SCOT'S Discovery of VVitchcraft: PROVING The common opinions of Witches
contracting with Devils, Spirits, or Familiars; and their power to kill,
torment, and consume the bodies of men women, and children, or other creatures
by diseases or otherwise; their flying in the Air, etc. To be but imaginary
Erroneous conceptions and novelties; WHEREIN ALSO, The lewd unchristian
practices of Witchmongers, upon aged, melancholy, ignorant, and superstious
people in extorting confessions, by inhumane terrors and tortures is notably
detected.

ALSO The knavery and confederacy of Conjurors. The impious blasphemy of
Inchanters. The imposture of Soothsayers, and Infidelity of Atheists. The
delusion of Pythonists, Figure-casters, Astrologers, and vanity of Dreamers.
The fruitless beggarly art of Alchimistry. The horrible art of Poisoning and
all the tricks and conveyances of juggling and Liegerdemain are fully
deciphered.


With many other things opened that have long lain hidden: though very
necessary to be known for the undeceiving of Judges, Justices, and Juries, and
for the preservation of poor, aged, deformed, ignorant people; frequently
taken, arraigned, condemned and executed for Witches, when according to a right
understanding, and a good conscience, Physic, Food, and necessaries should be
administered to them.

Whereunto is added, a treatise upon the nature, and substance of Spirits and
Devils, etc. all written and published in Anno 1584. by Reginald Scot, Esquire.

Printed by R. C. and are to be sold by Giles Calvert, dwelling at the Black
Spread-Eagle at the West End of Paul's, 1651.

To the Honorable, mine especial good Lord, S. Roger Manwood Knight, Lord
chief Baron of her Majesty's Court of the Eschequer.
IN-so-much as I know that your Lordship is by nature wholly inclined, and in
purpose earnestly bent to relieve the poor, and that not only with hospitality
and alms, but by diverse other devises and ways tending to their comfort,
having (as it were) framed and set your self to the help and maintenance of
their estate, as appears by your charge and travel in that behalf. Whereas
also you have a special care for the supporting of their right, and redressing
of their wrongs, as neither despising their calamity, nor yet forgetting their
complaint, seeking all means for their amendment, and for the reformation of
their disorders, even as a very father to the poor. Finally, for that I am a
poor member of that Commonwealth where your Lordship is a principal person; I
thought this my travel, in the behalf of the poor, the aged, and the simple,
might be very fitly commended unto you: for a weak house requires a strong
stay. In which respect I give God thanks, that has raised up unto me so mighty
a friend for them as your Lordship is, who in our laws have such knowledge, in
government such discretion, in these causes such experience, and in the
Commonwealth such authority; and never the less vouchsafe to descend to the
consideration of these base and inferior matters, which minister more care and
trouble, than worldly estimation.

And insomuch as your Lordship knows, or rather excerciseth the office of a
Judge, whose part it is to hear with courtesy, and to determine with equity;
it cannot but be apparent unto you, that when punishment exceeds the fault,
it is rather to be thought vengeance than correction. In which respect I know
you spend more time and travel in the conversion and reformation, than in the
subversion and confusion of offenders, as being well pleased to augment your
own private pains, to the end you may diminish their public smart. For in
truth, that Commonwealth remains in woeful state, where fetters and halters
bear more sway than mercy and due compassion.

Howbeit, it is natural to unnatural people, and peculiar unto witchmongers,
to pursue the poor, to accuse the simple, and to kill the innocent; supplying
in rigor and malice toward others, that which they themselves want in proof
and discretion, or the other in offense or occasion. But as a cruel heart and
an honest mind do seldom meet and feed together in a dish; so a discreet and
merciful Magistrate, and a happy Commonwealth cannot be separated asunder. How
much then are we bound to God, who has given us a Queen, that of justice is
not only the very perfect image and pattern, but also of mercy and clemency
(under God) the mere fountain and body it self? Insomuch as they which hunt
most after blood in these days, have least authority to shed it. Moreover,
since I see that in cases where lenity might be noisome, and punishment wholesome
to the commonwealth; there no respect of person can move you, no authority can
abash you, no fear, no threats can daunt you in performing the duty of Justice.

In that respect again I find your Lordship a fit person to judge and look upon
this present Treatise. Wherein I will bring before you, as it were to the bar,
two sorts of most arrogant and wicked people, the first challenging to
themselves, the second attributing unto others, that power which only
apperteineth to God, Apo. 4.11. Rom 8. Acts 5. Apo. 2. Luke 16. Dan. 2. and 28.
and 47.: Psalm 72. and 136. Jeremy 5. Job 5. and 36. Samuel 12. 1 Reg. 8. 2
Reg 3. Isaiah. 5. Zac. 10. and 14. Amos. 4.7. Job 1. Isaith. 42.8.
who only is the Creator of all things, who only searches the heart and
reins, who only knows our imaginations and thoughts, who only opens all
secrets, who only works great wonders, who only has power to raise up and
cast down; who only makes thunder, lightning, rain, tempests, and restrains
them at his pleasure; who only sends life and death, sickness and health,
wealth and woe; who neither gives nor lends his glory to any creature.

And therefore, that which grieveth me to the bottom of my heart, is that these
witchmongers cannot be content to wrest out of Gods hand his almighty power,
and keep it themselves, or leav it with a witch: but that, when by drift of
argument they are made to lay down the bucklers, they yield them up to the
divil, or at the least pray aid of him, as though the rains of all men's lives
and actions were committed into his hand; and that he sat at the stern, to
guide and direct the course of the whole world, imputing unto him power and
ability enough to do as great things, and as strange miracles as ever Christ
did.

But the doctors of this supernatural doctrine say sometimes, that the witch
does all these things by virtue of her charms; sometimes that a spiritual,
sometimes that a corporal devil does accomplish it; sometimes they say that the
devil does but make the witch believe she does that which he himself has
wrought, sometimes that the devil seems to do that by compulsion, which he
does most willingly. Finally, the writers hereupon are so eloquent, and full of
variety; that sometimes they write that the devil does all this by Gods
permission only; sometimes by his license, sometimes by his appointment: so as
(in effect and truth) not the devil, but the high and mighty King of kings, and
Lord of hosts, even God himself, should this way be made obedient and servile
to obey and perform the will and commandment of a malicious old witch, and
miraculously to answer her appetite, as well in every trifling vanity, as in
most horrible executions; as the revenger of a doting old woman's imagined
wrongs, to the destruction of many innocent children, and as a supporter of her
passions, to the undoing of many a poor soul. And I see not, but a witch may as
well inchant, when she will; as a lier may lie when he list: and so should we
possess nothing, but by a witches license and permission.

And now forsooth it is brought to this point, that all devils, which were wont
to be spiritual, may at their pleasure become corporal, and so show themselves
familiarly to witches and conjurors, and to none other, and by them only may be
made tame, and kept in a box, etc. So as a malicious old woman may command her
devil to plague her neighbor: and he is afflicted in manner and form as she
desires. But then comes another witch, and she bids her devil help, and he
heals the same party. So as they make it a kingdom divided in it self, and
therefore I trust it will not long endure, but will shortly be overthrown,
according to the words of our Savior, Omne regnum in se divisum desolabitur,
Every kingdom divided in it self shall be desolate.

And although some say that the devil is the witches instrument, to bring her
purposes and practices to pass: yet others say that she is his instrument, to
execute his pleasure in any thing, and therefore to be executed. But then
(methinks) she should be injuriously dealt withal, and put to death for
another offense: for actions are not judged by instrumental causes; neither
does the end and purpose of that which is done, depend upon the mean
instrument. Finally, if the witch do it not, why should the witch die for it?
But they say that witches are persuaded and think, that they do indeed those
mischifs; and have a will to perform that which the devil commits; and that
therefore they are worthy to die. By which reason every one should be executed,
that wishes evil to his neighbor, etc. But if the will should be punished by
man, according to the offense against God, we should be driven by thousands at
once to the slauterhouse or butchery. Proverbs 5.
For whosoever loatheth correction shall die. And who should escape execution,
if this lothsomnesse (I say) should extend to death by the civil laws. Also
the reward of sin is death. Howbeit, every one that sins, is not to be put
to death by the Magistrate. But my Lord it shall be proved in my book, and your
Lordship shall try it to be true, as well here at home in your native country,
as also abroad in your several circuits, that (besides them that be Veneficae,
which are plain poisoners) there will be found among our witches only two
sorts; the one sort being such by imputation, as so thought of by others (and
these are abused, and not abusors) the other by acceptance, as being willing
so to be accounted and these be mere couseners.

Insti. lib. 5. cap. 8. sect. 6. Item upon Deu. c. 18.
Calvine treating of these magicians, calls them couseners, saying, that they
use their juggling knacks only to amase or abuse the people; or else for fame:
but he might rather have said for gain. Erastus himself, Lib. de lamiis, page 5.
being a principal writer in the behalf of witches omnipotency, is forced to
confess, that these Greek words (...), are most commoly put for illusion false
packing, cousenage, fraud, knavery and deceit: and is further driven to say,
that in ancient time, the learned were not so blockish, as not to see that the
promises of magicians and inchanters were false, and nothing else but knavery,
cousenage and old wives fables; and yet defends he their flying in the air,
their transferring of corn or gras from one field to another, etc.

But as Erastus disagreeth herein with himself and his friends: so is there no
agreement among any of those writers, but only in cruelties, absurdities and
impossibilies. And these (my Lord) that fall into so manifest contradictions,
and into such absurd asseverations, are not of the inferior sort of writers;
neither are they all papists, but men of such account, as whose names give more
credit to their cause, then their writings. In whose behalf I am sorry, and
partly for reverence suppress their fondest errors and foulest absurdities;
dealing specially with them that most contend in cruelty, whose feet are swift
to shed blood, Isaiah 59.7. Romans 3.15. Eccles. 27.5. Prove. 1.16. Jeremy 2.34.
Psalm. 39.15. Isaiah 33.15.
striving (as Jesus the son of Sirach says) and hasting (as Solomon the son of
David says) to pour out the blood of the Innocent; whose heat against these
poor wretches cannot be allaied with any other liquor then blood. And therefore
I fear that under their wings will be found the blood of the souls of the poor,
at that day, when the Lord shall say, Depart from me ye bloodthirsty men.

And because I know your Lordship will take no council against innocent blood,
but rather suppres them that seek to imbrew their hands therein, I have made
choice to open their case to you, and to lay their miserable calamity before
your feet: following herein the advice of that learned man Brentius, who says;
Si quis admonuerit Magistratum, ^e in miseras illas mulierculas saeviat, In
epistola a^ Jo. Wier.
eum ego arbitror divinitus excitatum, that is, If any admonish the Magistrate
not to deal too hardly with these miserable wretches, that are called witches,
I think him a good instrument raised up for this purpose by God himself.

But it will perchance be said by witchmongers; to wit, by such as attribut to
witches the power which appertains to God only, that I have made choice of
your Lordship to be a Patron to this my book; because I think you favor mine
opinions, and by that means may the more freely publish any error or conceit of
mine own, which should rather be warranted by your Lordships authority, then by
the word of God, or by sufficient argument. But I protest the contrary, and by
these presents I renounce all protection, and despise all friendship that might
serve to help toward the suppressing or supplanting of truth: knowing also
that your Lordship is far from allowing any injury done unto man; much more an
enemy to them that go about to dishonor God, or to embeazel the title of his
immortal glory. But because I know you to be perspicuous, and able to see down
into the depth and bottom of causes, and are not to be carried away with the
vain persuasion or superstition either of man, custom, time or multitude. but
moved with the authority of truth only: I crave your countenance herein, even
so far forth, and no further, then the law of God, the law of nature, the law
of this land, and the rule of reason shall require. Neither do I treat for
these poor people any otherwise, but so, as with one hand you may sustain the
good, and with the other suppress the evil: wherein you shall be thought a
father to orphans, an advocate to widows, a guide to the blind, a stay to the
lame, a comfort and countenance to the honest, a scourge and terror to the
wicked.

Thus far I have been bold to use your Lordships patience, being offended
with my self, that I could not in brevity utter such matter as I have delivered
amply: whereby (I confess) occasion of tediousness might be ministered, were
it not that your great gravity joined with your singular constancy in reading
and judging be means of the contrary. And I wish even with all my heart, that I
could make people conceive the substance of my writing, and not to misconstrue
any part of my meaning. Then doubtless would I persuade my self, that the
company of witchmongers, etc. being once decreased, the number also of witches,
etc. would soon be diminished. But true be the words of the Poet, Haudquaquam
poteris sortirier omnia ^olus,
Namque aliis divi bello pollere dederunt,
Huic saltandi artem, voce huic cytharaqne canendi:
Rursum alii inservit sagax in pectore magnus
Jupiter ingenium, etc.


And therefore as doubtful to prevail by persuading ^ though I have reason
and common sense on my side; I rest upon earnest wishing; namely, to all people
an absolute trust in God the creator, and not in creatures, which is to make
flesh our arm: that God may have his due honor, which by the undutifulnesse
of many is turned into dishonor, and less cause of offense and error given by
common received evil example. And to your Lordship I wish, as increase of
honor, so continuance of good health, and happy days.

Your Lordships to be commanded Reginald Scot.

To the right worshipful Sir Thomas Scot, Knight, etc.
SIr, I see among other malefactors many poor old women convented before you
for working of Miracles, otherwise called witchcraft, and therefore I thought
you also ameet person to whom I might commend my book. And here I have occasion
to speak of your sincere administration of justice, and of your dexterity,
discretion, charge, and travel employed in that behalf, whereof I am oculatus
testis. Howbeit I had rather refer the Reader to common fame, and their own
eyes and ears to be satisfied; then to send them to a Stationers shop, where
many times lies are vendible, and truth contemptible. For I being of your
house, of your name, and of your blood; my foot being under your table, my hand
in your dish, or rather in your purse, might be thought to flatter you in that,
wherein (I know) I should rather offend you than please you. And what need I
curry-favour with my most assured friend? And if I should only publish those
virtues (though they be many) which give me special occasion to exhibit this my
travel unto you, I should do as a painter, that describes the foot of a
notable personage, and leaves all the best features in his body untouched.

I therefore (at this time) do only desire you to consider of my report,
concerning the evidence that is commonly brought before you against them. See
first whether the evidence be not frivolous, and whether the proofs brought
against them be not incredible, consisting of guesses, presumptions, and
impossibilities contrary to reason, Scripture, and nature. See also what
persons complain upon them, whether they be not of the basest, the u^wisest and
most faithless kind of people. Also may it please you to way what accusations
and crimes they lay to their charge, namely: She was at my house of late, she
would have had a pot of milk, she departed in a chafe because she had it not,
she railed, she cursed, she mumbled and whispered, and finally she said she
would be even with me: and soon after my child, my cow, my sow, or my pullet
died, or was strangely taken. Nay (if it please your Worship) I have further
proof: I was with a wise woman, and she told me I had an ill neighbor, and
that she would come to my house ere it were long, and so did she; and that she
had a mark above her waste, and so had she: and God forgive me, my stomach has
gone against her a great while. Her mother before her was counted a witch, she
has been beaten and scratched by the face till blood was drawn upon her,
because she has bin suspected, and afterward some of those persons were said
to amend. These are the certainties that I hear in their evidences.

Note also how easily they may be brought to confess that which they never did,
nor lies in the power of man to do: and then see whether I have cause to write
as I do. Further, if you shall see that infidelity, popery, and many other
manifest heresies be backed and shouldered, and their professors animated and
heartned, by yielding to creatures such infinite power as is wrested out of Gods
hand, and attributed to witches: finally, if you shall perceive that I have
faithfully and truly delivered and set down the condition and state of the
witch, and also of the witch monger, and have confuted by reason and law, and
by the word of God it self, all mine adversaries objections and arguments: then
let me have your countenance against them that maliciously oppose themselves
against me.

My greatest adversaries are young ignorance and old custom. For what folly
soever tract of time has fostered, it is so superstitiously pursued of some,
as though no error could be acquainted with custom. But if the law of nations
would join with such custom, to the maintenance of ignorance, and to the
suppressing of knowledge; the civilest country in the world would soon become
barbarous, etc. For as knowledge and time discovers errors, so does
superstition and ignorance in time breed them. And concerning the opinions of
such, as wish that ignorance should rather be maintained, than knowledge busily
searched for, because thereby offense may grow: I answer, that we are commanded
by Christ himself to search for knowledge: John 5. Prove. 15.1.
for it is the kings honor (as Solomon says) to search out a thing.

Aristotle said to Alexander, that a mind well furnished was more beautiful
then a body richly arraied. What can be more odious to man, or offensive to
God, than ignorance: Acts 3. Proverbs 9.
for through ignorance the Jews did put Christ to death. Which ignorance
whosoever forsakes, is promised life everlasting: and therefore among
Christians it should be abhorred above all other things. For even as when we
wrestle in the dark, we tumble in the mire, etc. so when we see not the truth,
we wallowe in errors. A blind man may seek long in the rushes ere he find a
needle; and as soon is a doubt discussed by ignorance. Finally, truth is no
sooner found out in ignorance, then a sweet savor in a dunghill. And if they
will allow men knowledge, and give them no leave to use it, men were much
better be without it than have it. For it is as to have a talent, and to hide
it under the earth; Matthew. 25. Matthew 5. Luke 8.
or to put a candle under a bushel: or as to have a ship, and to let her lie
always in the dock: which thing how profitable it is, I can say somewhat by
experience.

But hereof I need say no more, for every man sees that none can be happy who
knows not what felicity means. For what avails it to have riches, and not
to have the use thereof? Truly the heathen herein deserved more commendation
then many christians, for they spared no pain no cost, nor travel to attain to
knowlede. Pythagoras traveled from Thamus to Egypt, and afterward into Crete
and Lac^daemonia: and Plato out of Athens into Italy and Egypt, and all to
find out hidden secrets and knowledge: which when a man has, he seems te be
separated from mortality. For precious stones, and all other creatures of what
value soever, are but counterfeits to this jewel: they are mortal,
corruptible and inconstant; this is immortal, pure and certain. Wherefore if I
have searched and found out any good thing, that ignorance and time has
smothered, the same I commend unto you: to whom though I owe all that I have,
yet am I bold to make others partakers with you in this poor gift.

Your loving cosen Reg. Scot.

To the right worshipful his loving friends, Master Doctor Coldwell Deane of
Rochester, and Master Doctor Read-man Archdeacon of Canturbury, etc.
HAving found out two such civil Magistrates, as for direction of judgment,
and for ordering matters concerning justice in this commonwealth (in my poor
opinion) are very singular persons, who (I hope) will accept of my good will,
and examine my book by their experience, as unto whom the matter therein
contained does greatly appertain: I have now again considered of two other
points: namely, Divinity and Philosophy, whereupon the groundwork of my book
is laid. Wherein although I know them to be very sufficiently informed, yet
does not the judgment and censure of those causes so properly appertain to
them as unto you, whose fame therein has gotten preeminence above all others
that I know of your callings: and in that respect I am bold to join you with
them, being all good neighbors together in this commonwealth, and loving
friends unto me. I do not present this unto you, because it is meet for you;
but for that you are meet for it (I mean) to judge upon it, to defend it, and
if need be to correct it; knowing that you have learned of that grave
councellor Cato, not to shame or discountenance any body. For if I thought you
as ready, as able, to discharge me from mine in^ufficiencie: I should not have
been hasty (knowing your learning) to have written unto you: but if I should be
abashed to write to you, I should show my self ignorant of your courtesy.

I know mine own weakness, which if it have been able to maintain this
argument, the cause is the stronger. Eloquent words may please the ears, but
sufficient matter persuades the heart. So as, if I exhibit wholesome drink
(though it be small (in a treene dish with a faithful hand, I hope it will be
as well accepted, as strong wine affered in a silver bowl with a flattering
heart. And surely it is a point of as great liberality to receive a small thing
thankfully, as to give and distribute great and costly gifts bountifully for
there is more supplied with courteous answers than with rich rewards. The
tyrant Dionysius was not so hated for his tyranny, as for his churlish and
strange behavior. Among the poor Israelites sacrifices, God was satisfied
with the tenth part of an Epha^ of flower, so as it were fine and good. Christ
liked well of the poor widows mite. Lewis of France accepted a rape-root of
clownish Conan. Cyrus vouchsafed to drink a cup of cold water out of the hand
of poor Sinaetes: and so it may please you to accept this simple book at my
hands, which I faithfully exhibit unto you, (...) knowing your opinions to meet
with mine: but knowing your learni^^ and judgment to be able as well to
correct me where I speak her (...) unskilfully, as others when they speak
hereof maliciously.

Some be such dogs as they will bark at my writings, whether I maintain or
refute this argument: as Diogenes snarled both at the Rhoci^ns and at the
Lacedaemonians: at the one, because they were brave; at the other, because they
were not brave. Homer himself could not avoid reproachful speeches. I am sure
that they which never studied to learn any good thing, will study t^ find
faults hereat. I for my part fear not these wars, nor all the adversaries I
have; were it not for certain cowards, who (I know) will come behind my back
and bite me.

But now to the matter. My question is not (as many fondly suppose) whether
there be witches or nay: but whether they can do such miraculous works as are
imputed unto them? Go^^ Master Deane, is it possible for a man to break his
fast with you (...) Rochester, and to dine that day at Durham with Master
Doct^^ Matthew; or can your enemy maime you, when the Ocean (...) is betwixt
you? What real community is betwixt a spirit and (...) body? May a spiritual
body became temporal at his pleasure? Or may a carnal body become invisible?
is It likely that the lives of all Princes, Magistrates, and Subjects, should
depend upon the will, or rather upon the wish of a poor malicious doting old
foole^ and that power exempted from the wise, the rich, the learned, the godly,
etc? Finally, is impossible for a man or woman to do (...) of those miracles
expressed in my book, and so constantly reported b^ great clerks? If you say,
no; then am I satisfied. If you sa^ that God absolutely, or by means can
accomplish all those, an^ many more, I go with you. But witches may well say
they can (...) these things, howbeit they cannot show how they do them. If I
for my part should say I could do those things, my very adversaries would say
that I lied.

O Master Archdeacon, is it not pity, that that which is said to be done with
the almighty power of the most high God, and by our Savior his only son
Jesus Christ our Lord, should be referred to a baggage old woman's nod or wish,
etc? Good Sir, is it not one manifest kind of Idolatry, for them that labor
and are laden to come unto witches to be refr^shed? If witches could help whom
they are said to ha^^ made sick, I see no reason, but remedy might as well be
required at their hands, as a purse demanded of him that has stolen it. But
truly it is manifold idolatry, to ask that of a creature, which none can give
but the Creator. The papist has some color of scripture to maintain his idol
of bread, but no Jesuitical distinction can cover the witchmongers idolatry in
this behalf. Alas, I am sorry and ashamed to see how many die, that being said
to be bewitched, only seek for magical cures, whom wholesome diet and good
medicines would have recovered. I dare assure you both, that there would be
none of these cosening kind of witches, did not witchmongers maintain them,
follow them, and believe in them and their oracles: whereby indeed all good
learning and honest arts are overthrown. For these that most advance their
power, and maintain the skill of these witches, understand no part thereof:
and yet being many times wise in other matters, are made fools by the most
fools in the world.

Me thinks these magical physicians deal in the commonwealth, much like as a
certain kind of Cynicall people do in the church, whose severe sayings are
accounted among some such oracles, as may not be doubted of; who in stead of
learning and authority (which they make contemptible) do feed the people with
their own devises and imaginations, which they prefer before all other
divinity: and laboring to erect a church according to their own fancies,
wherein all order is condemned, and only their magical words and curious
directions advanced, they would utterly overthrow the true Church. And even as
these enchanting Paracelsians abuse the people, leading them from the true
order of physic to their charms: so do these other ( I say) dissuade from
hearkening to learning and obedience, and whisper in men's ears to teach them
their frier-like traditions. And of this sect the chief author at this time is
one Brown, a fugitive, a meet cover for such a cup: as heretofore the
Anabaptists, the Arrians, and the Franciscane friars.

Truly not only nature, being the foundation of all perfection; but also
scripture, being the mistress and director thereof, and of all christianity,
is beautified with knowledge and learning. For as nature without discipline
does naturally inclin^ unto vanities, and as it were suck, up errors: so does
the word, or rather the letter of the scripture without understanding, Romans
2.27* 2. Cor. 3.6.
not only make us devour errors, but yields us up to death and destruction:
and therefore Paul says he was not ^ minister of the letter, but of the spirit.

Thus have I been bold to deliver unto the world, and to you, those simple
notes, reasons, and arguments, which I have devised or collected out of other
authors; which I hope shall be hurtful to none, b^t my self great comfort, if
it may pass with good liking and acceptance. If it fall out otherwise, I
should think my pains ill employed. For truly, in mine opinion, whosoever
shall perform any thing, or attain to any knowledge; or whosoever should
travel throughout all the nations of the world, or (if it were possible) should
peep into the heavens, the consolation or admiration thereof were nothing
pleasant unto him, unless he had liberty to impart his knowledge to his
friends. Wherein because I have made special choice of you, I hope you will
read it, or at the least lay it up in your study with your other books, among
which there is none dedicated to any with more good will. And so long as you
have it, it shall be unto you ( upon adventure of my life) a certain amulet,
periapt, circle, charm, etc. to defend you from all enchantments.

Your loving friend Reg. Scot.

To the Readers.
TO you that are wise and discreet few words may suffice: for such a one
judges not at the first sight, Isa. 11. Proverbs 1^.
nor reproves by hearsay; but patiently hears, and thereby increases in
understanding: which patience brings forth experience, whereby true judgment
is directed. I shall not need therefore to make any further suite to you, but
that it would please you to read my book, without the prejudice of time, or
former conceit: and having obtained this at your hands, I submit my self unto
your censure. But to make a solemn suit to you that are partial readers,
desiring you to set aside partiality, to take in good part my writing, and with
indifferent eyes to look upon my book, were labor lost, and time ill
employed. For I should no more prevail herein, then if a hundred years since I
should have entreated your predecessors to believe, that Robin good fellow,
that great and ancient bull-begger, had been but a cousening merchant, and no
devil indeed.

If I should go to a Papist, and say, I pray you believe my writings, wherein I
will prove all popish charms, conjurations, exorcismes, benedictions and
curses, not only to be ridiculous, and of none effect, but also to be impious
and contrary to Gods word: I should as hardly therein win favor at their
hands, as herein obtain credit at yours. Nevertheless, I doubt not, but to use
the matter so, that as well the massemonger for his part, as the witchmonger
for his, shall both be ashamed of their professions.

But Robin good fellow cease now to be much feared, and popery is
sufficiently discovered. Nevertheless, witches charms, and conjurors
cousenages are yet thought effectual. Yea the Gentiles have espied the fraud
of their cousening oracles, and our cold prophets and inchanters make us fools
still, to the shame of us all, but specially of Papists, who conjure every
thing, and thereby bring to pass nothing. They say to their candles, I conjure
you to endure for ever: and yet they last not pater noster while the longer.
They conjure water to be wholesome both for body and soul: but the body (we
see) is never the better for it, nor the soul any whit reformed by it. And
therefore I marvel, that when they see their own conjurations confuted and
brought to naught, or at the least void of effect, that they (of all other)
will yet give such credit, countenance, and authority to the vain cousenages
of witches and conjurors; as though their charms and conjurations could
produce more apparent, certain, and better effects then their own.

But my request unto all you that read my book shall be no more, but that it
would please you to confer my words with your own sense and experience, and
also with the word of God. If you find your selves resolved and satisfied, or
rather reformed and qualified in any one point or opinion, that heretofore you
held contrary to truth, in a matter hitherto undecided, and never yet looked
into; I pray you take that for advantage: and suspending your judgment, ^^ay
the sentence of condemnation against me, and consider of the Rest, at your
further leisure. If this may not suffice for to persuade you, it cannot
prevail to annoy you: and then, that which is written without offense, may be
overpassed without any grief.

And although mine assertion, be somewhat differing from the old inveterate
opinion, which I confess has many g^ay hairs, whereby mine adversarys have
gained more authority then reason, toward the maintenance of their
presumptions and old wives fables: yet shall it fully agree with Gods glory,
and with his holy word. And albeit there be hold taken by mine adversarys of
certain few words or sentences in the Scripture that make a show for them: yet
when the whole course thereof makes against them, and impugneth the same, yea
and also their own places rightly understood do nothing at all releeve them: I
trust their glorious title and argument of antiquity will appear as stale and
corrupt as the Apothecaries d^ugs, or grocers spice, which the longer they be
preserved, the worse they are. And till you have perused my book, ponde^ this
in your mind, to wit, that Sagae, Thessalae, Striges, Lamiae (which words and
none other being in use do properly signify our witches) are no^ once found
written in the old or new Testament; and that Christ himself in his Gospel
never mentioned the name of a witch. And that neither he, nor Moses ever spoke
any one word of the witches bargain with the devil, their hagging, their
riding in the air, their transferring of corn or grass from one field to
another, their hurting of children o^ cattle with words or charms, their
bewitching of butter, cheese, ale, etc. nor yet their transubstantiation;
insomuch as the writers hereupon are not ashamed to say, that it is not absu^d
to ^ffirm that there were no witches in Jobs time. Mal. malef. par. 2. quae. 2.
The reason is, that if there had been such witches then in being. Job would
have said he had been bewitched. But indeed men took no ^eed in those days to
this doctrine of devils, to wit, to these fables of witchcraft, 1 Pet. 4.1.
which Peter says that shall be much regarded and hearkened unto in the latter
days.

Howbeit, how ancient so ever this barbarous conceit of witches o^^nipotencie
is, truth must not be measured by time* for every old opinion is not sound.
Verity is not impaired, how long soever it be suppressed; but is to be
searched out, in how da^ke a corner soever it lie hidden: for it is not like a
cup of ale, that may be broched, too rathe^. Finally, time bewraieth old
errors, and discovers new matters (...) truth. Danaeus himself says, that
this question hitherto has never bee^ handled; Danaeus in suo prologo.
nor the Scriptures concerning this matter have never bin ex^pounded. To prove
the antiquity of the cause, to confirm the opinion of the ignorant, to enforce
mine adversaries arguments, to aggravate the punishments, and to accomplish the
confusion of these old women, is added the vanity and wickedness of them,
which are called witches, the arrogance of those which take upon them to work
wonders, the desire that people have to hearken to such miraculous matters,
unto whom most commonly an impossibility is more credible than a verity; the
ignorance of natural causes, the ancient and universal hate conceived against
the name of a witch; their ill-favored faces, their spiteful words, their
curses and imprecations, their charms made in time, and their beggary; the
fear of many foolish folk, the opinion of some that are wise, the want of
Robin good fellow and the fairies, which were wont to maintain that, and the
common peoples talk in this behalf; the authority of the inquisitors, the
learning, cunning, consent, and estimation of writers herein, the false
translations and fond interpretations ^sed, specially by Papists; and many
other like causes. All which to^es take such hold upon men's fancies, as whereby
they are led and enticed away from the consideration of true respects, to the
condemnation of that which they know not.

Howbeit, I will (by Gods grace) in this my book, so apparently decipher and
confute these cavils, and all other their objections; as every witch monger
shall be abashed, and all good men thereby satisfied. In the mean time, I would
wish them to know that if neither the estimation of Gods omnipotency, nor the
tenor of his word, nor the doubtfulnesse or rather the impossibility of the
case, nor the small proofs brought against them, nor the rigor executed upon
them; nor the pity that should be in a christian heart, nor yet their
simplicity, impotency, or age may suffice to suppress the rage or rigor
wherewith they are oppressed; yet the consideration of their sex or kind ought
to move some mitigation of their punishment. For if nature (as Pliny
reports) have taught a lion not to deal so roughly with a woman as with a
man, because she is in body the weaker vessel, and in heart more inclined to
pity (which Jeremy in his lamentations seems to confirm) what should a man
do in this case, Lam. Jer. 3. and 4. cap. verse 10. 1 Cor. 11.9. Ibid verse 7.
Ge. 2.22.18. Arist. lib. problem. 2.9. Virg Georg.
for whom a woman was created as an help and comfort unto him? In so much as
even in the law of nature, it is a greater offense to slay a woman than a man:
not because a man is not the more excellent creature, but because a woman is
the weaker vessel. And therefore among all modest and honest persons it is
thought a shame to offer violence or injury to a woman; in which respect Virgil
says, Nullum memorabile nomen foeminea in poena est.

God that knows my heart is witness, and you that read my book shall see,
that my drift and purpose in this enterprise tends only to these respects.
First, that the glory and power of God be not so abridged and abased, as to be
thrust into the hand or lip of a lewd old woman: whereby the work^ of the
Creator shoul be attributed to the power of a creature. Secondly, that the
religion ^f the gospel may be seen to stand without such pei^ish trumphery
Thirdly, tha^ lawful favor and christian compassion be rather used toward
these your souls, than ^igor and extremity. Because they, which are commonly
accused of witchcraft, are the least sufficient of all other persons to speak
for themselves; (...) having the most base and simple education of all others;
the extremity of their age giving them leave to dote, their poverty to beg,
their wrongs to chide and threaten (as being void of any other way of revenge)
their humor melancholicall to be full of imaginations, from whence chiefly
proceeds the vanity of their confessions; as that they can transform
themselves and others into apes, owls, asses, dogs, cats, etc. that they can
fly in the air, kill children with charms, hinder the coming of butter etc.

Eccl. 35.15.
And for so much as the mighty help themselves together, and the poor widows
cry, though it reach to heaven, is scarce heard here upon earth; I thought good
(according to my poor ability) to make intercession, that some part of common
rigor, and some points of hasty judgment may be advised upon. For the world is
now at that stay (as Brentius in a most godly sermon in these words affirms)
that even as when the heathen persecuted the Christians, if any were accused to
believe in Christ, the common people cried Ad leonem: so now, if any woman, be
she never so honest, be accused of witchcraft, they cry Ad ignem. What
difference is between the rash dealing of unskilful people, and the grave
counsel of more discreet and learned persons, may appear by a tale of Danaeus
his own telling; wherein he opposes the rashness of a few townsmen, to the
counsel of a whole senate: preferring the folly of the one, before the wisdom
of the other.

At O^leance on Loyre (says he) there was a man-witch, not only taken and
accused, but also convicted and condemned for witch- craft, who appealed from
thence to the high court of Paris. Which accusation the senate saw in
sufficient, and would not allow, but laughed thereat, lightly regarding it; and
in the end sent him home (says he) as accused of a frivolous matter. And yet
for all that, the magistrates of Orleance were so bold with him, as to hang him
up within a short time after, for the same or the very like offense. In which
example is to be seen the nature, and as it were the disease of this cause:
wherein (I say) the simpler and undiscreeter sort are always more hasty and
furious in judgments, than men of better reputation and knowledge.
Nevertheless, Eunichius says that these three things; to wit, what is to be
thought of witches, what their incantations can do, and whether their
punishment should extend to death, are to be well considered. And I would
(says he) they were as well known, as they are rashly believed, both of the
learned, and unlearned. And further he says, that almost all divines,
physicians and lawyers, who should best know these matters, satisfiing
themselves with old custom, have given too much credit to these fables, and to
rash and unjust sentence of death upon witches, But when a man pondreth (says
he) that in times past, all that swarved from the church of Rome were judged
heretics; it is the less marvel, though in this matter they be blind and
ignorant.

And Surely, if the Scripture had been longer suppressed, more absurd fables
would have sprung up, and been believed. Which credulity though it is to be
derided with laughter; yet this their cruelty is to be lamented with tears.
For (God knows) many of these poor wretches had more need to be releeved than
chastised; and more meet were a preacher to admonish them, than a Jailer to
keep them; and a physician more necessary to help them, than an executioner or
tormentor to hang or burn them. For proof and due trial hereof, I will requite
Danaeus his tale of a man-witch (as he terms him) with another witch of the
same sex or gender.

Cardanus from the mouth of his own father reports, Lib. 15. cap. 18. de
varietati^. rerum.
that one Bernard, a poor servant, being in wit very simple and rude, but in
his service very necessary and diligent (and in that respect deerly beloved of
his master) prosessing the art of witchcraft, could in no wise be dissuaded
from that profession, persuading himself that he knew all things, and could
bring any matter to pass; because certain country people resorted to him for
help and counsel, as supposing by his own talk, that he could do somewhat.
At length he was condemned to be burned: which torment he seemed more willing
to suffer, than to loose his estimation in that behalf. But his master having
compassion upon him, and being himself in his princes favor, perceiving his
conceit to proceed of melancholy, obtained respit of execution for twenty
days. In which time (says he) his master bountifully fed him with good fat
meat, and with four eggs at a meal, as also with sweet win: which diet was best
for so gross and weak a body. And being recovered so in strength, that the
humor was suppressed, he was easily won from his absurd and dangerous opinions,
and from all his fond imaginations: and confesling his error and folly, from
the which before no man could remove him by any persuasions, having his pardon,
he lived long a good member of the Church, whom otherwse the cruelty of
judgment should have cast away and destroyed.

This history is more credible than Sprengers fables, or Bodins bables, which
reach not so far to the extolling of witches omnipotency, as to the derogating
of Gods glory. For if it be true, which they affirm, that our life and death
lies in the hand of a witch; then is it false, that God makes us live or die,
or that by him we have our being, our term of time appointed* and our days
numbered. But surely their charms can no more reach to the hurting or killing
of men or women, than their imaginations can extend to the stealing and
carrying away of horses and mares. Neither has God given remedies to sickness
or griefs, by words or charms, Amos 3.6. La. Ier. 3 38. Isai. 45.9. Romans 9.20.
but by herbs and medicines, which he himself has created upon earth, and
given men knowledge of the same; that he might be glorified, for that therewith
he does vouch safe that the maladies of men and cattle should be cured, etc.
And if there be no affiction nor calamity, but is brought to pass by him, then
let us defy the devil, renounce all his works, and not so much as once think
or dream upon this supernatural power of witches, neither let us prosecute them
with such despite, whom our fancy condemns, and our reason acquitteth: our
evidence against them consisting in impossibilities, our proofs in unwritten
verities, and our whole proceedings in doubts and difficulties.

Now because I mislike the extreme cruelty used against some of these silly
souls (whom a simple advocate having audience and justice might deliver out of
the hands of the inquisitors themselves) it will be said, that I deny any
punishment at all to be due to any witch whatsoever. Nay, because I be^ray the
folly and impiety of them, which attribute unto witches the (...) of Gods these
witchmongers will report, that I deny there are any witches at all: and yet
behold (say they) how often is this word (Witch) mentioned in the Scriptures?
Even as if an idolater should say in the behalf of images and idols, to them
which deny their power and godhead, and inveigh against the reverence done unto
them; How dare you deny the power of image, seeing ^here names are so often
repeated in the Scriptures? But truly I deny not that the^e are witches or
images: but I detest the idolaters opinions conceived of them; referring that
to Gods work and ordinance, which they impute to the power and malice of
witches; and attributing ^ha^ honor to God which they ascribe to idols. But as
for those that in very deed are either witches or conjurors, let them hardly
suffer such punishment as to their fault is agreeable, and as by the grave
judgment of law is provided.

The foreign Authors used in this Book.
AELiamus. Actius. Albertus Crantzius. Albertus Magnus. Albumazar. Alcoranum
Franciscanorum. Alexander Trallianus. Algerus. Ambrosius. Andradias. Andraeas
Gartnerus. Andraeas Massius. Antonius Sabelliens. Apollonius Tyanaeus.
Appianus. Apuleius. Archelaus. Argerius Ferrarius. Aristoreles. Arnoldus de
villa nova. Artemidorus. Athanasius. Averroes. Augustinus episcopus Hip.
Augustinus Niphus. Avicennas. Aulus Gellius. Barnardinus de bustis*
Bartholomaeus Anglicus. Berosus Anianus. Bodinus. Bordinus. Brentius. Calvinus.
Cametarius. Campanns. Cardanus pater. Cardanus filins. Carolus Gallus.
Cassander. Caro. Chrysostomus. Cicero. Clemens. Cornelius Agrippa. Cornelius
Nepos. Cornelius Tacitus. Cyrillus. Danaeus. Demetrius. Democritus. Didymus.
Diodorus Siculus. Dionysius Areopagita. Dioscorides. Diurius. Dodonaeus.
Durandus. Empedocles. Ephesius. Erasmus Roterodamus. Erasmus Sarcerius.
Erastus. Eudoxus. Eusebius Caesariensis. Fernelius. Franci^cus Petrarcha.
Fuchsius. Galenus. Gerropius, Galasius. Gemma Phrysius. Georgius Pictorios.
Gofridus. Goschalcus Boll. Gratianus. Gregorius. Grillandus. Guido Bonatus.
Gulielmus de fancto Clodoaldo. Gulielmus Parisiensis. Hemingius. Heraclides.
Hermes Trismegistus. Hieronymus. Hilarious. Hippocrates. Homerus. Horatius.
Hostiensis. Hovinus. Hypertus. Jacobus de Chusa Ca^thusianus. Jamblichus. Jaso
Pratensis. Innocentius 8 papa. Johannes Anglicus. Johannes Baptista
Neapolitanus. Johannes Cassianus. Johannes Montiregrus. Johannes Rivius.
Josephus ben Gorion. Josias Simlerus. Isidorus. Isigonus. Juba. Julius
Maternus. Justinus Martyr. Lactantius. Lavaterus. Laurentius Ananias.
Laurentius a villavicentio. Leo II. Pontifex. Lex Salicarum. Lex 12. Tabulaum.
Legenda aurea. Legenda longa Coloniae. Leonardus Vairus. Livius. Lucanus.
Lucretius. Ludovicus Caelius. Lutherus. Macrobius. Magna Charta. Malleus
Maleficarum. Manlius. Marbacchius. Marbodeus Gallus. Marsilius Ficinus.
Martinus de Arles. Mattheolus. Melancthonus. Memphradorus. Michael Andraeas.
Musculus. Nauclerus. Nicephorus. Nicholaus 5. Papa. Nider. Olaus Gothus.
Origenes. Ovidius. Panormitanus. Paulus Aegineta. Paulus Marsus. Persius.
Petrus de Appona. Petrus Lombardus. Petrus Martyr. Pe^ce^. Philarchus.
Philastrius Brixicu^u. Philodorus. Philo Judaeus. P^kma^rus. Plariu^. Plato.
Plinius. Plotinus. Plu^archus. Polydorus Virgilius. Pomoetium sermonum
quadragesimalium. Pompanatius. Pontificale. Ponzivibi^^. Por^ hyrius. Proclus.
Propertius. Psellus. Ptolomeus. Pythagoras. Quintilianus. Rabbi Abraham. Rabbi
ben Ezra. Rabbi David K^^hi. Rabbi Josuah ben Levi. Rabbi Isaac Natar. Rabbi
Levi. Rabbi Moles. Rabbi Sedaias Haias. Robertus Carocullus. Rupertu^. Sabinus.
Sadoletus. Savano^ola. Scotus. Seneca. Septuaginta interpreres. Serapio.
Socrates. Solinus. Speculum exemplorum. Strabo. Sulpitius Severus. Syneffus.
Tatianus. Te^tullianus. Thomas Aquinas. Themiltius. Theodore^u^. Theodorus
Bizantius. Theophrastus. Thucidydes. Tibullus. Tremelius. Valerius Maximus.
Varro. Vegetius. Vincentius. Virgilius. Vi^ellius. Wie^us. Xanrus
historiographus.
These English.
BArnaby Googe. Beehive of the Romish church. Edward Deering. Geffrey Chaucer.
Giles Alley. Guimelf Maharba. Henry Haward. J^hn Bale. John Fox. John Malborn.
John Record. P^ime^ after York use. Richard Gallis. Roger Bacon. Testament
printed at Rhemes. T. E. a nameles Author, 467. Thomas Hills. Thomas Lupron.
Thomas Moore Knight. Thomas Phaer. T. R. a nameles Author* 393. William
Lambard. W. W. a namelesse Author. 542.
The discovery of Witchcraft.
The first Book.
CHAP. I.
An impeachment of Witches power in meteors and elementary bodies, tending to
the rebuke of such as attribute too much unto them.

THe Fables of Witchcraft have taken so fast hold and deep root in the heart
of man, that few or none can, (now adays) with patience endure the hand and
correction of God. For if any adversity, grief, sickness, loss of children,
corn, cattle, or liberty happen unto them; Job 5.
by and by they exclaim upon witches. As though there were no God in Israel
that orders all things according to his will, punishing both just unjust and
with greefes, plagues, and afflictions in manner and form as he thinks good:
but that certain old women here on earth, called witches, must needs be the
contrivers of all men's calamities, and as though they themselves were
innocents, and had deserved no such punishments. Insomuch as they stick not to
ride and go to such, as either are injuriously termed witches, or else are
willing so to be accounted, seeking at their hands comfort and remedy in time
of their tribulation, contrary to Gods will and commandment in that behalf,
Mat. 12.
who bids us resort to him in all our necessities.

Such faithless people (I say) are also persuaded, that neither hail nor
snow, thunder nor lightning, rain nor tempestuous winds come from the heavens
at the commandment of God; but are raised by the cunning and power of witches
and conjurers; insomuch as a clap of thunder, or a gale of wind is no sooner
heard, but either they run to ring bells, or cry out to burn witches; or else
burn consecrated things, hoping by the smoke thereof, to drive the devil out
of the air, as though spirits could be fraid away with such external toies:
howbeit, these are right enchantments, In concione.
as Brentius affirms.

But certainly, it is neither a witch, nor devil, but a glorious Psalm. 25. Psalm
83. Eccles. 43. Luke 8. Math 8. Mark. 4.41. Luke 8.14. Psalm. 107.
God that makes the thunder. I have read in the Scriptures, that God Psalm. 25.
Psalm 83. Eccles. 43. Luke 8. Math 8. Mark. 4.41. Luke 8.14. Psalm. 107.
makes the blustering tempests and whirle-winds: and I find that it is Psalm.
25. Psalm 83. Eccles. 43. Luke 8. Math 8. Mark. 4.41. Luke 8.14. Psalm. 107.
the Lord that altogether deals with them, and that they blow according to
his will. But let me see any of them all Psalm. 25. Psalm 83. Eccles. 43. Luke 8.
Math 8. Mark. 4.41. Luke 8.14. Psalm. 107.
rebuke and still the sea in time of tempest, as Christ did; or raise the
stormy wind, as Psalm. 25. Psalm 83. Eccles. 43. Luke 8. Math 8. Mark. 4.41. Luke
8.14. Psalm. 107.
God did with his word; and I will believe in them. Has any witch or conjurer,
or any creature entered into the Psalm. 25. Psalm 83. Eccles. 43. Luke 8. Math 8.
Mark. 4.41. Luke 8.14. Psalm. 107.
treasures of the snow; or seen the secret places of the hail, Job 38.22.
Eccles. 43.
which GOD has prepared against the day of trouble, battle, and war? I for
my part also think with Jesus Sirach, that at Gods only commandment the snow
falls; and that the wind blows according to his will, who only makes all
storms to cease; and Leviti. 26. verse. 3, 4.
who (if we keep his ordinances) will send us rain in due season, and make the
land to bring forth her increase, and the trees of the field to give their
fruit.

But little think our witch-mongers, that the Psa 78.23.
Lord commands the clouds above, or opens the doors of heaven, as David
affirms; or that the Lord goes forth in the tempests and storms, as the
Prophet Nahum. 1.
Nahum reports: but rather that witches and conjurers are then about their
business.

The Marcionists acknowledged one God the author of good things, and another
the ordainer of evil: but these make the devil a whole God, to create things
of nothing, to know men's cogitations, and to do that which God never did; as,
to transubstatiate men into beasts, etc. Which thing if devils could do, yet
follows it not, that witches have such power. But if all the devils in hell
were dead, and all the witches in England burned or hanged; I warrant you we
should not fail to have rain, hail and tempests, as now we have: according to
the appointment and will of God, and according to the constitution of the
elements, and the course of the planets, wherein God has set a perfect and
perpetual order.

I am also well assured, that if all the old women in the world were witches;
and all the priests, conjurers: we should not have a drop of rain, nor a blast
of wind the more or the less for them. For Job. 26.8. Job. 37. Psalm 135.
Jer. 10. and 15. Ose. 13.
the Lord has bound the waters in the clouds, and has set bounds about the
waters, until the day and night come to an end: yea it is God that raises the
winds and stilleth them: and he says to the rain and snow; Be upon the earth,
and it falls. The Job. 26.8. Job. 37. Psalm 135. Jer. 10. and 15. Ose. 13.
wind of the Lord, and not the wind of witches, shall destroy the treasures of
their pleasant vessels, and dry up the fountains; says Oseas. Let us also
learn and confess with the Prophet David, that we Psa. 39. etc.
our selves are the causes of our afflictions; and not exclaim upon witches,
when we should call upon God for mercy.

The Imperial law (says Brentius) condemns them to death that trouble and
infect the air: but I affirm (says he) that it is neither in the power of
witch nor devil so to do, but in God only. Though (besides Bodin, and all the
popish writers in general) it please Danaeus, Hyperius, Hemingius, Erastus,
etc. to conclude otherwise. The clouds In ^epist. ad 10. Wierum
are called the pillars of Gods tents, Gods chariots, and his pavillions. And
if it be so, what witch or devil can make masteries thereof? S. Augustine
says, Non est putandum is it is transgressoribus angelis servire hanc rerum
visibilium materiem sed soli Deo; We must not think that these visible things
are at the commandment of the angels that fell, but are obedient to the only
God.

Finally, if witches could accomplish these things; what needed it seem so
strange to the people, when Christ by mi^acle Exodus 13. Isai. 66. Ps. 18,
11.19. August. 3. de sancta Trinit. Mar. 4.41.
commanded both seas and winds, etc. For it is written; Who is this? for both
wind and sea obey him.

CHAP. II.
The inconvenience growing by men's credulity herein, with a reproof of some
churchmen, which are inclined to the common conceived opinion of witches
omnipotency, and a familiar example thereof.

BUt the world is now so bewitched and overrun with this fond error, that even
where a man should seek comfort and counsel, there shall he be sent (in case
of necessity) from God to the devil; and from the Physician to the cosening
witch, who will not stick to take upon her, by words to heal the lame (which
was proper only to Christ; and to hem whom he assisted with his divine power)
yea, with her familiar and charms she will take upon her to cure the blind:
though in the Joh. 10.21.
tenth of S. John's Gospel it be written, that the devil cannot open the eyes
of the blind. And they attain such credit, as I have heard (to my grief) some
of the ministry affirm, that they have had in their parish at one instant, 17
or 18. Witches, meaning such as could work miracles supernaturally. Whereby
they manifested as well their infidelity and ignorance, in conceiving Gods
word; as their negligence and errror in instructing their flocks. For they
themselves might understand, and also teach their parishoners, that Psalm. 72.
and 136. Jeremy 5.
God only works great wonders; and that it is he which sends such
punishments to the wicked, and such trials to the elect: according to the
saying of the Prophet Haggai, Hag. 2.28.
I smote you with blasting and mildew, and with hail, in all the labors of
your hands; and yet you turned not unto me, says the Lord. And therefore says
the same Prophet in another place; Idem ca 1.
you have sown much, and bring in little. And both in Joel. 1.
Joel and Leviti. 26.
Leviticus, the like phrases and proofs are used and made. But more shall be
said of this hereafter.

S. Paul fore saw the blindness and obstinacy, both of these blind shepherds,
and also of their scabbed sheep, when he said 2 Timothy 4.34.
They will not suffer wholesome doctrine, but having their ears itching, shall
get them a heap of reachers after their own lusts; and shall turn their ears
from the truth, and shall be given to fables. And 1 Timothy 4.1.
in the latter time some shall depart from the faith, and shall give heed to
spirits of errors, and doctrines of devils, which speak lies (as witches and
conjurers do) but cast thou away such profane and old wives fables. In which
sense Basil says; Who so gives heed to inchanters, harkeneth to a fabulous
and frivilous thing. But I will rehearse an example whereof I my self am not
only Oculatus testis, but have examined the cause, and am to justify the truth
of my report: not because I would disgrace the ministers that are godly, but to
confirm my former assertion, that this absurd error is grown into the place,
which should be able to expel all such ridiculous folly and impiety.

At the assizes holden at Rochester, Anno 1581. one Margaret Simons, the wife
of John Simons, A story of Margaret Simons, a supposed witch.
of Brenchly in Kent, was arraigned for witchcraft, at the instigation and
complaint of diverse fond and malicious persons; and specially by the means of
one John Ferrall vicar of that parish: with whom I talked about that matter and
found him both fondly assorted in the cause, and enviously bent toward her:
and (which is worse) as unable to make a good account of his faith, as she whom
he accused. That which he, for his part, laid to the poor woman's charge, was
this.

His son (being an ungracious boy, and prentise to one Robert Scotchsord
clothier, dwelling in that parish of Brenchly) passed on a day by her house; at
whom by chance her little dog barked. Which thing the boy taking in evil part,
drew his knife, and pursued him therewith even to her door: whom she rebuked
with some such words as the boy disdained, and yet nevertheless would not be
persuaded to depart in a long time. At the last he returned to his masters
house, and within five or six days fell sick. Then was called to mind the fray
betwixt the dog and the boy: insomuch as the vicar (who thought himself so
privileged, as he little mistrusted that God would visit his children with
sickness) did so calculate; as he found, partly through his own judgment and
partly (as he himself told me) by the relation of other witches, that his said
son was by her bewitched. Yea, he also told me, that this his son (being as
it were past all cure) received perfect health at the hands of another witch.

He proceeded yet further against her, affirming, that always in his
parish church, when he desired to read most plainly, his voice so failed him,
as he could scant be heard at all. Which he could impute, he said, to nothing
else, but to her enchantment. When I advertised the poor woman hereof, as being
desirous to hear what she could say for her self; she told me, that in very
deed his voice did much fail him, specially when he strained himself to speak
lowdest. Howbeit, she said that at all times his voice was hoarse and low,
which thing I perceived to be true. But sir; said she, you shall understand,
that this our vicar is diseased with such a kind of hoarsenesse, as diverse of
our neighbors in this parish not long since, doubted that he had the
French Pox; and in that respect utterly refused to communicate with him: until
such time as (being thereunto injoined by M. D. Lewen the ordinary) he had
brought from London a certificat, under the hands of two Physicians, that his
hoarsenes proceeded from a disease in the lungs. Which certificate he published
in the church, in the presence of the whole congregation: and by this means he
was cured, or rather excused of the shame of his disease. And this I know to be
true by the relation of diverse honest men of that parish. And truly, if one of
the Jury had not been wiser then the other, she had been condemned thereupon,
and upon other as ridiculous matters as this. For the name of a witch is so
odious, and her power so feared among the common people, that if the honestest
body living chance to be arraigned thereupon, she shall hardly escape
condemnation.

CHAP. III.
Who they be that are called witches, with a manifest declaration of the cause
that moves men so commonly to think, and witches themselves to believe that
they can hurt children, cattle, etc. with words and imaginations; and of
cosening witches.

ONe sort of such as fare said to be witches, are women which be commonly old,
lame, blear-eyed, pale, foul, and full of wrinckles; poor, sullen,
superstitious, and papists; or such as know no religion: in whose drousie minds
the devil has gotten a fine seat; so as, what mischief, mischance, calamity,
or slaughter is brought to pass, they are easily persuaded the same is done by
themselves; Cardan de var^rerum.
imprinting in their minds an earnest and constant imagination thereof. They
are lean and deformed, showing melancholy in their faces, to the horror of all
that see them. They are doting, scolds; mad, devilish; and not much differing
from them that are thought to be possessed with spirits, so firm and steadfast
in their opinions, as whosoever shall only have respect to the constancy of
their words uttered, would easily believe they were true indeed.

These miserable wretches are so odious unto all their neighbors; and so
feared, as few dare offend them, or deny them any thing they ask: whereby they
take upon them, yea, and sometimes think, that they can do such things as are
beyond the ability of humane nature. These go from house to house, and from
door to door for a pot full of milk, yest, drink, pottage, or some such
relief; without the which they could hardly live: neither obtaining for their
service and pains, nor yet by their art, nor yet at the devils hands (with
whom they are said to make a perfect and visible bargain) either beauty,
money, promotion, wealth, worship, pleasure, honor, knowledge, learning, or any
other benefit whatsoever.

It falls out many times, that neither their necessities, nor their
expectation is answered or served, in those places where they beg or borrowe;
but rather their lewdness is by their neighbors reproved. And further, in
tract of time the witch waxes odious and tedious to her neighbors; and they
again are despised and despited of her: so as sometimes she curses one, and
sometimes another; and that from the master of the house, his wife, children,
cattle, etc. to the little pig that lies in the stie. Thus in process of
time they have all displeased her, and she has wished evil luck unto them
all; perhaps with curses and imprecations made in form. Doubtless (at length)
some of her neighbors die, or fall sick; or some of their children are visited
with diseases that vex them strangely: as apoplexies, epilepsie, convulsions,
hot fevers, worms, etc. Which by ignorant parents are supposed to be the
vengeance of witches. Yea and their opinions and conceits are confirmed and
maintained by unskilful physicians, according to the common saying: Inscitiae
pallium maleficium and incantatio, Witchcraft and enchantment is the cloak of
ignorance: whereas indeed evil humors, and not strange words, witches, or
spirits are the causes of such diseases. Also some of their cattle pe^ish,
either by disease or mischance. Then they, upon whom such adversities full,
weighing the fame that goes upon this woman, her words, displeasure, and
curse^, meeting so justly with their misfortune, do not only conceive, but
also are resolved that all their mishaps are brought to pass by her only
means.

The witch on the other side expecting her neighbors mischances, and seeing
things sometimes come to pass according to her wishes, curses, I. Bodin. li.
2. de. demon. cap. 8.
and incantations (for Bodin himself confesses, that not above two in a
hundred of their witchings or wishings take effect) being called before a
Justice, by due examination of the circumstances is driven to see her
imprecations and desires, and her neighbors harms and losses to concur, and
as it were to take effect: and so confesses that she (as a goddess) has
brought such things t^ pass. Wherein, not only she, but the accuser, and also
the Justice are foully deceived and abused; as being through her confession and
other circumstances persuaded (to the injury of Gods glory) that she has done,
or can do that which is proper only to God himself.

Another sort of witches there are, which he absolutely coseners. These take
upon them, either for glory, fame, or gain, to do any thing which God or the
devil can do: either for foretelling of things to come, bewrayring of secrets,
curing of maladies, or working of miracles. But of these I will talk more at
large hereafter.

CHAP. IIII.
What miraculous actions are imputed to witthes by witchmongers, papists, and
poets.

ALthough it be quite against the hair, and contrary to the devils will
contrary to the witches oath, promise, and homage, and contrary to all reason,
that witche^ should help any thing that is bewitched; but rather set forward
their masters business: yet we read in Malleo Maleficarum, Mal. Malef. par. 2.
quaest. 1. cap. 2.
of three sorts of witches; and the same is affirmed by all the writers
hereupon, new and old. One sort (they say) can hurt and not help, the second
can help and not hurt, the third can both help and hurt. And among the
hurtful witches he says there is one sort more beastly than any kind of
beasts, saving wolves; for these usually devour and eat young children and
infants of their own kind. These be they (says he) that raise hail, tempests,
and hurtful weather; as lightning, thunder, etc. These be they that procure
barrenness in man, woman and beast. These can throw children into waters, as
they walk with their mothers, and not be seen. These can make horses kick,
till they cast the riders. These can pass from place to place in the air
invisible. These can so alter the mind of judges, they can have no power to
hurt them. These can procure to themselves and to others, taciturnity and
insensibility in their torments. These can bring trembling to the hands, and
strike terror into the minds of them that apprehend them. These can manifest
unto others, things hidden and lost, and foreshew things to come; and see them
as though they were present. These can alter men's minds to inordinate love or
hate. Ovid. lib. metamorphoseon 7. Danaeus in dialog. Psellus in Operatione
daem Virg. in Damone. Hor a epod. 5. Tibul. de fascinat. lib. 1. eleg 2. Ovid.
Epist. 4. Lex. 12. Tabularum. Mal. Malef. Lucan. de bello civili. lib. 6, Virg.
eclog. 8. Ovid de remedio amoris lib. 1. Hyperius. Erastus. Rich. Gal. in his
horrible treatise. Hemingius: Bar. Spineus. Bryan Darcy Confessio Windesor.
Virgil. Aeneid. 4. C. Manlius astrol. lib. 1. Mal. Malef. part 2. quaest. 1.
cap. 14.
These can kill whom they list with lightning and thunder. These can take away
man's courage, and the power of generation. These can make a woman miscarry in
childbirth, and destroy the child in the mothers womb, without any sensible
means either inwardly or outwardly applied. These can with their looks kill
either man or beast.

All these things are avowed by James Sprenger and Henry Institor In Malleo
Maleficarum, to be true, and confirmed by Nider, and the inquisitor Cumanus;
and also by Danaeus, Hyperius, Hemingius, and multiplied by Bodin, and Friar
Bartholomaeus Spineus. But because I will in no wise abridge the authority of
their power, you shall have also the testimonies of many other grave authors in
this behalf; as follows.

And first Ovid affirms that they can raise and suppress lightning and
thunder, rain and hail, clouds and winds, tempests and earthquakes. Others do
write, that they can pull down the moon and the stars. Some write that with
wishing they can send needles into the livers of their enemies. Some that they
can transfer corn in the blade from one place to another. Some, that they can
cure diseases supernaturally, fly in the air, and dance with devils. Some
write, that they can play the part of Succubus, and contract themselves to
Incubus; and so young prophets are upon them begotten, etc. Some say they can
transubstantiate themselves and others, and take the forms and shapes of
asses, wolves, ferrets, cows, apes, horses, dogs, etc. Some say they can keep
devils and spirits in the likeness of todes and cats.

They can raise spirits (as others affirm) dry up springs, turn the course
of running waters, inhibit the sun, and stay both day and night, changing the
one into the other. They can go in and out at awger-holes, and sail in an egg
shell, a cockle or muscel-shell, through and under the tempestuous seas. They
can go invisible, and deprive men of their privities, and otherwise of the act
and use of venery. They can bring souls out of the graves. They can tear
snakes in pieces with words, and with looks kill lambs. But in this case a
man may say, that Miranda canunt, sed non credenda Poetae. They can also bring
to pass, that cherne as long as you lift, your butter will not come;
especially, if either the maids have eaten up the cream; or the good-wife have
sold the butter before in the market. Whereof I have had some trial, although
there may be true and natural causes to hinder the common course thereof: as
for example. Put a little soap or sugar into your cherne of cream, and there
will never come any butter, cherne as long as you list. But M. Mal. says, that
there is not so little a village, where many women are not that bewitch,
infect, and kill kine, and dry up the milk: alleging for the strengthening of
that assertion, 1 Cor. 9.9.
the saying of the Apostle, Nunquid Deo cura est de bobus? does God take any
care of oxen?

CHAP. V.
A confutation of the common conceived opinion of witches and witchcraft, and
how detestable a sin it is to repair to them for counsel or help in time
of affliction.

BUt whatsoever is reported or conceived of such manner of witchcrafts, I dare
avow to be false and fabulous (cosenage, dotage, and poisoning excepted:)
neither is there any mention made of these kind of witches in the Bible. If
Christ had known them, he would not have pretermitted to inveigh against their
presumption, in taking upon them his office: as, to heal and cure diseases;
and to work such miraculous and supernatural things, as whereby he himself
was specially known, believed, and published to be God; his actions and cures
consisting (in order and effect) according to the power by our witch-mongers
imputed to witches. Howbeit, if there be any in these days afflicted in such
strange sort, as Christ's cures and patients are described in the new testament
to have been: we fly from trusting in God to trusting in witches, who do not
only in their cosening art take on them the office of Christ in this behalf;
but use his very phrase of speech to such idolaters, as come to seek divine
assistance at their hands, saying; Go thy ways, thy son or thy daughter, John
5, 6. Mark. 5.34.
etc. shall do well, and be whole.

It will not suffice to dissuade a witch-monger from his credulity, that he
sees the sequel and event to fall out many times contrary to their assertion;
but in such case (to his greater condemnation) he seeks further to witches of
greater fame. If all fail, he will rather think he came an hour too late;
than that he went a mile too far. Truly I for my part cannot perceive what it
is to go a whoring after strange gods, if this be not. To go to witches, etc.
is idolatry.
He that looks upon his neighbors wise, and lusts after her, has
committed adultery. And truly, he that in heart and by argument maintained the
sacrifice of the mass to be propitiatory for the quick and the dead, is an
idolater; as also he that allows and commends creeping to the cross, and
such like idolatrous actions, although he bend not his corporal knees.

In like manner I say, he that attributes to a witch, such divine power, as
duly and only appertains unto GOD (which all witch-monger do) is in heart a
blasphemer, an idolater, and full of gross impiety, although he neither go nor
send to her for assistance.

CHAP. VI.
A further confutation of witches miraculous land omnipotent power, by
invincible reasons and authorities, with disswasions from such fond credulity.

IF witches could do any such miraculous things, as these and other which are
imputed to them, they might do them again and again, at any time or place, or
at any man's desire: for the devil is as strong at one time as at another, as
busy by day as by night, and ready enough to do all mischief, and cares not
whom he abuses. And insomuch as it is confessed, by the most part of
witch-mongers themselves, that he knows not the cogitation of man's heart, he
should (me thinks) sometimes appear, unto honest and credible persons, in such
gross and corporal form, as it is said he does unto witches: which you shall
never hear to be justified by one sufficient witness. For the devil indeed
enters into the mind, and that way seeks man's confusion.

The art always presupposes the power; so as, if they say they can do this or
that, they must show how and by what means they do it; as neither the witches,
nor the witch-mongers are able to do. For to every action is required the
faculty and ability of the agent or doer; the aptnes of the patient or subject;
and a convenient and possible application. Now the witches are mortal, and
their power depends upon the analogy and consonancy of their minds and
bodies; but with their minds they can but will and understand; and with their
bodies they can do no more, but as the bounds and ends of terrene sense will
suffer: and therefore their power extended not to do such miracles, as
surmounteth their own sense, and the understanding of others which are wiser
than they; so as here wants the virtue and power of the efficient. And in
reason, there can be no more virtue in the thing caused, than in the cause, or
that which proceeds of or from the benefit of the cause. And we see; Aristot.
de. anima lib. 2. Acts. 8.
that ignorant and impotent women, or witches, are the causes of incantations
and charms; wherein we shall perceive there is none effect, if we will credit
our own experience and sense unabused, the rules of philosophy, or the word of
God. For alas! What an unapt instrument is a toothles, Why should not the
devil be as ready to help thief really as a witch? L. mulfum. ^siquis alteri,
vel libi.
old, impotent, and unweildy woman to fly in the air; Truly, the devil
little needs such instruments to bring his purposes to pass.

It is strange, that we should suppose, that such persons can work such
feats: and it is more strange, that we will imagine that to be possible to be
done by a witch, which to nature and sense is impossible; specially when our
neighbors life depends upon our credulity therein; and when we may see the
defect of ability, which always is an impediment both to the act, and also to
the presumption thereof. And because there is nothing possible in law, that in
nature is impossible; therefore the judge does not attend or regard what the
accused man says; or yet would do: but what is proved to have been committed,
and naturally falls in man's power and will to do. For the law says, that to
will a thing unpossible, is a sign of a madman, or of a soole, upon whom no
sentence or judgment takes hold. Furthermore, what jury will condemn, or
what Judge will give sentence or judgment against one for killing a man at
Berwicke; when they themselves, and many other saw that man at London, that
very day, wherein the murder was committed; yea though the party confess
himself guilty therein, and twenty witnesses depose the same; But in this case
also I say the judge is not to weigh their testimony, which is weakened by law;
and the judges authority is to supply the imperfection of the case, and to
maintain the right and equity of the same.

Seeing therefore that some other things might naturally be the occasion and
cause of such calamities as witches are supposed to bring; let not us that
profess the Gospel and knowledge of Christ, be bewitched to believe that they
do such things, An objection answered.
as are in nature impossible, and in sense and reason incredible. If they say
it is is done through the devils help, who can work miracles; why do not
thieves bring their business to pass miraculously, with whom the devil is as
conversant as with the other; Such mischiefs as are imputed to witches, happen
where no witches are; yea and continue when witches are hanged and burnt: why
then should we attribute such effect to that cause, which being taken away,
happens nevertheless?

CHAP. VII.
By what means the name of witches becomes so famous, and how diversely people
be opinioned concerning them and their actions.

Surely the natural power of man or woman cannot be so enlarged, as to do any
thing beyond the power and virtue given and ingrafted by God. But it is the
will and mind of man, which is vitiated and depraved by the devil: Miracles
are ceased.
neither does God permit any more, than that which the natural order appointed
by him does require. Which natural order is nothing else, but the ordinary
power of God, powered into every creature, according to his state and condition.
But hereof more shall be said in the title of witches confessions. Howbeit you
shall understand, the few or none are thoroughly persuaded, resolved, or
satisfied, that witches can indeed accomplish all these impossibilities: but
some one is bewitched in one point, The opinions of people concerning
witchcraft are diverse and inconstant.
and some are cosened in another, until in fine, all these impossibilities,
and many more, are by several persons affirmed to be true.

And this I have also noted, that when any one is cosened with a cosening toie
of witchcraft, and makes report thereof accordingly, verifiing a matter most
impossible and false as it were upon his own knowledge, as being overtaken with
some kind of illusion or other (which illusions are right enchantments) even
the self same man will deride the likely proceeding out of another man's mouth,
as a fabulous matter unworthy of credit. It is also to be wondered, how men
(that have seen some part of witches cosenages detected, and see also therein
the impossibility of their own presumptions, and the folly and false-hood of
the witches confessions) will not suspect, but remain unsatisfied, or rather
obstinately defend the residue of witches supernatural actions: like as when a
jugler has discovered the slight and illusion of his principal seats, one
would fondly continue to think, that his other petty juggling knacks of
legier^emaine are done by the help of a familiar: and according to the folly
of some papists, who seeing and confessing the Popes absurd religion, in the
erection and maintenance of idolatry and superstition, specially in Images,
pardons, and relics of saints, will yet persevere to think, that the rest of
his doctrine and trumpery is holy and good. Finally, many maintain and cry out
for the execution of witches, that particularly believe never a whit of that
which is imputed unto them; if they be therein privately dealt withal, and
substantially opposed and tried in argument.

CHAP. VIII.
Causes that move as well witches themselves as others to think that they can
work impossibilities, with answers to certain objections: where also their
punishment by law is touched.

CArdanus writes, Car. de. var. rerum. lib. 15. cap. 80.
that the cause of such credulity consists in three points; to wit, in the
imagination of the melancholic, in the constancy of them that are corrupt
therewith, and in the deceit of the Judges; who being inquisitors themselves
against heretics and witches, did both accuse and condemn them, having for
their labor the spoil of their goods. So as these inquisitors added many
fables hereunto, least they should seem to have done injury to the poor
wretches, in condemning and executing them for none offense. But fithens (says
he) the springing up of Luthers sect, these priests have tended more deligently
upon the execution of them: because more wealth is to be caught from them:
insomuch as now they deal so loosly with witches (through distrust of gains)
that all is seen to be malice, solly, or avarice that has been practiced
against them. And whosoever shall search into this cause, or read the chief
writers hereupon, shall find his words true.

It will be objected, that we here in England are not now directed by the Popes
laws; An obejection answered.
and so by consequence our witches not troubled or convented by the inquisitors
Haereticae pravitatis. I answer, that in times past here in England, as in
other nations, this order of discipline has been in force and use; although
now some part of old rigor be qualified by two several statutes made in the
first of Elizabeth, and 33 of Henry the eight. Nevertheless the estimation of
the omnipotency of their words and charms seems in those statutes to be
somewhat maintained, as a matter hitherto generally received; and not yet so
looked into, as that it is refuted and decided. But how wisely soever the
Parliament House has dealt therein, or how mercifully soever the Prince
beholds the cause: if a poor old woman, supposed to be a witch, be by the
civil or canon law convented; I doubt, some canon will be found in force, not
only to give scope to the tormentor, but also to the hangman, to exercise
their offices upon her. And most certain it is, that in what point soever any
of these extremities, which I shall rehearse unto you, be mitigated, it is
through the goodness of the Queens Majesty, and her excellent magistrates
placed amongst us. For as touching the opinion of our writers therein in our
age; yea in our country you shall see it does not only agree with foreign
cruelty, but surmounteth it far. If you read a foolish pamphlet dedicated to
the Lord Darcy by W. W. 1582. you shall see that he affirms, W. W. his book
printed in Anno Dom. 1582.
that all those torture are far too light, and their rigor too mild; and that
in that respect he impudently exclameth against our magistrates, who suffer
them to be but hanged, when murderers, and such malefactors be so used, which
deserve not the hundredth part of their punishments. But if you will see more
folly and lewdness comprised in one lewd book, I commend you to Ri. Ga. a
Windsor-man; who being a madman has written according to his frantic humor;
the reading whereof may satisfy a wise man, how mad all these witch-mongers
dealings be in this behalf.

CHAP. IX.
A conclusion of the first book, wherein is fore-shewed the tyrannical cruelty
of witch-mongers and inquisitors, with a request to the reader to peruse the
same.

ANd because it may appear unto the world what treacherous and faithless
dealing, what extreme and intolerable tyranny, what gross and fond
absurdities, what unnatural and uncivil discourtesie, what cankerd and
spiteful malice, what outrageous and barbarous cruelty, what lewd and false
packing, what cunning and crafty intercepting, what bald and pievish
interpretations, what abominable and devilish inventions; and what ^lat and
plain knavery is practiced against these old women; I will set down the whole
order of the inquisition, to the everlasting, inexcusable, and apparent shame
of all witch-mongers. Neither will I insert any private or doubtful dealings
of theirs; or such as they can either deny to be usual, or justly cavil at;
but such as are published and renewed in all ages, since the commencement of
popery, established by laws, pactised by inquisitors, privileged by princes,
commended by doctors, confirmed by popes, councels, decrees, and canons; and
finally be left of all witch-mongers; to wit, by such as attribute to old
women, and such like creatures, the power of the Creator. I pray you therefore,
though it be tedious and intolerable (as you would be heard in your miserable
calamities) so hear with compassion, their accusations, examinations, matters
given in evidence, confessions, presumptions, interrogatories, conjurations,
cautions, crimes, tortures and condemnations, devised and practiced usually
against them.

The second Book.
CHAP. I.
What testimonies and witnesses are allowed to give evidence against reputed
witches, by the report and allowance of the inquisitors themselves, and such as
are special writers herein.

EXcommunicate persons, Mal. Malef. quaest. 5. pa. 3. ^. Bod, lib. 4. cap. 2.
de demon.

Arch. in C. all. accusatus. in S. lz. super. verba.

I. Bod. lib. 4. cap. 1. de demon.

Mal. Malef. quaest. 56. pa. 3. and quae. 5. part. 3. Ibidem.


partakers of the fault, infants, wicked servants, and run-a-waies are to be
admitted to bear witness against their dames in this matter of witchcraft,
because (says Bodin the champion of witch-mongers) none that be honest are
able to detect them. Heretics also and witches shall be received to accuse,
but not to excuse a witch. And finally, the testimony of all infamous persons
in this case is good and allowed. Yea, one lewd person (says Bodin) may be
received to accuse and condemn a thousand suspected witches. And although by
law, a capital enemy may be challenged; yet James Sprenger, and Henry
Institor, (from whom Bodin, and all the writers that ever I have read, do
receive their light, authorities and arguments) say (upon this point of law)
that the poor friendlesse old woman must prove, that her capital enemy would
have killed her, and that he has both assaulted and wounded her; otherwise she
pleads all in vain. If the judge ask her, whether she have any capital
enemies; and she rehearse other, and forget her accuser: or else answer that he
was her capital enemy, but now she hops he is not so; such a one is
nevertheless admitted for a witness. And though by law, single witnesses are
not admittable; yet if one depose she has bewitched her cow; another, her sow;
and the third, her butter: these (says M. Mal. and Bodin) are not single
witnesses; because they agree that she is a with.

CHAP. II.
The order of examination witches of by the inquisitors.

WOmen suspected to be witches, The Scottish custom of accusing a witch.
after their apprehension may not be suffered to go home, or to other places,
to seek sureties: for then (says Bodin) the people would be worse willing to
accuse them; for fear least at their return home, they work revenge upon
them. In which respect Bodin commends much the Scottish custom and order in
this behalf: where (he says) a hollow piece of wood or a chest is placed in
the church, into the which any body may freely cast a little scroll of paper,
wherein may be contained the name of the witch, the time, place, and fact, etc.
And the same chest being locked with three several locks are opened every
fifteenth day by three inquisitors or officers appointed for that purpose:
which keep three several keys. And thus the accuser need not be known, nor
shamed with the reproach of slander or malice to his poor neighbor.

Item, there must be great persuasions used to all men, women, and and
children, to accuse old women of witchcraft.

Item, there may always be promised impunity and favor to witches, that
confess and detect others; and on the contrary, there may be threatenings and
violence practiced and used.

Item, the little children of witches, which will not confess, must be
attached, who (if they be craftily handled says Bodin) will confess against
their own mothers.

Item, witches must be examined as suddenly, and as unawarres as is possible:
the which will so amaze them, that they will confess any thing, supposing the
devil has forsaken them; whereas if they should first be committed to prison,
the devil would tamper with them, and inform them what to do.

Item, the inquisitor, judge, or examiner, must begin with small matters first.

Item, they must be examined, whether their parents were witches or no: I. Bod.
lib. de demon. 4. cap. 4. L parents de testibus.
for witches (as these Doctors suppose) come by propagation. And Bodin sets
down this principle in witchcraft, to wit, Si saga sit matter, sic etiam est
filia: howbeit the law forbids it, Ob sanguinis rev^rentiam.

Item, the examiner must look steadfastly upon their eyes: for they cannot look
directly upon a man's face (as Bodin affirms in one place, although in another
he says, that they kill and destroy both men and beasts with their looks.)

Item, she must be examined of all accusations, presumptions, and faults, at
one instant; least Satan should afterward dissuade her from confession.

Item, a witch may not be put in prison alone, least the devil dissuade her
from confession, through promises of her indemnity. For (says Bodin some that
have been in the goal have proved to fly away, as they were wont to do when
they met with Diana and Minerva, etc. and so brake their own necks against the
stone wales.

Item, if any deny her own confession made without torture, she (...)
nevertheless by that confession to be condemned, as in any other crime*

Item, the judges must seem to be in a pitiful countenance and (...) bemone
them; saying, that It was not they, but the devil that committed the murder,
and that he compelled them to do it; and must make them believe that they
think them to be innocents.

Item, if they will confess nothing* but upon the rack or torture their
apparel must be changed; and every hair in their body must be shaven off with
a sharp razor.

K. Childeberts cruel devise.
Item, if they have charms for taciturnity, so as they feel not the common
tortures, and thefore confess nothing: then some sharp instrument must be
thrust betwixt every nail of their fingers and toes; which (a^ Bodin says) was
king Childeberts devise, and is to thia day of all others the most effectual.
For by means of that extreme pain, they will (says he) confess any thing.

Item, Paulus Grillandus, being an old doer in these matters; wishes that when
witches sleep, P. Grillandus.
and feel no pain upon the torture, Domine labia mea aperies should be said;
and so (says he) both the torments will be felt, and the truth will be
uttered: Et sic ars deluditur art.

Item, A subtle and devilish devise.
Bodin says, that at the the time of examination, there should be a semblance
of great a do, to the terrifying of the witch; and that a number of
instruments, gives, manacles, ropes, halters, fetters, etc. be prepared,
brought forth, and laid before the examinate: and also that some be procured to
make a most horrible and lamentable cry, in the place of torture, as though he
or she were upon the rack, or in the tormentors hands: so as the examinate may
hear it whiles she is examined, before she her self be brought into the
prison; and perhaps (says he) she will by this means confess the matter.

Item, there must be subborned some crafty spy, that may seem to be a prisoner
with her in the like case; who perhaps may in conference undermine her, and so
bewraie and discover her.

Item, if she will not yet confess, she must be told that she is detected, and
accused by other of her companions; although in truth there be no such matter:
and so perhaps she will confess, the rather to be revenged upon her
adversaries and accusers.

CHAP. III.
Matters of evidence against witches.

IF an old woman threaten or touch one being in health, who dies shortly
after; or else is infected with the leprosy, apoplexy, or any other strange
disease: it is (says Bodin) a permanent fact, and such an evidence, as
condemnation or death must ensue, without further proof: if any body have
mistrusted her, or said before that she was a witch.

Item, if any come in, or depart out of the chamber or house, the doors being
shut; it is an apparent and sufficient evidence to a witches condemnation,
without further trial: which thing Bodin never saw. If he can show me that
fea^, I will subscribe to his folly. For Christ after his resurrection used the
same: not as a ridiculous toie, that every witch might accomplish; but as a
special miracle, to strengthen the faith of the elect.

Item, if a woman bewitch any bodies eyes, she is to be executed without
further proof.

Item, if any inchant or bewitch men's beasts, or corn, or fly in the air, or
make a dog speak, or cut off any man's members, and unite them again to men or
childrens bodies; it is sufficient proof to condemnation.

Item, presumptions and conjectures are sufficient proofs against witches.

Bar. Spineus and I. Bod. de demon. lib. 2. cap. 2.

Alexander. L. ubi numerus de testibus.

I. Bod. de demon. lib. 2. cap. 2.


Item, if three witnesses do but say, Such a woman is a witch; then it is a
clear case that she is to be executed with death. Which matter Bodin says is
not only certain by the canon and civil laws, but by the opinion of Pope
Innocent, the wisest Pope (as he says) that ever was.

Item, the complaint of any one man of credit is sufficient to bring a poor
woman to the rack or pully.

Item, a condemned or infamous persons testimony is good and allowable in
matters of witchcraft.

Item, a witch is not to be delivered, though she endure all the tortures, and
confess nothing; as all other are in any criminal cases.

Item, though in other cases the epo^i^ions of many women at one instant are
disabled, as sufficient in law; because of the imbecility and frailty of their
nature or sex, yet in this matter one woman, though she be a party, either
accuser or accused, and be also infamous and impudent (for such are Bodins
words) yea and already condemned; she may nevertheless serve to accuse and
condemn a witch.

Item, a witness uncited, and offering himself in this case is to be heard,
and in none other.

Item, a capital enemy (if the enmity be pretended to grow by means of
witchcraft) may object against a witch; and none exception is to be had or
made against him. Par. in. L. post leno^um 9. bis, de iis quibus ut indig.
Alex. cap. 72. L. 2. etc.


Item, although the proof of perjury may put back a witness in (...) other
causes; yet in this a perjured person is a good and lawful witness.

Item, the proctors and advocates in this case are compelled to be witnesses
against their clients, as in none other case they are to be constrained
thereunto.

Item, none can give evidence against witches, touching their assemblies, but
witches only: because (as Bodin says) none other can do (...) Howbeit, In his
foolish pamphlet of the execution of Windsor-witches.

I. Bod. lib. 4. cap. 3.

Is there any probability that such would continue witches? Idem ibid. Joan.
An. ad speculat. tit de litis ^^ntest. part. 2. non alienem eodem.


Ri. Ga. writes, that he came to the God-speed, and with his sword and buckler
killed the devil; or at the least he wounded him sore, that he made him stink
of brimstone.

Item, Bodin says, that because this is an extraordinary matter; the^ must
herein be extraordinary dealing: and all manner of ways are to (...) used,
direct and indirect.

CHAP. IIII.
Confessions of witches, whereby they are condemned.

Some witches confess (says Bodin) that are desirous to die; not (...) glory,
but for despair: because they are tormented in their lifetime. But these may
not be spared (says he) although the law does (...) them.

The best and surest confession is at strife, to her ghostly father.

Item, if she confess many things that are false, and one thing (...) may be
true; she is to be taken and executed upon that confession: Item she is not so
guilty that confesses a falsehood or ly, and d^enieth a ru^h; as she that
answers by ^ircumstance.

Item, an equivocall or doubtful answer is taken for a confession against a
witch.

Item, L. de aet at. 5. nihil eodem. etc.

I. Bod. de demon. lib. 4. cap. 3.


Bodin reports, that one confessed that he went out, or rather up in the air,
and was transported many miles to the fairies dance, only because he would spy
unto what place his wife went to hagging, and how she behaved her self.
Whereupon was much ado among the inquisitors and lawyers, to discuss whether
he should be executed with his wife or no. But it was concluded that he must
die, because he bewrayed not his wife: the which he forbear to do, Propter
reverentiam honoris and familiae.

Item, if a woman confess freely herein, before question be made; and yet
afterward deny it: she is nevertheless to be burned.

Item, they affirm that this extremity is herein used, because not one among a
thousand witches is detected. And yet it is affirmed by Sprenger in M. Mal.
that there is not so little a parish, but there are many witches known to be
there.

CHAP. V.
Presumptions, whereby witches are condemned.

IF any woman's Child chance to die at her hand, I. Bod de demon lib. 4. cap. 4.
so as no body knows how, it may not be thought or presumed that the mother
killed it, except she be supposed a witch; and in that case it is otherwise:
for she must upon that presumption be executed; except she can prove the
negative or contrary.

Item, if the child of a woman that is suspected to be a witch, be lacking or
gone from her; it is to be presumed, that she has sacrificed it to the devil:
except she can prove the negative or contrary.

Item, though in other persons, certain points of their confessions may be
thought erroneous, and imputed to error: yet (in witches cau^es) all
oversights, imperfections, and escapes must be adjudged impious and malicious;
I. Bod de demon. lib. 4. cap. 4.

L. decurionem de panis.

Panorm. and Felin in C. venient. 1. de testibus parsi. causa 15.4. Lib 4
numero 12. usque 18.


and tend to her confusion and condemnation.

Item, though a thief be not said in law to be infamous in any other matter
than in the^t; yet a witch defamed of witch craft is said to be defiled with
all manner of faults and infamies universally, though she were condemned; but
(as I said) defamed with the name of a witch. For rumors and reports are
sufficient (says Bodin) to condemn a witch

Item, if any man, woman, or child do say, that such a one is a witch; it is a
most vehement suspicion (says Bodin, and sufficient to bring her to the rack;
though in all other cases it be directly against law.

Item, in presumptions and suspicions against a witch, the common brute or
voice of the people cannot err.

Item, if a woman, when she is apprehended, cry out, or say; I am undone; Save
my life; I will tell you how the matter stands etc. she is thereupon most
vehemently to be suspected and condemned to die.

Item, though a conjurer be not to be condemned for curing the diseased by
virtue of his art: yet must a witch die for the like case.

Item, the behavior, looks, becks, and countenance of a woman, are sufficient
signs, whereby to presume she is a witch: for always they look down to the
ground, and dare not look a man full in the face.

Item, if their parents were thought to be witches, then is it certainly to be
presumed that they are so: but it is not so to be thought of whores. Item, it
is a vehement presumption if she cannot weep, at the time of her examination:
and yet Bodin says, that a witch may shed three drop out of her right eye.

Item, it is not only a vehement suspicion, and presumption, but an evident
proof of a witch; if any man or beast die suddenly where she has been seen
lately; although her witching-stuffe be not found or espied.

Item, if any body use familiarity or company with a witch convicted it is a
sufficient presumption against that person to be adjudged ^ witch.

L. 5. de adult. S. gl. and Bart. c. venerabilis de electio. etc. I. Bod. de
demon. lib. 4. cap. 4.
Item, that evidence that may serve to bring in any other person to examination,
may serve to bring a witch to her condemnation.

Item, herein judgment must be pronounced and executed (as Bod^^ says,
without order, and not like to the orderly proceeding and form^^ judgment in
other crimes.

Item a witch may not be brought to the torture suddenly; or before long
examination, least she go away scotfree: for they feel no torment and therefore
care not for the same, as Bodin affirms.,

Idem Ibid.
Item, little children may be had to the torture at the first dash; but (...)
may it not be done with old women: as is aforesaid.

Item, if she have any privy mark under her arme-pits, under he^ hair, under
her lip, or in her buttock, or in her privities: it is a presumption sufficient
for the judge to proceed and give sentence of dea^^ upon her.

The only pity they show to a poor woman in this case, is: that thoug^ she be
accused to have slain any body with her enchantments; yet if (...) can bring
^orth the party alive, she shall not be put to death. Whereas marvel, in as
much as they can bring the devil in any bodies likeness and representation.
Cap. preterea cum glos. extra. de test. Panormit. in C. vener. col. 2. oedem,
etc


Item, their law says, that an uncertain presumption is sufficient, when a
certain presumption fails.

CHAP. VI.
Particular interrogatories used by the inquisitors against witches

I Need not stay to confute such partial and horrible dealings, being
apparently impious, and full of tyranny, which except I should (...) so
manifestly detected, even with their own writings and assertions, (...) or none
would have believed. But for brevi^ies sake I will pass over the same;
supposing that the citing of such absurdities may stand for a suffic^^ent
confutation thereof. Now therefore I will proceed to a more particular order
and manner of examinations, etc. used by the inquisitors, and allowed for the
most part throughout all nations.

First the witch must be demanded, why she touched such a child or such a cow,
Mal. malef. super interreg.
etc. and afterward the same child or cow fell sick or lame, etc.

Item, why her two kine give more milk than her neighbors. And the note
before mentioned is here again set down, to be specially observed of all men:
to wit; that though a witch cannot weep, yet she may speak with a crying voice.
which assertion of weeping is false, and contrary to the saying of Seneca,
Seneca in tragoed Mal. malef. part. 3. quaest
Cato, and many others; which affirm, that a woman weepeth when she means
most deceit; and therefore says M. Mal. she must be well looked unto,
otherwise she will put spitle privily upon her cheeks, and seem to weep; which
rule also Bodin says is infallible. But alas that tears should be thought
sufficient to excuse or condemn in so great a cause, and so weighty a trial!
I am sure that the worst sort of the children of Israel wept bitterlly: 15.
act. 10. Number. 11.4. 1 Samuel 11 4. 2 Samuel 15 23. Mar 8 and 13. and 22. and 24. and
25. Luke 3 etc.
yea, if there were any witches at all in Israel, they wept. For it is written,
that all the children of Israel wept. Finally, if there be any witches in hell,
I am sure they weep; for there is weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

But God knows many an honest marrone cannot sometimes in the heaviness of
her heart shed tears; the which oftentimes are m^re ready and common with
crafty queanes and strumpets, than with sober women. For we read of two kinds
of tears in a woman's eye, the one of true grief, Seneca in tragoed.
the other of deceit. And it is written, that Dediscere flere foeminium est
menda^ium: which argues, that they ly which say, that wicked women cannot
weep. But let these tormentors take heed, that the tears in this case which
run down the widows cheeks, Eccl. 35.15.
with their cry spoken by jesus Sirach, be not heard above. But lo what
learned, godly, and lawful means these popish inquisitors have invented for
the trial of true or false tears.

CHAP. VII.
The inquisitors trial of weeping by conjuration.

I Conjure thee by the amorous tears, which Jesus Christ our Savior shed upon
the cross for the salvation of the world; Trial of tears.
and by the most earnest and burning tears of his mother the most glorious
Virgin Mary, sp^inkled upon his wounds late in the evening; and by all the
tears, which every saint and elect vessel of God has powered out here in the
world, and from those eyes he has wiped away all tears; that if thou be
without fault, thou may power down tears abundantly; and if thou be guilty,
that thou weep in no wise: In the name of the Father, of the son, and of the
Holy Ghost; Amen. And note, says he, that the more you conjure, Mal. malef.
quae. 15. pa. 3.
the less she weepeth.

CHAP. VIII.
Certain cautions against witches, and of their tortures to procure confession.

BUt to manifest their further follies, I will recite some of their caution,
which are published by the ancient inquisitors, for perpetual lessons of their
successors: as follows.

The first caution is that, which was last rehearsed concerning weeping; the
which (say they) is an infallible note.

Secondly, the judge must beware she touch no Part of him, specially of his
bare: and that he always wear about his neck conjured salt, palm, Ia.
Sprenger. H. Institor.
herbs, and wax hallowed: which (say they) are not only approved to be good by
the witches confessions; but also by the use of the Romish church, which
halloweth them only for that purpose.

Mal. malef. pa. 3. quae. 15.
Item, she must come to her arreignment backward, to wit, with her tail to the
judges face, who must make many crosses, at the time of her approaching to the
bar. And least we should condemn that for superstition, they prevent us with
a figure, and tell us, that the same superstition may not seem superstitious
unto us. Prolepsis or Preoccupation.
But this resembles the persuasion of a thief, that disswadeth his son from
stealing; and never thelesse tells him that he may pick or cut a purse, and
rob by the high way.

One other caution is, that she must be shaven, so as there remain not one
hair about her: for sometimes they keep secrets for ^aciturnity, and for other
purposes also in their hair, in their privities, and between their skin and
their flesh. For which cause I marvel they flea them no^^ for one of their
witches would not burn, being in the midst of the flame, Mal. Malef.
as M. Mal. reports; until a charm written in a little scroll was espied to
be hidden between her skin and flesh, and taken away. And this is so gravely
and faithfully set down by the inquisitors themselves, that one may believe it
if he list, though indeed it be a verity. The like cites Bodin, of a witch
that could not be strangled by the executioner, do what he could. John Bod.
Anno. 1485. a knave inquisitor. Q. 16. de. tempore and modo ^errog.

Blasphemous Pope July, of that name the third.


But it is most true, that the inquisitor Cumanus in one year did shave one and
forty poor women, and burnt them all when he had done.

Another caution is, that at the time and place of torture, the hallowed things
aforesaid, with the seven words spoken on the cross, he hang^ed about the
witches neck; and the length of Christ in wax be knit about her bare naked
body, with relics of saints, etc. All which stuff (say they) will so work
within and in them, as when they are racked and tortured, they can hardly stay
or hold themselves from confession. In which case I doubt not but that Pope,
which blasphemed Christ, and cursed his mother for a peacoke, and cursed God
with great despigh^ for a piece of porke, with less compulsion would have
renounced the trinity, and have worshipped the devil upon his knees.

Another caution is, that after she has been racked, and has passed over all
tortures devised for that purpose; and after that she has been compelled to
drink holy water, she be conveied again to the place of torture: and that in
the midst of her torments, her accusations be read unto her; and that the
witnesses (if they will) be brought face to face unto her: and finally, that
she be asked, whether for trial of her innocence she will have judgment, Mal.
Malef. par. 3. quae. 16.
Candentis ferri, which is, To carry a certain weight of burning iron in her
bare hand. But that may not (say they) in any wise be granted. For both M. Mal.
and Bodin also affirm that many things may be promised, but nothing need be
performed: for why, they have authority to promise, but no commission to
perform the same.

Another caution is, that the judge take heed, thar when she once begins to
confess, he cut not of^ her examination, but continue it night and day. For
many times, whiles they go to dinner, she returns to her vomit.

Another caution is, that after the witch has confessed the annoying of men
and beasts, she be asked how long she has had Incubus, when she renounced the
faith, and made the real league, and what that league is, etc. And this is
indeed the cheef cause of all their incredible and impossible confessions: for
upon the rack, when they have once begun to ly, they will say what the torment
or list.

The last caution is, that if she will not confess, she be had to some strong
castle or goal. And after certain days, the jayler must make her believe he
goes forth into some far country: and then some of her friends must come in
to her, and promise her, that if she will confess to them, they will suffer
her to escape out of prison: Mal. malef. par. 3. quae. 16. act. 11.
which they may well do, the keeper being from home. And this way (says M.
Mal.) has served, when all other means have failed.

And in this place it may not be omitted, that above all other times, they
confess upon frydaies. Now says James Sprenger, and Henry Institor, we must
say all, to wit: If she confess nothing, she should be dismissed by law; and
yet by order she may in no wise be bailed, but must be put into close prison,
and there be talked withal by some crafty person, those are the words, and in
the mean while there must be some eves-dropers with pen and ink behind the
wall, to harken and note what she confesses: or else some of her old
companions and acquaintance may come in and talk with her of old matters, and
so by eves-droppers be also bewraied; so as there shall be no end of torture
before she have confessed what they will.

CHAP. IX.
The fifteen crimes laid to the charge of witches by witch-mongers; specially
by Bodin in Daemonomania.



Answer Then let them die therefore, or at the least be used liked infid^^s, or
aposta^^'s.

They curse, blaspheme, and provoke God with all despite.

Answer Then let them have the law expressed in Levit. 24. and Deuteronomy. 1^ and 17

They give their faith to the devil, and they worship and offer sacrifice

Ans. Let such also be judged by the same law.

They do solemnly vow and promise all their progeny unto the

Ans. This promise proceeds from an unsound mind, and is not (...) be
regarded; because they cannot perform it, neither will it be proved true.
Howbeit, if it be done by any that is sound of mind, let the cause of Jeremy
32.36. light upon them, to wit, the sword, famine and pestilence.



Ans. If this be true, I maintain them not herein: but there is a (...) to
judge them by. Howbeit, it is so contrary to sense and nature, that were folly
to believe it; either upon Bodins bare word, or else upon (...) presumptions;
especially when so small commodity and so great danger and inconvenience
insueth to the witches thereby.

They burn their children when they have sacrificed them.

Ans Then let them have such punishment, as they that offered th^^ children
unto Moloch: Levit. 20. But these be mere devises of wit^^-mongers and
inquisito's, that with extreme tortures have wrung such confessions from them;
or else with false reports have belyed them; (...) by flattery and fair words
and promises have won it at their hands, at (...) length.

They swear to the devil to bring as many into that society as they (...)

Ans. This is false, and so proved elsewhere.

They swear by the name of the devil.

Ans. I never heard any such oath, neither have we warrant to (...) them that
so do swear; though indeed it be very lewd and impious.

They use incestuous adul^e^y with spirits.

Ans. This is a stale ridiculously, as is proved apparently hereafter.

They boil infants, after they have murthured them unbaptised, (...)

Ans. This is untrue, incredible, and impossible.

They eat the flesh and drink the blood of men and children openly.

Ans. Then are they kin to the Anthropophagi and Canibals. But, I believe never
an honest man in England nor in France, will affirm that he has seen any of
these persons, that are said to be witches, do so; if they should, I believe it
would poison them.

They kill men with poison.

Ans. Let them be hanged for their labor.

They kill men's cattle.

Ans. Then let an action of trespass be brought against them for so doing.

They bewitch men's corn, and bring hunger and barrenness into the country;
they ride and fly in the air, bring storms, make tempests etc.

Ans. Then will I worship them as Gods; for those be not the works of man, nor
yet of a witch: as I have elsewhere proved at large.

They use venery with a devil called Incubus, even when they ly in bed with

Ans. This is the last ly, very ridiculous, and confuted by me elsewhere.

CHAP. X.
A refutation of the former surmised crimes patched together by Bodin, and the
only way to escape the inquisitors hands.

IF more ridiculous or abominable crimes could have been invented, these poor
women (whose chief fault is that they are scolds) should have been charged with
them.

In this libell you do see is contained all that witches are charged with; and
all that also, which any witch-monger surmiseth, or in malice imputes unto
witches power and practice.

Some of these crimes may not only be in the power and will of a witch, but
may be accomplished by natural means: and therefore by them the matter in
question is not decided, The question or matter in controversy: that is to
say, the proposition or theme.
to wit; whether a witch can work wonders supernaturally; For many a knave and
whore does more commonly put in execution those lewd actions, than such as are
called witches and are handged for their labor.

Some of these crimes also laid unto witches charge, are by me denied, and by
them cannot be proved to be true, or committed by any one witch. Othersome of
these crimes likewise are so absurd, supernatural, and impossible, that they
are derided almost of all men, and as false, fond, and fabulous reports
condemned: insomuch as the very witch-mongers themselves are tashamed to hear
of them.

If part be untrue, why may not the residue be thought false: For all these
things are laid to their charge at one instant, even by the greatest doctors
and patrones of the sect of witch-mongers, producing as many proofs for witches
supernatural and impossible actions, as for the other. So as, if one part of
their accusation* be false, the other part deserves no credit. If all be true
that is alleged of their doings, why should we believe in Christ, because of
his miracles, when a witch does as great wonders as ever he did?

But it will be said by some; As for those absurd and popish writers, they are
not in all their allegations, touching these matters, to be credited. But I
assure you, that even all sorts of writers herein (for the most part) the very
doctors of the church to the school men, A general error.
Protestants and Papists, learned and unlearned, Poets and historiographers,
Jews, Christians, or Gentiles agr^e in these impossible and ridiculous
matters. Yea and these writers, out of whom I gather most absurdities, are of
the best credit and authority of all writers in this matter. The reason is,
because it was never thoroughly looked into; but every fable credited; and the
word (Witch) named so often in Scripture. The only way for wi^ches to avoid
the inquisitors, hands.


They that have seen further of the inquisitors orders and customs, say also*
that there is no way in the world f^r th^s^ poor women to escape the
inquisitors hands, and so consequently burning: but to gild their hands with
money, whereby oftentimes they take pity upon them, and deliver them, as
sufficiently purged For they have authority to exchange the punishment of the
body with the punishment of the purse, applying the same to the office of their
inquisition: whereby they reap such profit, as a number of these silly women
pay them yearly pensions, to the end they may not be punished again.

CHAP* XI.
The opinion of Cornelius Agrippa concerning witches, of (...) pleading for a
poor woman accused of witch craft, and how be convinced the inquisitors.

Cornelius Agrippa says, that while he was in Italy, many inquisito^ in the
duchy of Millen troubled diverse most honest and noble matrones, privily
wringing much money from them, until their knavery was detected. Further he
says, that being an advocate (...) councellor in the Commonwealth of
Maestright in Brabant, he had sor^ contention with an inquisitor, who through
unjust accusations drew ^ poor woman of the country into his butchery, and to
an unsit place^ not so much to examine her, as to torment her, Whom when C.
Agrippa had undertaken to defend, declaring that in the things done, these was
no proof, no sign or token that could cause her to be tormented the inquisitor
stoutly denying it, said; One thing there is, which is proof and matter
sufficient: for her mother was in times past burned for a witch. Now when
Agrippa replied, affirming that this article was impertinent, and ought to be
refused by the judge, as being the deed of another; alleging to the inquisitor
reasons and law for the same: he replied again that this was true, because they
used to sacrifice their children to the devil, as soon as they were borne; and
also because they usually conceived by spirits transformed into man's shape, and
that thereby witchcraft was naturally ingraffed into this child, as a disease
^at comes by inheritance.

C. Agrippa replying against the inquisitors folly and superstitious
blindness, A bitter invective against a cruel inquisitor.
said; O thou wicked Priest! Is this thy divinity? Do thou use to draw poor
guiltless women to the rack by these forged devises? Do thou with such
sentences judge others to be heretics, thou being a more heretic than either
Faustus or Donatus? Be it as thou say, do thou not frustrate the grace of
Gods ordinance; namely baptism? Are the words in baptism spoken in vain? Or
shall the devil remain in the child, or it in the power of the devil, being
there and then consecrated to Christ Jesus, in the name of the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost? And if thou defend their false opinions, which affirm,
that spirits accompanying with women, can engender; yet dotest thou more than
any of them, which never believed that any of those devils, together with their
stolen seed, do put part of that their seed or nature into the creature. But
though indeed we be borne the children of the devil and damnation, yet in
baptism, through grace in Christ, Satan is cast out, and we are made new
creatures in the Lord, from whom none can be separated by another man's deed.
The inquisitor being hereat offended, threatened the advocate to proceed against
him, as a supporter of heretics or witches, yet nevertheless he ceased not to
defend the silly woman, and through the power of the law he delivered her from
the claws of the bloody monk, who with her accusers, were condemned in a
great sum of money to the charter of the church of Meniz, and remained
infamous after that time almost to all men.

But by the way you must understand, that this was but a petty inquisitor, and
had not so large a commission as Cumanus, Sprenger, and such other had; nor yet
as the Spanish inquisitors at this day have. For these will admit no advocate
now unto the poor souls, John Fox in the acts and monuments
except the tormentor or hangman may be called an advocate. You may read the
sum of this inquisition in few words set out by M. John Fox in the acts and
monuments. For witches and heretics are among the inquisitors of like
reputation; saving that the extremity is greater against witches, because
through their simplicity, they may the more boldly tyrannize upon them and
triumph over them.

CHAP. XII.
What the fear of death and feeling of torments may force one to do, and that
it is no marvel though witches condemn themselves by their own confessions so
tyrannically extorted.

HE that reads the ecclesiastical histories, or remembers the persecutions
in Qeen Mary's time, shall find, that many good men have fallen for fear of
persecution, and returned unto the Lord again. What marvel then, though a poor
woman, such a one as is described elsewhere, and tormented as is declared in
these latter leaves, be made to confess such absurd and false impossibilities;
when flesh and blood is unable to endure such trial? Or how can she in the
midst of such horrible tortures and torments, promise unto her self
constancy; or forbear to confess any thing? Or what avails it her, to
persevere in the denial of such matters, as are laid to her charge unjustly;
when on the one side there is never any end of her torments; on the other side,
if she continue in her assertion, they say she has charms for taciturnity or
silence?

Peter's apostasy and renouncing of Christ.
Peter the Apostle renounced, cursed, and forsware his master and our Savior
Jesus Christ, for fear of a wenches menaces; or rather at a question demanded
by her, wherein he was not so circumvented, as these poor witches are, which be
not examined by girls, but by cunning inquisitors, who having the spoil of
their goods, and bringing with them into the place of judgment minds to
maintain their bloody purpose spare no manner of allurements, threatenings, nor
torments, until they have wrung out of them all that, which either makes to
their own desire or serves to the others destruction.

Peter (I say) in the presence of his Lord and master Christ, who had
instructed him in true knowledge many years, being forewarned, no^ passing four
or five hours before, and having made a real league and ^ faithful promise
to the contrary, without any other compulsion than (as has been said) by a
question proposed by a girl; against his conscience, forsook, thrice denied,
and abandoned his said Master: and yet he was a man illuminated, and placed in
dignity aloft, and nearer to Christ by many degrees: than the witch, whose fall
could not be so great as Peter's; because she never ascended half so many
steps. A pastors declination is much more abominable than the going astray of
any of his sheep^ as an ambassadors conspiracy is more odious, than the
falsehood of a common person: or as a captains treason is more mischeevous, than
a private soldiers mutiny. If you say, Peter repented; I answer that the witch
does so likewise sometimes, and I see not in that case, but mercy may be
employed upon her. It were a mighty temptation to a silly old woman, that a
visible devil (being in shape so ugly, as Danaeus and others say her is)
should assault her in manner and form as is supposed, Danaeus in dialog.
o^ rather avowed; specially when there is promise made that none shall be
tempted above their strength. 2 Cor. 10.
The poor old witch is commonly u^^learned, unwarned, and unprovided of
counsel and friend-ship, void (...) judgment and discretion to moderate her
life and communication, he^ kind and gender more weak and frail than the
masculine, and much more subject to melancholy; her bringing up and company is
so ba^^ that nothing is to be looked for in her, specially of these
extraordinary qualities; her age also is commonly such, as makes her
decrepite, which is a disease that moves them to these follyes.

Finally, Christ did clearly remit Peter, though his offense were committed
both against his divine and humane nature; yea afterward he (...) put him in
trust to feed his sheep, and showed great countenance, friendship and love unto
him. And therefore I see not, but we may show compassion upon these poor
souls, if they show themselves; sorrowful for their mis^^ceipts and wicked
imaginations.

The third Book.
CHAP. I.
The witches bargain with the devil, according to M. Mal. Bodin, Nider,
Danaeus, Psellus, Erastus, Hemingius, Cumanus, Aquinas, Bartholomaeus Spineus,
etc.

THat which in this matter of witchcraft has abused so many, and seems both
so horrible and intolerable, is a plain bargain, that (they say) is made
betwixt the devil and the witch. And many of great learning conceive it to be a
matter of truth, and in their wiritings publish it accordingly: the which (by
God, grace) shall be proved as vain and false as the rest.

The order of their bargain or profession is double; The double bargain of
(...) with the devil.
the one solemn and public, the other secret and private. That which is
called solemn or public, is where witches come together at certain
assemblies, at the times prefixed, and do not only see the devil in visible
form; but confer and talk familiarly with him. In which conference the devil
exhorts them to observe their fidelity unto him, promising them long li^e and
prosperity. Then the witches assembled, commend a new disciple (whom they call
a novice) unto him: and if the devil find that young witch apt and forward in
renunciation of christian faith, in despising any of the seven sacraments, in
treading upon ^crosses, in spitting at the time of the elevation, in breaking
their fast on fasting days, and fasting on Sundaies; the devil gives forth
his hand, and the novice joining hand in hand with him, promises to observe
and keep all the devils commandments.

This done, the devil begins to be more bold with her, telling her plainly,
that all this will not serve his turn; and therefore requires homage at her
hands: yea he also tells her, that she must grant him both her body and soul
to be tormented in everlasting fire; which she yields unto. Mal. malef. de
modo professionis.
Then he charged her, to procure as many men, women, and children also, as she
can, to enter into this society. Then he teaches them to make ointments of the
bowels and members of children, whereby they ride in the air, and accomplish
all their desires. So as, if there be any children unbaptised, or not guarded
with the sign of the cross, or orizons; then the witches may and do catch
them from their mothers sides in the night, or ou^ of their cradles, or
otherwise kill them with their ceremonies; and after burial steal them out of
their graves, and sees them in a caldron, until their flesh be made potable.
Of the thickest whereof they make ointments, whereby they ride in the air, but
the thinner potion they put into flaggons, whereof whosoever drinks,
observing certain ceremonies, immediately becomes a master or rather a
mistress in that practice and faculty.

CHAP. II.
The order of the witches homage done (as it is written by lewd inquisitors and
peevish witchmongers) to the devil in person; of their songs and dances, and
namely of La volta, and of other ceremonies, also of their excourses.

Homage of witches to the devil.
SOmetimes their homage with their oath and bargain is received for a certain
term of years; sometimes for ever. Sometimes it consists in the denial of
the whole faith, sometimes in part. The first is, when the soul is absolutely
yielded to the devil and hell fire: the other is, when they have but bargained
to observe certain ceremonies and statutes of the church; as to conceal faults
at shrift, to fast on sundaies, etc. And this is done either by oath,
protestation of words, or by obligation in writing, sometimes sealed with wax,
sometimes signed with blood, sometimes by kising the devils bare buttocks; as
did a Doctor called Edli^, who as ( Bodin says) was burned for witchcraft.

^ar Spineus, cap. 1. in nuo Mal. malef.
You must also understand, that after they have delicately banqueted with the
devil and the lady of the faries; and have eaten up a fat o^^ and emptied a
butt of malmesie, and a binne of bread at some noble man's house, in the dead of
the night, nothing is missed of all this in the morning. For the lady Sibylla,
Minerva, or Diana with a golden rod strikes the vessel and the binne, and
they are fully replenished again. Yea, she causes the bullockes bones to be
brought and laid together upon the hide. and lappeth the four ends thereof
together, laying her golden rod thereon, and then rises up the bullock again
in his former estate and condition: and yet at their return home they are like
to starve for hunger; Idem Ibid.
as Spineus says. And this must be an infallible rule, that every fortnight,
or at the least every month, each witch must kill one child (...) the least
for her part.

I. Bod. de demon. lib. 2. cap. 4.
And here some of Monsieur Bodins lies may be inserted, who says, th^^ at these
magical assemblies, the witches never fail to dance; and (...) their dance
they sing these words; Har har, devil devil, dance here, dance here, play
here, play here, Sabbath, sabbath. And whiles they sing and dance, every one
has a broom in her hand, and holds it (...) aloft. Item he says, that these
night-walking or rather night-dancing brought out of Italy into France, Mal.
malef.
that dance, which is called La Volta.

A part of their league is, to scrape off the oil, which is received (...)
extreme folly (unction I should have said.) But if that be so dangerous, the^
which socke the corpse had need to take great care, that they rub not (...) the
oil, which diverse other ways may also be thrust out of the forehead and then
I perceive all the virtue thereof is gone, and farewell it. But marvel how
they take on to preserve the water powered on them in b^^ptisme, which I take to
be largely of as great force as the other; and yet I think is commonly wiped
and washed off, within four and twenty hours after baptism: but this agrees
with the residue of their folly,

And this is to be noted, that the inquisitors affirm, that during the whole
time of the witches excourse, the devil occupies the room and place of the
witch, in so perfect a similitude, as her husband in his bed, neither by
feeling, speech, nor countenance can discern her from his wife. Yea the wife
departs out of her husbands arms insensibly, and leaves the devil in her
room visibly. Wherein their incredulity is incredible, who will have a very
body in the fained play, and a fantastical body in the true bed: Grillandus.
de sort. 10. vol. tract.
and yet (forsooth) at the name of Jesus, or at the sign of the cross, all
these bodily witches (they say) vanish away.

CHAP. III.
How witches are summonded to appear before the devil, of their riding in the
air, of their accounts, of their conference with the devil, of his supplies,
and their conference, of their farewell and sasacrifices: according to Danaeus,
Psellas, etc.

HItherto, for the most part, are the very words contained in M. Mal. or Bodin,
or rather in both; or else in the new M. Mal. or at the leastwise of some
writer or other, Danaeus in dialog. cap. 4.
that maintains the almighty power of witches. But Daenens says, the devil
oftentimes in the likeness of a summoner, meets them at markets and faires,
and warns them to appear in their assemblies, at a certain hour in the
night, that he may understand whom they have slain, and how they have
profited. If they be lame, he says the devil delivers them a staff, to
convey them thither invisibly through the air; and that then they fall a
dancing and singing of bawdy-songs, wherein he leads the dance himself.
Which dance, and other conferences being ended, he supplieth their wants of
powders and roots to intoxicate withal; and gives to every novice a mark,
either with his teeth or with his claws, and so they kiss the devils bare
buttocks, and depart: not forgetting every day afterward to offer to him,
dogs, cats, hens, or blood of their own. And all this does Danaeus report as a
truth, and as it were upon his own knowledge. And yet elsewhere he says; Idem
Ibidem. Idem in dialog. cap. 3.
In these matters they do but dream, and do not those things indeed, which
they confess through their distemperature, growing of their melancholic
humor: and therefore (says he) these things, which they report of themselves,
are but mere illusions.

Psellus adds hereunto, that certain magical heretics, to wit; the
Eutychians, assemble themselves every good friday at night; and putting out the
candles, do commit incestuous adultery, the father with the daughter, the
sister with the brother, and the son with the mother; and the ninth month they
return and are delivered; and cutting their children in pieces, fill their
pots with their blood; then burn they the carcases, and mingle the ashes
therewith, and so preserve the same for magical purposes. Cardanus writes
(though in mine opinion not very probably) that these excourses, Card. lib. de
var. rerum. 15. cap. 80.
dancings, etc. had their beginning from certain heretics called Dulcini, who
devised those feasts of Bacchus which are named Orgia, whereunto these kind of
people openly assembled; and beginning with riot, ended with this folly. Which
feasts being prohibited they nevertheless haunted them secretly; and when they
could not do so, then did they it in cogitation only, and even to this day
(says he) there remains a certain image or resemblance thereof among our
melancholicke women.

CHAP. IIII.
That there can no real league be made with the devil the first author of the
league, and the weak proofs of the adversaries for the same.

IF the league be untrue, as are the residue of their confessions, the
witch-mongers arguments fall to the g^ound: for all the writers herein hold
this bargain for certain, good, and granted, and as their only maxim. But
surely the inden^u^es, containing those covenants, are sealed with butter; and
the labels are but bables. What fit me bargain can be made betwixt a carnal
body and a s^irituall? Let any wise or honest man tell me, that either has
been a^parey, on a witness; and I will believe him. But by what au^hority,
proof, or testimony^ and upon what ground all this geere stande^h, Mal. malef.
part. 2. qua 7. cap. 2.
if you read M. Mal. you shall find to the shame of the reporters (who do so
vary in their tales, and are at such contrarie^y:) and to the reproach of the
believers of such absurd lies.

For the beginning of the credit hereof, rests upon the confession of a
baggage young fellow condemn^d to be burnt for witch-craf^; Upon what ground
this real league began to grow in credit.
who said to the inquisitors, of likelihood to prolong his lie, (if at least
wise the story be true, which is taken out of Nides;) If I wish (quo^ he) that
I might obtain pardon: I would discover all that I know of witchcraft. The
which condition being accepted; and pardon promised (partly in hope thereof,
and partly to be rid of his wife) he said as follows.

The novice or young disciple goes to some church, together with the mistress
of that profession, upon a sunday morning, before the conjur^tion of
Holy Water, and there the said novice renounceth the says, promises obedience
in observing, or rather omitting of ceremonies in meetings, and such other
follyes; and finally, that they do homage to their young master the devil, as
they covenanted.

But this is notable in that story, that this young witch; doubting that his
wives examination would bewraye his knavery, told the inquisitor: that in truth
his wife was guilty as well as he, but she will never, I am sure (quoth he)
though she should be burned a thousand times, confess any of these
circumstances.

And this is in no wise to be forgotten, that notwithstanding his contri^ion,
(...) confession, and his accusation of his own wife (contrary to the
inquisi^^^^ promise and oath) he and his wife were both burned at a stake,
being the first discoverers of this notable league, whereupon the fable of
witchcraft is maintained; and whereby such other confessions have been from
the like persons, since that time, extorted and augmented.

CHAP. V.
Of the private league, a notable tale of Bodins concerning a French-lady, with
a confutation.

THe manner of their private league is said to be, The manner of witches
private league with the devil.
when the devil invisible, and sometimes visible, in the midst of the people
talks with them privately; promising, that if they will follow his counsel,
he will supply all their necessities, and make all their endeavors prosperous;
and so begins with small matters: whereunto they consent privily, and come
not into the fairies assembly.

And in this case (me thinks) the devil sometimes, in such external or
corporal shape, should meet with some that would not consent to his motions
(except you will say he knows their cogitations) and so should be bewrayed.
They also (except they were idiots) would spy him; and forsake him for breach
of covenants. But these bargains, and these assemblies do all the writers
hereupon maintain; and Bodin confirms them with a hundred and odd lies;
among the number whereof I will (for diverse causes) recite one.

There was (says he) a noble Gentlewoman at Lions, I. Bed. lib. 2. de
daemonomania. cap. 4.
that being in bed with a lover of hers, suddenly in the night arose up, and
lighted a candle: which when she had done, she took a box of ointment,
wherewith she anointed her body; and after a few words spoken, she was carried
away. Her bedfellow seeing the order hereof, lept out of his bed, took the
candle in his hand, and sought for the Lady round about the chamber, and in
every corner thereof; But though he could not find her, yet did he find her box
of ointment: This agreeeth not with their interpretation, that say, this is
only done by virtue of the league; nor yet to them that refer it unto words;
quoth nota.
and being desirous to know the virtue thereof, besmeered himself therewith,
even as he perceived her to have done before. And although he were not so
superstitious, as to use any words to help him forward in his business, yet
by the virtue of that oinment (says Bodin) he was immediately conveyed to
Lorreine, into the assembly of witches. Which when he saw, he was abashed, and
said; In the name of God, what make I here? And upon those words the whole
assembly vanished away, and left him there alone stark naked; and so was he
said to return to Lions. But he had so good a conscience, for you may perceive
by the first part of the history, he was a very honest man, that he accused his
true lover for a witch. And caused her to be burned. But as for his adultery,
neither, M. Mal. nor Bodin do once so much as speak in the dispraise thereof.

It appears throughout all Bodins book, that he is sore offended with
Cornelius Agrippa, and the rather as I suppose, because the said C. Agrippa
recanted that which Bodin maintains, who thinks he could work wonders by
magic, and specially by his black dog. It shoud seem he had pretty skill in
the art of divination. For though he wrote before Bodin many a year, C.
Agrippa. cap. 51.
yer utters he these words in his book De vanitate scientiarum: A certain
French protonotary (says he) a lewd fellow and a cosener, has written a
certain fable or miracle done at Lions, etc. What Bodin is, I know not,
otherwise than by report; but I am certain this his tale is a fond fable: and
Bodin says it was performed at Lions; and this man (as I understand) by
profession is a civil lawyer.

CHAP. VI.
A disproofe of their assemblies, and of their bargain.

THat the joining of hands with the devil, the kissing of his bare buttocks,
and his scratching and biting of them, are absurd lies; every one having the
gift of reason may plainly perceive: insomuch as it is manifest unto us by the
word of God, that a spirit has no flesh, bones, nor sinews, whereof hands,
buttocks; claws, teeth, and lips do consist, For admit that the constitution of
a devils body (as Tatian and other affirm) consists in spiritual
congelations, Tatianus contra Graecos.
as of fire and air; yet it cannot be perceived of mortal creatures. What
credible witness is there brought at any time, of this their corporal,
visible, and incredible bargain; saving the confession of some person diseased
both in body and mind, wilfully made, or injuriously constrained? It is
marvel that no penitent witch that forsakes her trade, confesses not these
things without compulsion. Me thinks their covenant made at baptism with God
before good witnesses, sanctified with the word, confirmed with his promises,
and established with his sacraments, should be of more force then that which
they make with the devil, which no body sees or knows. For God deceives
none, with whom he bargaineth: neither does he mock or disappoint them,
although he dance not among them.

The oath, to procure into their league and fellowship as many as they can
(whereby every one witch, as Bodin affirms, augmenteth the number of fifty)
bewrays greatly their indirect dealing. Hereof I have made trial, as also of
the residue of their cosening devises; and have been with the best, The author
speaks upon due proof and trial.
or rather the worst of them, to see what might be gathered out of their
counsels; and have cunningly treated with them thereabouts: and further, have
sent certain old persons to indent with them, to be admitted into their
society. But as well by their excuses and delays, as by other circumstances, I
have tried and found all their trade to be mere cosening.

I pray you what bargain have they made with the devil, that with their angry
looks bewitch lambs, children, etc? Is it not confessed, that it is natural,
though it be a ly? What bargain makes the sooth-sayer* which has his several
kinds of witchcraft and divination expressed i^ the Scripture? Or is it not
granted that they make none? How chances it that we hear not of this bargain
in the Scriptures?

CHAP. VII.
A confutation of the objection concerning witches confessions.

IT is Confessed (say some by the way of objection) even of these women
themselves, that they do these and such other horrible things, a^ deserves
death, with all extremity, etc. Whereunto I answer, that whosoever
considerately beholds their confessions, shall perceive all to be vain, idle,
false, inconstant, and of no weight: except their contempt and ignorance in
religion; which is rather the fault of the negligent pastor, than of the simple
woman.

First, Confession compulsory; as by Hispanicall inquisition: Look Mal. malef.
and Io. Bodin.

Confession perswasory; as by flattery: Look Bry. Darcy against Vusu. Kempe.
John Bod. Mal. malef. L. absen^. de panis.

L. 2. cum glos. de iis; qui ante senient. moatui sunt, sibi necem consciscente.


if their confession be made by compulsion, of force or authority, or by
persuasion, and under color of friend-ship, it is not to be regarded; because
the extremity of threats and tortures provokes it; or the quality of fair word,
and allurements constraines it. If it be voluntatary, many circumstances must
be considered, to wit; whether she appeach not her self to overthrow her
neighbor, which many times happens through their cankered and malicious
melancholic humor: then; whether in that same malancholike mood and frantic
humor, she desire not the abridgement of her own days. Which thing Aristotle
says does oftentimes happen unto persons subject to malancholike passions: and
(as Bodin and Sprenger say) to these old women called witches, which many times
(as they affirm) refuse to live; threatening the judges, that if they may not
be burned, they will lay hands upon themselves, and so make them guilty of
their damnation.

I my self have known, that where such a one could not prevail, to be accepted
as a sufficient witness against himself, he presently went and threw himself
into a pond of water, where he was drowned. But the law says; Volenti mori non
est habenda fides, that is; His word is not to be credited that is desirous to
die. Also sometimes (as elsewhere I have proved) they confess that whereof
they were never guilty; supposing that they did that which they did not, by
means of certain circumstances. And as they sometimes confess
impossibilities, as that they fly in the air, transubstantiate themselves,
raise tempests, transfer or remove corn, etc. so do they also (I say)
confess voluntarily, that which no man could prove, and that which no man
would guess, nor yet believe, except he were as mad as they; so as they bring
death wilfully upon themselves: which argues an unsound mind.

If they conf^sse that, which has been indeed committed by them, as poisoning,
Absurdities in witches confessions.
or any other kind of murder, which falls into the power of such persons to
accomplish; I stand not to defend their cause. Howbeit, I would wish that even
in that case there be not too rash credit given, nor to hasty proceedings used
against them: but that the causes, properties, and circumstances of every thing
be duly considered, and diligently examined. For you shall understand, that as
sometimes they confess they have murdered their neighbors with a wish,
sometimes with a word, sometimes with a look, etc. so they confess, that with
the delivering of an apple, or some such thing, to a woman with child, they
have killed the child in the mothers womb, when nothing was added thereunto,
which naturally could be noisome or hurtful.

In like manner they confess, that with a touch of their bare hand, they
sometimes kill a man being in perfect health and strength of body; when all his
garments are betwixt their hand and his flesh.

But if this their confession be examined by divinity, philosophy, physic, law
or conscience, it will be found false and insufficient. First, for that the
working of miracles is ceased. Secondly, no reason can be yielded for a thing
so far beyond all reason. Thirdly, no receipt can be o^ such efficacy, as
when the same is touched with a bare hand, from whence the veins have passage
through the body unto the heart, it should not annoy the poison; and yet retain
virtue and force enough, to pearce through so many garments and the very flesh
incurable, to the place of death in another personr. I. Bod. de daemono lib 2.
cap. 8.
Cui argumento (says Bodin) nescio quid responderi possit. Fourthly, no law
will admit such a confession; as yields unto impossibilities, against the
which there is never any law provided; otherwise it would not serve a man's
turn, to plead and prove that he w^^ at Berwick that day, that he is accused
to have done a murder in Cant^^bury: for it might be said he was conveyed to
Berwick, and back again by enchantment. Fifthly, he is not by conscience to be
executed, which has no sound mind nor perfect judgment. In a little pamphlet
of the acts and hanging of four witches, in anno. 1579.
And yet forsooth we read that one mother Style did kill one Saddocke with a
touch on the shoulder, for not keeping promise with her for an old cloak, to
make her^ safeguard; and that she was hanged for her labor.

CHAP. VIII.
What folly it were for withes to enter into such desperate peril, (...) to
endure such intolerable tortures for no gain or commodity, and b^^ it comes to
pass that witches are overthrown by their confessions.

ALas! if they were so subtle, as witch-mongers make them to be, the^ would
espy that it were mere folly for them, not only to make bargain with the
devil to throw their souls into hell fire, but their bodies to the tortures
of temporal fire and death, for the accomplishme^^ of nothing that might
benefit themselves at all: but they would at the leastwise indent with the
devil, both to enrich them, and also to enabl^ them; and finally to endue them
with all worldly felicity and pleasure which is furthest from them of all
other. Yea, if they were sensible, the^ would say to the devil; Why should I
hearken to you, when you (...) deceive me? Did you not promise my neighbor
mother Dutton to sa^ and rescue her; and yet lo she is hanged? Surely this
would appose the devil very sore. And it is a wonder, that none, from the
beginning: (...) the world, till this day, has made this and such like
objections, where^^ the devil could never make answer. But were it not more
madness for them, to serve the devil, under these conditions; and yet to
endur^ whippings with iron rods at the devils hands: which (as the
witch-mongers write) are so set on, that the print of the lashes remain upon
the witches body ever after, even so long as she has a day to live?

But these old women being daunted with authority, circumvented with guile,
constrained by force, compelled by fear, induced by error, and deceived by
ignorance, do fall into such rash credulity, and so are brought unto these
absurd confessions. Whose error of mind and blindness of will depends upon
the disease and infirmity of nature: and therefore their actions in that case
are the more to be borne withal: because they being destitute of reason, can
have no consent. For, Delictum sine consensu non potest commiti, John Bod. L.
si per errerem jurisd. omni cum inde.

C. sed hoc d. de publ. etc. Bal. in. leg. etc.


neque injuria sine animo injuriandi; that is, There can be no sin without
consent, nor injury committed without a mind to do wrong. Yet the law says
further, that a purpose retained in mind, does nothing to the private or
public hurt of any man; and much more that an impossible purpose is
unpunishable. Sanae mentis voluntas, voluntas rei possibilis est; A sound mind
wills nothing, but that which is possible.

CHAP. IX.
How malancholy abuses old women, and of the effects thereby by sundry
examples.

IF any man advisedly marked their words, actions, cogitations, and gestures,
he shall perceive that melancholy abounding in their head, and occupying their
brain, has deprived or rather depraved their judgments and all their senses:
I mean not of cosening witches, but of poor melancholic women; which are
themselves deceived. For you shall understand, that the force which melancholy
has, and the effects that it works in the body of a man, or rather of a
woman, are almost incredible. For as some of these malancholike persons
imagine, they are witches, and by witchcraft can work wonders, and do what
they list: so do other, troubled with this disease, imagine many strange,
incredible, and impossible things. Some, that they are Monarchs and Princes,
and that all other men are their subjects: some, that they are brute beasts:
some, that they be urinals or earthen pots, greatly fearing to be broken: some,
that every one that meets them, will convey them to the gallows; and yet in
the end hang themselves. One thought, that Atlas, whom the poets feign to hold
up heaven with his shoulders, would be weary, and let the sky fall upon him:
another would spend a whole day upon a stage, imagining that he both heard and
saw interludes, and therewith made himself great sport. One Theophilus a
Ph^sitian, otherwise sound enought of mind (as it is said) imagined that he
heard and saw musicians continually playing on instruments, in a certain place
of his house. One Bessus, that had killed his father, was notably detected; by
imagining that a Swallow upraided him therewith: so as he himself thereby
revealed the murder.

But the notablest example hereof is, of one that was in great perplexity,
imagining that his nose was as big as a house; Of one that through melancholy
was induced to think that he had a nose as big as house etc.
insomuch as no friend nor Physician could deliver him from this conceit, nor
yet either ease his grief, or satisfy his fancy in that behalf: till at the
last, a Physician more expert in this humor than the rest, used this devise
following. First, when he was to come in at the chamber door being wide open,
he suddenly stayed and withdrew himself; so as he would not in any wise
approach nearer then the door. The melancholic person musing hereat, asked him
the cause why he so demeaned himself? Who answered him in this manner: Sir,
your nose is so great, that I can hardly enter into your chamber but I shall
touch it, and consequently hurt it. Lo (quoth he) this is the man that must do
me good; the residue of my friends flatter me, and would hide my infirmity from
me. Well (said the Physician) I will cure you, but you must be content to
endure a little pain in the dressing: which he promised patiently to sustain,
and conceived certain hope of recovery. Th^n entered the Physician into the
chamber, creeping close by the walls, seeming to fear the touching and
h^rting of his nose. Then did he blindfold him, which being done, he caught him
b^ che nose with a pair of pinsors, and threw down into a tub, which he had
placed before his patient, a great quantity of blood, with many pi^c^ of
bullocks livers, which he had conveyed into the chamber, whilst the others
eyes were bound up, and then gave him liberty to see and behol^ the same. He
having done thus again two or three times, the melancholic humor was so
qualified, that the man's mind being satisfied, his grief was eased, and his
disease cured.

Thrasibulus, otherwise called Thrasillus, being sore oppressed with the
melancholic humor, imagined, that all the ships, which arrived at por^
Pyraeus, were his: insomuch as he would number them, and command the mariners
to lanch, etc. triumphing at their safe returns, and mourning for their
misfortunes. Danaeus in dialog. cap. 3.
The Italian whom we called here in England the Monarch, was possessed with the
like spirit or conceit* Danar himself reports, that he saw one, that
affirmed constantly* that he (...) a cock; and says that through malancholy,
such were alienated from themselves.

Now, if the fancy of a melancholic person may be occupied in cause which are
both false and impossible; I. Baptist. P. N. cap. 2. Card. do var. rerum. I.
Wie de prestigiis demonum, etc. Aristotle, John Bod.
why should an old witch be thoug^^ free from such fantasies, who (as the
learned Philosophers and Physitia^ say) upon the stopping of their monehtly
melancholic flux or issue^ blood, in their age must needs increase therein, as
(through their weakne^^ both of body and brain) the aptest persons do meet
with such melanch^like imaginations: with whom their imaginations remain, even
wh^^ their senses are gone. Which Bodin labors to disprove, there ^ showing
himself as good a Physician, as elsewhere a divine.

But if they may imagine, that they can transform their own bodie^ which
nevertheless remain in the former shape: how much more c^^^dible is it, that
they may falsely suppose they can hurt and infeeble other men's bodies; or which
is less, hinder the coming of butter? etc. B^ what is i^ that they will not
imagine, ^and consequently confess that the^ can do; specially being so
earnestly persuaded thereunto, so sorely tormented, so craftily examined, with
such promises of favor, as whereby they imagine, that they shall ever after
live in great credit and wealth etc.

If you read the executions done upon witches, either in times past in other
countries, or lately in this land; you shall see such impossibilities
confessed, as one, having his right wits, will believe. Among other like false
confessions, we read that there was a witch confessed at the time of her death
or execution, that she had raised all the tempests, and procured all the frosts
and hard weather that happened in the winter 1565. and that many grave and wise
men believed her.

CHAP. X.
That voluntary confessions may be untruly made, to the undoing of the
confessors, and of the strange operation of melancholy, proved by a familiar
and late example.

BUt that it may appear, that even voluntary confession (in this case may be
untruly made, though it tend to the destruction of the confessor; and that
melancholy may move imaginations to that effect: I will cite a notable instance
concerning this matter, the parties themselves being yet a live, and dwelling
in the parish of Sellenge in Kent, and the matter not long sithence in this
sort performed.

One Ade Davie, A Kentish story of a late accident.
the wife of Simon Davie husbandman; being reputed a right honest body, and
being of good parentage, grew suddenly (as her husband informed me, and as it
is well known in these parts) to be somewhat pensive and more sad than in times
past. Which thing though it greev^d him; yet he was loath to make it so appear,
as either his wife might be troubled or discontented therewith, or his
neighbors informed thereof; least ill husbandry should be laid to his charge
(which in these quarters is much, abhorred.) But when she grew from
pensiveness, to some perturbation of mind; so as her accustomed rest began in
the night season to be withdrawn from her, through fighing and secret
lamentation; and that, not without tears, her could not but demand the cause
of her conceip^ and extraordinary mourning, But although at that time she
covered the same, acknowledging nothing to be amiss with he: soon after
notwithstanding she fell down before him on her knees, desiring him to forgive
her, for she had greevously offended (as she said) both God and him. Her poor
husband being abashed at this her behavior, comforted her, as he could; asking
her the cause of her trouble and greef: who told him, that she had, contrary to
gods law, and to the offense of all good christians, Note the christian comfort
of the husband to his wife.
to the injury of him, and specially to the loss of her own soul, bargained
and given her soul to the devil, to be delivered unto him within short space.
Whereunto her husband answered, saying; Wife, be of good cheer, this thy
bargain is void and of none effect: for thou have sold that which is none of
thine to^ sell; since it belongs to Christ, who has bought it, and deerly
paid for it, even with his blood, which he shed upon the cross; so as the
devil has no interest in the. After this, with like submission, tears, and
penitence, she said unto him; Oh husband, I have yet committed another fault*
and done you more injury: for I have bewitched you and your children. Be
content (quoth he) by the grace of God, Jesus Christ shall unwitch us: for none
evil can happen to them that fear God*

And (as truly as the Lord lives) this was the tenor of his words unto me,
which I know is true, as proceeding from unfeigned lips, and from one that
fears God. Now when the time approached that the devil should come, and take
possession of the woman, according to his bargain, he watched and prayed
earnestly, and caused his wife to read psalms and prayers for mercy at Gods
hands: and suddenly about midnight, there was a great rumbling below under his
chamber window, which amazed them exceedingly. For they conceived, that the
devil was below, though he had no power to come up, because of their servent
prayers.

He that notes this woman's first and second confession, freely and voluntarily
made, Confutation.
how every thing concurred that might serve to add credit thereunto, and yield
matter for her condemnation, would not think, but that if Bodin were foreman of
her inquest, he would cry; Guilty: and would hasten execution upon her: who
would have said as much before any judge in the world, if she had been
examined: and have confessed no less, if she had been arraigned thereupon. But
God knows, she was innocent of any of these crimes: howbeit she was brought
low and pressed down with the weight of this humor, so as both her rest and
sleep were taken away from her; and her fancies troubled and disquieted with
despair, and such other cogitations as grew by occasion thereof. And yet I
believe, if any mishap had insued to her husband, or his children; few witch
mongers would have judged otherwise, but that she had bewitched them. And she
(for her part) so constantly persuaded her self to be a witch, that she judged
her self worthy of death, insomuch as being retained in her chamber, she saw
not any one carrying a faggot to the fire, but she should say it was to make a
fire to burn her for witchery. But God knows she had bewitched none, neither
insued there any hurt unto any by her imgination, but unto her self.

And as for the rumbling, it was by occasion of a sheep, which was stayed, and
hung by the walls, A comicall catastrophe.
so as a dog came and devoured it; whereby grew the noise which I before
mentioned: and she being now recovered, remains a right honest woman, far
from such impiety, and ashamed of her imaginations, which she perceives to
have grown through melancholy.

CHAP. XI.
The strange and diverse effects of melancholy, and how the same humor abounding
in witches, H. Card. de var. rerum. cap. 8. Io. Wierus de depraest. lib. 6. cap.
or rather old women; fills them full of mavelous imaginations, and that
their confessions are not to be credited.

BUt in truth, this malancholike humor (as the best Physicians affirm) is the
cause o^ all their strange, impossible and incredible confessions: which are so
fond, that I wonder how any men can be abused thereby. Howbeit these
affections, though they appear in the mind of man, yet are they bred in the
body, and proceed from this humor, which is ^he very dregs of blood, nourishing
and feeding those places, from whence proceed fears, cogitations,
superstitions, fastings, labors, and such like.

This makes sufferance of torments, Aristotle de somni^. H. Card. lib. 8. de
var. rer.
and (as some say) foresight of things to come, and preserves health, as being
cold and dry; it make^h men subject to leanness, and to the quartane ague.
They that are vexed therewith are destroyers of themselves, stout to suffer
injuries, fearful to offer violence; except the humor be hot. They learn
strange tongues with small industry (as Aristotle and others affirm.)

If our witches fantasies were not corrupted, nor their wills confounded with
this humor, they would not so voluntarily and readily confess that which
calls their life in question; whereof they could never otherwise be
convicted. I. Bodin with his lawyers physic reasons contrarily; as though
melancholy were furthest of all from those old women, Io. Bod. contra. lo.
Wierum.
whom we call witches: deriding the most famo^s and noble Physician John Wier
for his opinion in that behalf. But because I am no Physician, I will set a
Physician to him; namely Erastus, who has these words, to wit, that these
witches, through their corrupt fantasy abounding with melancholic humors, by
reason of their old age, do dream and imagine they hurt those things which
they neither could nor do hurt; and so think they knew an art, which they
neither have learned nor yet understand.

But why should there be more credit given to witches, when they say they have
made a real bargain with the devil, killed a cow, bewitched butter, infeebled
a child, forespoken her neighbor, etc. than when she confesses that she
transubstantiateth her self, makes it rain or hail, flies in the air, goes
invisible, transferreth corn in the grass from one field to another? etc. If
you think that in the one their confessions be found, why should you say that
they are corrupt in the other; the confession of all these things being made at
one instant, and affirmed with like constancy, or rather audacity? But you see
the one to be impossible, and therefore you think thereby, that their
confessions are vain and false. The other you think may be done, August. lib.
de Trinit. 3. Idem de civit. Dei.
and see them confess it, and therefore you conclude, A Posse ad esse; as
being persuaded it is so, because you think it may be so. But I say, both with
the divines, and philosophers, that that which is imagined of witchcraft, has
no truth of action; or being besides their imagination, the witch (for the most
part) is oc^upied in false causes. For whosoever desires to bring to pass an
impossible thing, Clemens, recog. 3. Iamblichus. Io. Wierus. Cardanus. Pampia.
etc.
has a vain, and idle, and childish persuasion, bred by an unsound mind; for
Sana mentis voluntas, voluntas; rei possibilis est; The will of a sound mind,
is the desire of a possible thing.

CHAP. XII.
A confutation of witches confessions, especially concerning the^^ league.

But it is objected, that witches confess they renounce the faith, and as
their confession must be true, or else they would not make it: so must their
fault be worthy of death, An objection.

The resolution.


or else they should not be executed* Whereunto I answer as before; that their
confessions are extorted, or else proceed from an unsound mind. Yea I say
further, that we our selves, which are sound of mind, and yet seek any other
way of salvation than Christ Jesus, or break his commandments, or walk not in
(...) steps with a lively faith, etc. do not only renounce the faith, but God
himself: and therefore they, in confessing that they forsake God, and embrace
Satan, do that which we all should do. As touching that horrible part of their
confession, in the league which tends to the killing of their own and others
children, the seething of them, and the making of their potion or pottage, and
the effects thereof; their good fridayes meeting being the day of their
deliverance, their incests, with their return, at the end of nine months,
when commonly women be neither able to go that journey, nor to return, etc. it
is so horrible, unnatural, unlikely, and impossible; that if I should behold
such things with mine eyes, I should rather think my self dreaming, drunken,
or some way deprived of my senses; than give credit to so horrible and filthy
matters.

A forged miracle.
How has the the oil or pottage of a sodden child such virtue, as tha^ a
staff anointed therewith, can carry folk in the air? Their potable liquor,
which, they say, makes masters of that faculty, is it not ridiculous* And is
it not, by the opinion of all philosophers, Physicians, and divines, void of
such virtue, as is imputed thereunto?

Their not fasting on fridayes, and their fasting on sundays, their spitting
at the time of elevation, their refusal of holy water, their despising of
superstitious crosses, etc. which are all good steps to true Christianity, help
me to confute the tesidue of their confessions.

CHAP. XIII.
A confutation of witches confessions, concerning making of tempests and rain:
of the natural cause of rain, and that witches or devill^ have no power to do
such things.

ANd to speak more generally of all the impossible actions ref^rred unto them,
as also of their false confessions; I say, that there is none which
acknowledges God to be only omnipotent, and the only worke^ of all miracles,
nor any other i^dued with mean sense, but will deny tha^ the elements are
obedient to wi^ches, and at their commandment; or that they may at their
pleasure send r^n, hail, tempests, thunder, lightning; when she being b^^ an
old doing woman, casts a flint-stone over her let shoulder, The ways that
witches use to make rain etc.

Nider. Mal. Malef. I. Bod. Friar Barth. Heming Danaeus, etc. Mal. Malef. par.
2. quae. 1. cap. 12.


toward the west, or hurleth a little sea-sand up into the element, or wetteth
a broom-sprig in water, and sprinkleth the same in the air; or diggeth a pit in
the earth, and putting water therein, stirs it about with her finger; or
boileth hogs bristles, or lays sticks acrosse upon a bank, where never a
drop of water is; or burieth sage till it be rotten: all which things are
confessed by witches, and affirmed by writers to be the means that witches use
to move extraordinary tempests and rain, etc.

We read in M. Maleficarum, that a little girl walking abroad with her father
in his land, heard him complain of drought, wishing for rain, etc. Why
Father, quoth the child, I can make it rain or hail, when and where I list?
He asked where she learned it. She said, of her mother, who forbad her to tell
any body thereof. He asked her how her mother taught her? She answered, that
her mother committed her to a master, who would at any time do any thing for
her. Why then, said he, make it rain but only in my field. And so she went to
the stream, and threw up water in her masters name, and made it rain
presently. And proceeding further with her father, she made it hail in another
field, at her fathers request. Hereupon he accused his wife, and caused her to
be burned; and then he new christened his child again: which circumstance is
common among Papists and witch mongers. And howsoever the first part hereof was
proved, there is no doubt but the latter part was thoroughly executed. If they
could indeed bring these things to pass at their pleasure, then might they
also be impediments unto the course of all other natural things, He that can
ly, can steal, as he that can work can play.
and ordinances appointed by God: as, to cause it to hold up, when it should
rain; and to make midnight, of high noon; and by those means, I say, the
divine power should become servile to the will of a witch, so as we could
neither eat nor drink, but by their permission.

Me thinks Seneca might sa^isfie these credulous or rather idolatrous people,
that run a whore-hunting, either in body or fancy, after these witches,
believing all that is attributed unto them, to the derogation of Gods glory. He
says, that the rude people, and our ignorant prededecessors did believe, that
rain and showers might be procured and stayed by witches charms and
inchan^ments: of which kind of things tha^ th^re can nothing be wrought, it is
so manifest, that we need not go to any philosophers school, to learn the
confutation thereof.

But Jeremy, Jer. 16.22. Dii gentium demonia. The gods of the gentiles are
devils.

The natural generation of hail and rain.


by the word of God, does utterly confound all that which may be devised for
the maintenance of that foolish opinion, saying: Are the^^ any among the gods
of the gentiles, that send rain, or give showers from heaven? Art not thou the
self same our Lord God? We will trust in thee, for thou do and makes all
these things. I may therefore with Brentius boldly say, that is neither in the
power of witches nor devils, to accomplish that matter; but in God only. For
when exhalations are drawn and lifted up from out of the earth, by the power
of the Sun, into the middle region of the air, the coldness thereof
constrains and thickeneth those vapors: which being become clouds, are
dissolved again by the heat of the sun, whereby rain or hail is engendered;
rain, if by the way the drops be not frosen and made hail. These circumstances
being considered with the course of the whole Scripture, it can neither be in
the power of witch or devil to procure rain or fair weather.

And whereas the story of Job in this case is alleged against me (wherein a
witch is not once named) I have particularly answered it elsewhere. And
therefore thus much only I say here; that even there, where it pleased God (as
Calvine says) to set down circumstances for the instruction of our gross
capacities, which are not able to conceive of spiritual communication, or
heavenly affairs; the devil desires God to stretch out his hand, and touch
all that Job has. And though he seems to grant S^tans desire, Job. 11.
yet God himself sent fire from heaven, etc. Whereby it is to be gathered, that
although God said, He is in thine hand: it wa^ the Lords hand that punished
Job, Ib. verse. 16.
and not the hand of the devil, who said not, Give me leave to plague him;
but, Lay thine han^ upon him. And when Job continued faithful notwithstanding
all his afflictions, i^ his children, body and goods; the devil is said to
come again to God, and to say as before, to wit; Now stretch out thine hand,
and touch h^s bones and his flesh. Job. 2.5.
Which argues as well that he could not do it, as th^^ he himsel^e did it not
before. And be it here remembered, that M. M^^. and the residue of the
witch-mongers deny, Mal. malef. pa. 1. quae. 2,
that there were ^hy wi^ch^^ in Jobs time. But see more hereof elsewhere.

CHAP. XIIII.
What would ensue, if witches confessions or witch-mongers opinion were true,
concerning the effects of witch-craf^, enchantments, and

But these suppositions are false, Ergo the consequencies are not true.
IF it were true that witches confess, or that all writers write, or the
witch-mongers report, or that fools believe, we should never have b^ter in the
chearne, nor cow in the close, nor corn in the field, nor (...) weather
abroad, nor health within doors. Or if that which is contai^^ in M. Mal. Bodin,
etc. or in the pamphlets late set forth in English, (...) witches executions,
should be true in those things tha^ witches are (...) to confess, what
creature could live in security? Or what needed for preparation of wars, or
such trouble, or charge in that behalf? N^ Prince should be able to reign or
live in the land. For (as Danaeus said that one Martin a witch killed the
Emperor of Germany with witch-(...)) so would our witches (if they could)
destroy all our mag^strates. One (...) witch might overthrow an army royal:
and then what needed w^ (...) guns, or wildfire, or any other instruments of
war? A witch mig^^ supply all wants, and accomplish a Prince^ will in this
behalf, e^^ without charge or bloodshed of his people.

If it be objected, that witches work by the devil, and christi^^ princes are
not to deal that way; I answer, that for princes disposed to b^ tell would
make conscience therein, specially such as take unjust wa^s hand, using other
helps, devises, and engines as lawful and devilish that; in whose camp there
is neither the rule of religion or christi^^ order observed; insomuch as
ravishments, murders, blasphemies (...) thefts are there most commonly and
freely committed. Mal. malef. I. Bodin. Bar. Spinaeus.
So that the devil is more feared, and better served in their camps, than God
Almighty.

But admit that soldiers would be scrupulous herein, the Pope has authority
to dispense therewith; as in like case he has done, by the testimony of his
own authors and friends. Admit also, that throughout all christendom, wars
were justly maintained, and religion duly observed in their camps; yet would
the Turk and other infidels cut our throats, or at least one another throat,
with the help of their witches; for they would make no conscience thereof.

CHAP. XV.
Examples of foreign nations, who in their wars used the assistance of
witches; of eybiting witches in Ireland, of two archers that shot with
familiars.

IN the wars between the kings of Denmark and Sueveland, Witches in wars.
1563. the Danes do write, that the king of Sueveland carried about with him in
camp, four old witches, who with their charms so qualified the Danes, as
they were thereby disabled to annoie their enemies: insomuch as, if they had
taken in hand any enterprise, they were so infeebled by those witches, as they
could perform nothing. And although this could have no credit at the first,
yet in the end, one of these witches was taken prisoner, and confessed the
whole matter; so as (says he) the threads, and the line, and the characters
were found in the high way and water-plashes.

The Irishmen addict themselves wonderfully to the credit and practice hereof;
Eybitting witches.
insomuch as they affirm, that not only their children, but their cattle,
are (as they call it) eybitten, when they fall suddenly sick, and ^earme one
sort of their witches eybiters; only in that respect: yea and they will not
stick to affirm, that they ca^ rhyme either man or beast to death. Also the
West- Indians and Muscovits do the like, and the Hunnes (as Gregory Turonensis
writes) used the help of witches in time of war.

I find another story written in M. Mal. repeated by Bodin; that one soldier
called Pumher, daily through witchcraft killed with his bow and arrows three
of the enemies, Pumher an acher.
as they stood peeping over the walls of a castle besieged: so as in the end he
killed them all quite, saving one. The trial of the archers simister dealing,
and a proof thereof expressed, is; for that he never lightly failed when he
shot, and for that he killed them; by three a day; and had shot three arrows
into a rod. This was he that shot at a penny on his sons head, and made ready
another arrow, to have slain the Duke Remgrave that commanded it. And
doubtless, because of his singular dexterity in shooting, as he reputed a
witch, as doing that which others could not do, nor think to be in the power of
man to do: though indeed no miracle, no witchcraft, no impossibility nor
difficulty consisted therein.

A skillfull archer punished by an unskillfull justice.
But this latter story I can requite with a familiar example. For (...) Town
Malling in kent, one of Q. Mary's justices, upon the complaint of many wise
men, and a few foolish boys, laid an archer by the heels; because he shot so
near the white at buts. For he was informed and persuaded, that the poor man
played with a fly, otherwise called a devil or familiar. And because he was
certified that the archer aforesaid shot better than the common shooting, which
he before had heard of or seen, he conceived it could not be in Gods name, but
by enchantment; whereby this archer (as he supposed by abusing the Queens
liege people) gained some one day two or three shillings, to the detriment of
the commonwealth, and to his own enriching. And therefore the archer was
severely punished, to the great encouragement of archers and to the wise
example of justice; but specially to the overthrow of witchcraft. And now
again to our matter.

CHAP. XVI.
Authorities condemning the fantastical confessions of witches, and how a
popish doctor takes upon him to disprove the same.

Certain general counsels, by their decrees, have condemned the confessions
and erroneus credulity of witches, to be vain, fantastical and fabulous. And
even those, which are parcel of their league, whereupon our witch-mongers do
so build, to wit; their night-walkings and meetings with Herodias, and the
Pagan gods: at which time they should pass so far in so little a space on
cockhorse; their transubstantiation, their eating of children, and their
pulling of them from their mothers sides; their entering into men's houses,
through chinks and little holes where a fly can scarcely wring out, and the
disquieting of the inhabitants etc. all which are not only said by a general
council to be meet fantastical, Council. Acquirens. in decret. 26. quae. 5.
can. episcopi. August. de speritu and 8. anima cap. Fran. Ponzivib. tract. de
lam. numero 49. de Grillandus ^e sort. numero. 6. In histor. vel vita. sancti
Germani.
and imaginations in dreams; but so affirmed by the ancient writers. The words
of the council are these; It may not be omitted, that certain wicked women
following Satan's provocations, being seduced by the illusion of devils, believe
and profess, that in the night-times they ride abroad with Diana, the goddess
of the Pagans, or else with Herodias, with an innumerable multitude, upon
certain beasts, and pass over many countries and nations, in the silence of
the night, and do whatsoever those fai^ies or ladies command etc. And it
follows even there* Let all ministers therefore in their several cures,
preach to Gods people, so as they may know all these things to be false, etc.
It follows in the same counsel; Therefore, whosoever believes that any
creature may be either created by them, or else changed into better or worse,
or be any way transformed into any other kind or likeness of any, but of the
creator himself, is assuredly an infidel* and worse than a Pagan.

And if this he credible, then all these their bargains and assemblie^ etc.
are incredible, which are only ^^^ified by the certain foolish and extorted
confessions; and by a fable of S. Germane, who watched the fairies or witches,
being at a rear banquet, and through his holiness stayed them, till he sent to
the houses of those neighbors, which seemed to be there, and found them all in
bed; and so cried, that these were devils in the likeness of those women.
Which if it were as true, as it ifalse, it might serve well to confute this
their meeting and night-walkings For if the devils be only present in the
likeness of witches, then is that false, which is attributed to witches in
this behalf.

But because the old hammer of Sprenger and Institor, Nonus mal. Mal. in quae.
de strigib, cap. 21, 22.23. etc.
in their old Malleo maleficarum, was insufficient to knock down this counsel;
a young beetlehead called Friar Bartholomaeus Spineus has made a new leaden
beetle, to beat down the counsel, and kill these old woman. Wherein he
counterfeiting Aesops ass, claweth the pope with his heels, affirming upon
his credit, that the counsel is false and erroneous; because the doctrine
swarveth from the Popish church, and is not authentical but apocryphal:
saying (though u^truly) that that counsel was not called by the commandment
and pleasure of the Pope, nor ratif^ed by his authori^y, which (says he) is
sufficient to disannul all councels. For surely (says this ^rier; which at
this instant is a cheef inquisitor) if the words of this counsel were to be
admitted, both I, and all my predecessors had published notorious lies, and
committed many injurious executions: whereby the Popes themselves also might
justly be detected of error, Bar. Spinaeus Mal. malef. cap. 23. in quae. de
strigib
c^ntrary to the catholic belief in that behalf. Marry he says, that
although the words and direct sense of this counsel be quite contrary to truth
and his opinion; yet he will make an exposition thereof, that shall somewhat
mi^igate the lewdness of the same; and this he says is not only allowable to
do, but also meritorious. Mark the man's words, and judge his meaning.

CHAP. XVII.
Witch-mongers reasons, to prove that witches can work wonders, Bodins tale of
a Friseland priest transported, that imaginations proceeding of melancholy do
cause illusions. Mal, malef. pa. 1. cap. 3. Guli. Ph^risi.


OLd M. Malificarum also says, that the counsels and doctors were all deceived
herein, and alleging authority therefore, confuteth that opinion by a notable
reason, called Petitio principii, or rather, Ignotum per ignotius, in this
manner: They can put changelings in the place of other children; Ergo they can
tranferre and tran^forme* themselves and others, etc. according ^o their
confession in that behalf. Item he says, and Bodin justifies it, that a
priest in Friseland was corporally transferred into a fa^re country, as
witnessed a^o^her priest of Oberdorf his companion, who saw him aloft in the
air: Ergo says M. ^al. they have all been deceived hitherto; to the great
impunity of horrible witches. Wherein he opposes his folly against God and his
church, against the truth, and against all possibility. But surely ^ is almost
incredible, how imagination shall abuse such as a^^ subject unto melancholy; so
as they shall believe they see, hear, and do that, which never was nor shall
be; as is partly declared, if you read Galen de locis affectis, and may more
plainly appear also if you read Aristotle De somnio. August. de spiritu and
anima. Lib. 1. cap. 7. de ^auch^rist.


And thereof S. Agustine says well, that he is too much a fool and a
blockhead, that supposes those things to be done indeed, and corporally, which
are by such persons phantastically imagined: which fantastical illusions do
as well agree and accord (as Algerus says) with magical deceipts, as the
verity accompanies divine holiness.

CHAP. XVIII.
That the confession of witches is sufficient in civil and common law to take
away life. What the sounder divines, and decrees of councels determine in this
case.

It is not likely they would so do: Ergo a ly.
ALas! what creature being sound in state of mind, would (without compulsion)
make such manner of confessions as they do; or would for a trifle, or nothing,
make a perfect bargain with the devil, for her soul to be yielded up unto his
tortures and everlasting flames, and that within a very short time; specially
being through age most commonly unlike to live one whole year? The terror of
hellfire must needs be to them diversely manifested, and much more terrible;
because of their weakness, nature, and kind, than to any other: as it would
appear, if a witch we^^ but asked, Whether she would be contented to be hanged
one ye^ hence, upon condition her displeasure might be wreaked upon her e^emy
presently? As for thieves, and such other, they think not to go to hellfire;
but are either persuaded there is no hell, or that their crime deserves it
not, or else that they have time enough to repent: so as, (...) doubt, if they
were perfectly resolved hereof, they would never make such adventures. Neither
do I think, that for any sum of money, they would make so direct a bargain
to go to hellfire. Now then I conclude, that confession in this behalf is
insufficient to take away the life of any body; August. de civit. Dei. Isidor.
lib. 8. cap. 9. Etymol. 26. quae 5. ca. non mirum. Ponzivibus de lamiis, volum.
10. Laerror; and L. cum post. c. de juris and facti ignor. ac in L. de etat. S.
i^em de interrog. action. Per glos. Bal. and alios in L. 1. c. de confess. glos.
nec si de confess. in 6. S^^ ad leg. Aquil. L. Neracius. S. fin. V^ per Bald.
and August. in L. I. c. de confess. etc. Extra. de praesum. literas. Per Bald.
in deleg. etc. Extra detest. cum literis. Mal. malef. pa. 3. quaest. 5. cap. 11.
or to attain such credit, as to be believed without furth^^ proof. For as
Augustine and Isidore, with the rest of the sounder divines say, that these
perstigious things, which are wrought by witches, are fantastical: so do the
sounder decrees of councels and canons agree, th^^ in that case, there is no
place for cirminall action. And the law says, th^^ The confession of such
persons as are illuded, must needs be erroneous, and therefore is not to be
admitted: for, Confessio debet tenere verum and possible. But these things are
opposite both to law and nature, and therefore it follows not; Because these
witches confess so, Ergo it is so. For the confession differs from the act,
or from the possible of the the act. And whatsoever is contrary to nature
fails in his principles and therefore is naturally impossible.

The law also says, In criminalibus regulariter non statur soli confessioni
(...) In criminal cases or touching life, we must not absolutely stand to the
confession of the accused party: but in these matters proofs must be brough
more clear than the light it self. And in this crime no body must be condemned
upon presumptions. And where it is objected and urged, the Since God only
knows the thoughts, there is none other way of proo^ but by confession: It is
answered thus in the law, to wit: Their confession in this case contains an
outward act, and the same impossible both in the law and nature, and also
unlikely to be true; and therefore Quod verisimile non est, attendi non debet.
So as, though their confessions may be worthy of punishment, as whereby they
show a will to commit such mischief, yet not worthy of credit, as that they
have such power. For, Si factum absit, solaque opinione laborent, estultorum
genere sunt; If they confess a fact performed but in opinion, they are to be
repu^ed among the number of fools. Neither may any man be by law condemned for
criminal causes, upon presumptions, nor yet by single witnesses: neither at
the accusation of a capital enemy; who indeed is not to be admitted to give
evidence in this case; though it please M. M^l. and Bodin to affirm the
contrary. But beyond all equity, these inquis^^ors have shifts and devises
enough, to plague and kill these poor souls: for (they say) their ^ault is
greatest of all others; because of their carnal copulation with the devil,
and therefore they are to be punished as he^eticks, four nannes of ways: to
wit, with excommunication, deprivation, loss of goods, and also with death.

And indeed they find law, and provide means thereby to maintain this their
bloody humor. For it is writ^en in their popish canons, that As for these kind
of heretics, how much soever they repent and return to the faith, they may
not be retained alive, or kept in perpetual prison; but be put to extreme
death. Yea, M. Mal. writes, that a witches sin is the sin aganist the Holy
Ghost; Mal. malef. quest. 14. pa. ^. C. de malef. L. nullus. L. nemo. and L.
culpa. and affirm by Mal, malef. Mal. Malef. quaest. 17.
to wit, irremissible; yea further, that it is greater than the sin of the
angels that fell. In which respect I wonder, that Moses delivered not three
tables to the children of Israel; or at the leastwise, that he exhibited not
commandments for it. It is not credible that the greatest should be included
in the less, etc.

But when these witch-mongers are convinced in the objection concerning their
confessions; so as thereby their tyrannical arguments cannot prevail, to
imbrue the magistrates hands in so much blood as their appetite requires: they
fall to accusing them of other crimes, that the world might think they had some
color to maintain their malicious fury against them.

CHAP. XIX.
Of four capital crimes objected against witches, all fully answered and
confuted as frivolo us.

FIrst therefore they lay to their charge idolatry. But alas without all
reason; for such are properly known to us to be idolaters, as do external
worship to idols or strange gods. The furthest point that idolatry can be
stretched unto, is, that they, which are culpable therein, are such as hope for
and seek salvation at the hands of idols, or of any other than God; or fix
their whole mind and love upon any creature, so as the power of God be
neglected and contemned thereby. But witches neither seek nor believe to have
salvation at the hands of devils, but by them they are only deceived; the
instruments of their fantasy being corrupted, and so infatuated, that they
suppose, confess, and say they can do that, which is as far beyond t^eir
power and nature to do, as to kill^ man at York before noon, when they have
been seen at London in that morning, etc. But if these latter idolaters; whose
idolatry is spiritual and committed only in mind, should be punished by
death; then should every covetous man or other, that sets his affection any
way too much upon an earthly creature be executed, and yet perchance the witch
might escape-scot-free. Apostasy, confuted.


Secondly, apostasy is laid to their charge, whereby it is inferred, that they
are worthy to die. But apostasy is, where any of sound judgment forsake the
gospel, learned and well known unto them; and do not only embrace impiety and
infidelity; but oppugn and resist the truth erstwhile by them professed. But
alas these poor women go not about to defend any impiety, but after good
admonition repent.

Seducing of the people, confuted.
Thirdly, they would have them executed for seducing the people. But God knows
they have small store of Rhetorike or ar^ to seduce; except to tell a tale of
Robin good fellow, to be deceived and seduced. Neither may their age or sex
admit that opinion or accusation to be just: for they themselves are poor
seduced souls. I for my part (as elsewhere I have said) have proved this
point to be false in most apparent sort.

Fourthly, as touching the accusation, which all the writers use herein against
them for their carnal copulation with Incubus: Carnal copulation with
Incubus, confuted.
the folly of men^ credulity is as much to be wondered: at and derided, as the
others vain and impossible confessions. For the devil is a spirit, and has
neither flesh nor bones, which were to be used in the performance of this
action. And since he also lacks all instruments, substance, and seed
engendered of blood; it were folly to stay overlong in the confutation of that,
which is not in the nature of things. And yet must I say somewhat herein,
because the opinion hereof is so strongly and universally received, and the
fables hereupon so innumerable; whereby M. Mal. Bodin, Hemingiu^, Hyperius,
Danaeus, Erastus, and others that take upon them to write herein are so abused,
How the devil plays Succubus and Incubus.
or rather seek to abuse others; as I wonder at their fond credulity in this
behalf. For they affirm undoubtedly, th^^ the devil plays Succubus to the
man, and carries from him the seed of generation, which he delivers as
Incubus to the woman, who many times that way is gotten with child; which will
very naturally (they say) become a witch, and such a one they affirm Merline
was.

CHAP. XX.
A request to such readers as are loath to hear or read filthy and baw^ masters,
which of necessity are here to be inserted, to pass over eight chapters.

A perotation to the readers
BUt insomuch as I am driven (for the more manifest bewraying and ^^^^playing of
this most filthy and horrible error) to stain my paper wi^^ writing thereon
certain of their beastly and bawdy assertions and examples, whereby they
confirm this their doctrine (being my self both ashamed, and loath once to
think upon such filthiness, although it be to the condemnation thhereof) I
must entreat you that are the readers hereof, whose chaste ears cannot well
endure to hear of such abominable lecheries, as are gathered out of he books
of those witch-mongers (although doctors of divinity, and otherwise of great
authority and estimation) to turn over a few leaves, wherein (I say) I have
like a groom thrust their bawdy stuff (even that which I my self loath) as
into a stinking corner: howbeit, none otherwise, I hope* but that the other
parts of my writing shall remain sweet, and this also covered as close as may
be.

The fourth Book
CHAP. I.
Of witchmongers opinions concerning evil spirits, how they frame themselves in
more excellent sort than God made us.

Mal. malef. part. 2. cap. 4. que^. 1.
James Sprenger and Henry Institor, in M. Mal. agreeing with Bodin, Barth*
Spineus, Danaeus, Erastus, Hemingius, and the rest, do make a bawdy discourse;
laboring to prove by a foolish kind of philosophy; that evil spirits cannot
only take earthly forms and shapes of men; but also counterfeit hearing,
seeing, etc. and likewise, that they can eat and devour meats, and also
retain, digest, and avoid the same; and finally, use diverse kinds of
activities, but specially excel in the use and art of venery. For M. Man
says, If his bodily eyes were out he would see but ilfavoredly.
that the eyes and ears of the mind are far more subtle than bodily eyes or
carnal ears. Yea it is there affirmed, that as they take bodies, and the
likeness of members; so they take minds and similitudes of their operations.
But by the way, I would have them answe^^ed this question. Our minds and souls
are spiritual things. (...) our corporal ears be stopped, what can they hear
or conceive of any e^ternall wisdom? And truly, a man of such a constitution
of body, (...) they imagine of these spirits, which make themselves, etc. were
of (...) more excellent substance, etc. than the bodies of them that God made
in paradise; and so the devils workman-ship should exceed the hand^ work of God
the father and Creator of all things.

CHAP. II.
Of bawdy Incubus and Succubus, and whether the action of venery (...) be
performed between witches and devils, and when witches first yielded to Incubus.

Nider in fornicario. T. Brabant. in lib. de apib. in sen. did 4. art. 4. Genesis
6 4.
HEreto^ore (they say) Incubus was fain to ravish women against the^^ ^ill,
until Anno. 1400. but now since that time witchesconse^ willing to their
desires: Insomuch as some one witch exercised that (...) of lechery with
Incubus twenty or thirty years together; as was confe^sessed by forty and
eight witches burned at Ravenspurge. But what good^ly fellows Incubus be
gets upon these witches, is proved by Tho^^ of Aquine, Bodin, M. Mal.
Hyperius, etc.

This is proved first by the devil cunning, in discerning the difference of
the seed which falls from men. Secondly, by his understanding o^ the aptness
of the women for the receipt of such seed. Thirdly by his knowledge of the
constellations, which are friendly to such corporal o^^iects. And lastly, by
the excellent complexion of such as the dev^^ makes choice of, to beget such
notable personages upon, as are the causes of the greatness and excellency of
the child thus begotten. Mal. malef. Par. 7. quae. 1. August. de doctrina.
Christ.


And to prove that such bawdy doings betwixt the devil and witches is not
fained, S. Augustine is alleged, who says, that All superstitious arts had
their beginning of the pestiferous society betwixt the devil and man. Wherein
he says truly; for that in paradise, betwixt the devil and man, all
wickedness was so contrived, that man ever since has studied wicked arts: yea
and the devil will be sure to be at the middle and at both ends of every
mischief. But that the devil ingendreth, with a woman, in manner and form as
is supposed, and naturally begets the wicked, neither is it true, nor
Augustines meaning in this place.

Howbeit M. Mal. proceeds, affirming that All witches take their beginning
from such filthy actions, wherein the devil, in likeness of a pretty wench,
lies prostitute as Succubus to the man, and retaining his nature and seed,
conveyeth it unto the witch, to whom he delivers it as Incubus. Wherein also
is refuted the opinion of them that hold a spirit to be unpalpable, M. Mal.
says, There can be rendered no infallible rule, though a probable distinction
may be set down, whether Incubus in the act of venery do always power seed out
of his assumed body. Mal. malef. quae. 1. part. 1. Mal. Malef. par. 1. quae. 1.
And this is the distinction, Either she is old and barren, or young and
pregnant. If she be barren, then does Incubus use her without decision of seed;
because such seed should serve for no purpose. And the devil avoideth
superfluity as much as he may; and yet for her pleasure and condemnation
together, he goes to work with her. But by the way, if the devil were so
compendious, what should he need to use such circumstances, even in these very
actions, as to make these assemblies, conventicles, ceremonies, etc. when he
has already bought their bodies, and bargained for their souls? Or what
reason had he, to make them kill so many infants, by whom he rather loses than
gains any thing; because they are, so far as either he or we know, in
better case than we, of riper years by reason of their innocence? Well, if she
be not past children, then steals he feed away (as has been said) from some
wicked man being about that lecherous business, and therewith gets young
witches upon the old.

Ane note, that they affirm that this business is better accomplished with
seed thus gathered, than that which is shed in dreams, through superfluity of
humors: because that is gathered from the virtue of the seed generative. And if
it be said that the seed will wax cold by the way, and so lose his natural
heat, and consequently the virtue: M. Mal. Danaeus and the rest do answer,
that the devil can so carry it, as no heat shall go from it, etc.

Furthermore, Danaeus in dialog. de sortiariis. Ia. Sprenger in Mal. malef.
old witches are sworn to procure as many young virgins for Incubus as they
can, whereby in time they grow to be excellent bawds: but in this case the
priest plays Incubus. For you should find, that confession to a priest, and
namely this word Benedicit, drives Incubus away, when Ave Mary's, crosses, and
all other charms fail.

CHAP. III.
Of the devils visible and invisible dealing with witches in the way of lechery.

BUt as touching the devils visible or invisible execution of lechery, it is
written, that to such witches, as before have made a visible league with the
priest, (the devil I should say) there is no necessity that Incubus should
appear invisible: This was done at Ravenspurge.
marry to the standers by he is for the most part invisible. For proof hereof
James Sprenger and Institor affirm, that many times witches are seen in the
fields and woods, prostituting themselves uncovered and naked up to the navill,
wagging and moving their members in every part, according to the disposition of
one being about that act of concupiscence, and yet nothing seen of the
beholders upon her; saving that after such a convenient time as is required
about such a piece of work, a black vapor, of the length and bigness of a man,
has been seen as it were to depart from her, and to ascend from that place.
Nevertheless, many times the husband sees Incubus making him cuckhold, Mal.
malef.
in the liknesse of a man, and sometimes strikes off his head with his sword^
but because the body is nothing but air: it closes together again: so (...)
although the good-wife be sometimes hurt thereby; yet she makes him believe he
is mad or possessed, and that he does he knows not what. For she has more
pleasure and delight (they say) with Incubus that way than with any mortal
man; whereby you may perceive that spirits ar^ palpable.

CHAP. IIII.
That the power of generation is both outwardly and inwardly impeached by
witches, and of diverse that had their genitals taken from the^ by witches, and
by the same means again restored.

THey also affirm, that the virtue of generation is impeached b^ witches, both
inwardly, and outwardly: for intrinsecally they repre^^ the courage, and they
stop the passage of the man's seed, so as it may no^ descend to the vessels of
generation: also they hurt extrinsecally, wi^^ images, herbs, etc. And to prove
this true, you shall hear certain stories out of M. Mal. worthy to be noted.

A young priest at Mespurge in the diocese of Constance was bewitched so as he
had no power to occupy any other or mo women than one: Mal. malef. cap. 6.
quae. pa. 2.
and to be delivered out of that thraldom, sought to fly into another country*
where he might use that priestly occupation more freely. But all in vain for
evermore he was brought as far backward by night, as he went forward in the day
before; some tims by land, sometimes in the air, as though ^e flew. And if this
be not true, I am sure that James Sprenger does ly.

For the further confirmation of our belief in Incubus, M. Mal. cites a story
of a notable matter executed at Ravenspurge, as true and as clean^^ as the
rest. A young man lying with a wench in that town (says he) was fain to leave
his instruments of venery behind him, by means of that prestigious art of
witchcraft: so as in that place nothing could be seen or felt but his plain
body. This young man was willed by another witch, to go to her whom he
suspected, and by fair or foul means to require her help: who soon after
meeting with her, entreated her fair, but that was in vain; and therefore he
caught her by the throat, and with a towel strangled her, saying: Restore me my
tool, or thou shall die for it: so as she being swollen and black in the face,
and through his boisterous handling ready to die, said Let me go, and I will
help thee. And whilst he was losing the towell, she put her hand into his
cod-peece, and touched the place; saying; Now have thou thy desire: and even at
that instant he felt himself restored.

Item, Ia. Sprenger. in Mal. malef. part. 2. quae.
a reverend father, for his life, holiness, and knowledge notorious, being a
friar of the order and company of Spire, reported, that a young man at shrift
made lamentable moan unto him for the like loss: but his gravity suffered him
not to believe lightly any such reports, and therefore made the young man
untrusse his codpeece-point, and saw the complaint to be true and just.
Whereupon he advised or rather enjoined the youth to go to the witch whom he
suspected, and with flattering words to entreat her, to be so good unto him, as
to restore him his instrument: which by that means he obtained, and soon after
returned to show himself thankful; and told the holy father of his good
success in that behalf: but he so believed him, as he would needs be Oculatus
testis, and made him pull down his breeches, and so was satisfied of the truth
and certainty thereof.

Another young man being in that very taking, Mal. malef. cap. 7. par. 2.
quaest. 1.
went to a witch for the restitution thereof, who brought him to a tree, where
she showed him a nest, and bad him climb up and take it. And being in the top
of the tree, he took out a mighty great one, and showed the same to her, asking
her if he might not have the same. Nay (quoth she) that is our parish priests
tool, but take any other which thou will. And it is there affirmed, that some
have found 20. and some 30. of them in one nest, being there preserved with
provender, as it were at the wrack and manger, with this note, wherein there is
no contradiction (for all must be true that is written against witches) that if
a witch deprive one of his privities, it is done only by prestigious means,
Note.
so as the senses are but illuded. Marry by the devil it is really taken away,
and in like sort restored. These are no jestes, for they be written by them
that were and are judges upon the lives and deaths of those persons.

CHAP. V.
Of bishop Sylvanus his lechery opened and covered again, how maids having
yellow hair are most combered with Incubus, how married men are bewitched to
use other men's wives, and to refuse their own.

YOu shall read in the legend, how in the nightime Incubus came to a ladies
bedside, In vita Hieronym.
and made hot love unto her: whereat she being offended, cried out so loud,
that company came and found him under her bed in the likeness of the holy
bishop Sylvanus, which holy man was much defamed thereby, until at the length
this infamy was purged by the confession of a devil made at S. Ieroms tomb. Oh
excellent piece of witch craft wrought by Sylvanus! Item S. Christine would
needs take unto her another maids Incubus, Saints as holy and chaste as horses
etc mares.
and ly in her room: and the story says, that she was shrewdly accloyed. But
she was a shrew indeed, that would needs change beds with her fellow, that was
troubled every night with Incubus, and deal with him her self. But here the
inqusitors note may not be forgotten, to wit; that maids having yellow hair
are most molested with this spirit. Also it is written in the Legend, of S.
Bernard, that a pretty wench that had had the use of Incubus his body by the
space of six or seven years in Aquitania (being belike weary of him for that he
waxed old) would needs go to S. Bernard another while. Maids having yellow
hair. Mal. malef. par 2. quae. 2. cap. 2.
But Incubus told her, that if she would so forsake him, being so long her true
lover, he would be revenged upon her, etc. But befall what would, she went to
S. Bernard, who took her his staff, and bad her lay it in the bed besides her.
And indeed the devil fearing the bed-staffe, or that S. Bernard lay there
himself, durst not approach into her chamber that night: what he did
afterward, I am uncertain. Marry you may find other circumstances hereof, and
many other like bawdy lies in the golden Legend. But here again we may not
forget the inquisitors note, to wit* that many are so bewitched, that they
cannot use their own wives, but any other bodies they may well enough away
withal. Which witchcraft is practiced among many bad husbaned, for whom it
were a good excuse to say they were bewitched.

CHAP. VI.
How to procure the dissolving of bewitched love, also to enforce a man (how
proper soever he be) to love an old hag: and of a bawdy trick of a priest in
Gelderland.

THe priests say, that the best cure for a woman thus molested, next to
confession, is excommunication. But to procure the dissolving of bewitched and
constrained love, the party bewitched must make a jakes of the lovers shoe. And
to enforce a man, how proper soever he be, to love an old hag, she gives unto
to eat (among other meats) her own dung: and this way an old witch made three
abbats of one house successively to die for her love, Of bawdy priest in
Gelderland.
as she her self confessed, by the report of M. Mal. In Gelderlend a priest
persuaded a sick woman that she was bewitch^ed; and except he might sing a
mass upon her belly, she could not be helped. Whereupon she consented, and lay
naked on the alter whilst he sung mass, to the satisfying of his lust; but not
to the release of her grief. Other cures I will speak of in other places more
civil. Howbeit, certain miraculous cures, both full of bawdery and lies, must
either have place here, or none at all.

CHAP. VII.
Of diverse saints and holy persons, which were exceeding bawdy and lecherous,
In col. patrum,
and by certain miraculous means became chaste.

CAssianus writes, that S. Siren being of body very lecherous, and of mind
wonderful religious, fasted and prayed; to the end his body might be reduced
miraculously to chastity. At length came an angel unto him by night, Gregor.
lib. 1. dial 2.
and cut out of his flesh certain kernels, which were the sparks of
concupiscence; so as afterward he never had any more motions of the flesh. It
is also reported, that the abbat Equiciu; being naturally as unchaste as the
other, fell to his beads so devoutly for recovery of honesty, that there came
an angel unto him in an apparation, that seemed ^o geld him, and after that
(forsooth) he was as chaste as though he had never a stone in his breech; and
before that time being a ruler over monks, he became afterward a governor
over nuns. Even as it is said Helias the holy monk gathered thirty virgins
into a monastery, in vitis patrum. Heraclides in paradise.
over whom he ruled and reigned by the space of two years, and grew so proud
and hot in the cod-peece, that he was fain to forsake his holy house, and fly
to a desert, where he fasted and prayed two days, saying; Lord quench my hot
lecherous humors, or kill me. Whereupon in the night following, there came unto
him three angels, and demanded of him why he forsook his charge: but the holy
man was ashamed to tell them. Howbeit they asked him further, saying; Will thou
return to these damsels, if we free thee from all concupiscence? Yea (quoth
he) with all my heart. And when they had sworn him solemnly so to do, they
took him up, and gelded him; and one of them holding his hands, and another his
^eet, the third cut out his stones. But the story says it was not so ended,
but in a vision. Which I believe, because within five days he returned to his
minions, who pitiously mourned for him all this while, and joyfully embraced
his sweet company at his return. The like story does Nider write of Thomas,
Nider in fornicarii.
whom two angels cured of that lecherous disease; by putting about him a
girdle, which they brought down with them from heaven.

CHAP. VIII.
Certain popish and magical cures, for them that are bewitched in their
privities.

FOr direct cure to such as are bewitched in the privy members, the first and
special is confession; then follow in a row, holy water, and those ceremonial
trumperies, Ave Mary's, and all manner of crossings ^ which are all said to be
wholesome, except the witchcraft be perpetual, and in that case the wife may
have a divorse of course.

Item, the eating of a haggister or py helps one bewitched in that member.
Aliter.


Item, the smoke of the tooth of a dead man.

Aliter.
Item, to anoint a man's body over with the gall of a crow.

Item, to fill a quill with quicksilver, and lay the same under the cushin,
where such a one sits, Aliter.
or else to put it under the threshold of the door of the house or chamber
where he dwells.

Aliter.
Item, to spit into your own bosom, if you be so bewitched is very good.

Item, to piss through a wedding ring. If you would know who is hurt in his
privities by witchcraft; and who otherwise is therein diseased, Hostiensis
answers: but so, as I am ashamed to english it: and therefore have here set
down his experiment in Latin; Aliter.
Quando virgo nullatenus movetur, and nunquam potuit cognoscere; hoc est signum
frigiditatis: sed quando movetur and erigitur, perficere autem non potest, est
signum maleficii.

S. Thomas Moors, medicinable receipt etc. Aliter.
But Sir Th. Moore has such a cure in this matter, as I am ashamed to write,
either in Latin or English: for in filthy bawdery it passes all the tales
that ever I heard. But that is rather a medicine to procure generation, than
the cure of witchcraft, though it serve both turns.

Item, when ones instrument of venery is bewitched, certain characters must be
written in virgin-parchment, celebrated and holyed by a popish priest; and
thereon also must the 141. Psalm be written, and bound ad viri fascinati coxam.

Item, one Katherine Lo (having a husband not so readily disposed that way as
she wished him to be) made a waxen image of the likeness of her husbands
bewitched member, Aliter.
and offered it up at S. Anthonies altar; so as, through the holiness of the
mass it might be sanctified, to be more courageous; and of better disposition
and ability, etc.

CHAP. IX.
A strange cure done to one that was molested with Incubus.

NOw being wearied with the rehearsal of so many lecheries most horrible, and
very filthy and fabulous actions and passions to witches^ together with the
spirit Incubus, I will end with a true story taken out of Jason Pratensis,
which though it be rude, yet it is not altogether so unclean as the rest. Iaso
Pratensis de ^erebrimorbo, ca. 16.


There came (says he) of late a mass priest unto me, making pittious moan,
and saying, that if I help him not, he should be undone, and utterly
over-thrown; so great was his infirmity: for (says he) I was wont to be fair
and fat, and of an excellent complexion; and lo how I look, being now a very
ghost consisting of skin and bone, etc. What is the matter (quoth Jason?) I
will show you sir, said the priest. There comes unto me, almost every night, a
certain woman, unknown unto me, and lies so heavy upon my breast, that I
cannot setch my breath, neither have any power to cry, neither do my hands
serve me to shove her away, nor my feet to go from her. I smild (quoth Jason)
and told him that he was vexed with a disease called Incubus, or the mare; and
the residue was fantasy and vain imagination. The priest is opinionative in
the error of his fantasy.
Nay (said the priest) it cannot be so: for by our blessed lady, I tell you
nothing but that which waking I saw with mine eyes, and felt with mine hands. I
see her when she comes upon me, and strive to repel her; but I am so
infeebled that I cannot: and for remedy I have run about from place to place,
but no help that I could get. At length I went to an old friar that was
counted an odd fellow; and thought to have had help at his hands; but the
devil a whit had I of him; saving that for remedy he willed me to pray to God;
whom I am sure I wearied with my tedious prayers long before. Then went I unto
an old woman, quoth the priest, who was said to be a cunning witch: and she
willed me, that the next morning, about the dawning of the day, I should piss,
and immediately should cover the pis-pot; or stop it with my right netherstock,
and before night the witch should come to visit me. And although, quoth he, the
respect of mine orders somewhat terrified me from the execution of her advise;
yet my necessities diverse ways, and specially my pains moved me to make
trial of her words. And by the mass, quoth the priest, her prophecy fell out
as sure as a club. For a witch came to my house, and complained, of a grief in
her bladder, and that she could not piss. The priest recovered.
But I could neither by fair nor foul means obtain at her hands, that she
would leave molesting me by night; but she keeps her old custom, determining
by these filthy means to dispatch me. I could hardly, said Jason, reclaim him
from this mad humor; but by that time he had been with me three or four times,
he began to comfort himself, and at last perceiving it, he acknoledged his
disease, and recovered the same.

CHAP. X.
A confutation of all the former follyes touching Incubus, which by examples
and proofs of like stuff is showed to be flat knavery, wherein the carnal
copulation with spirits is over-throwne.

THus are lecheries covered with the cloak of Incubus and witchcraft, contrary
to nature and verity: and with these fables is maintained an opinion, that men
have been begotten without carnal copulation, as Hyperius and others write
that Merlin was, Merlin begotten of Incubus.
An. 440;, specially to excuse and maintain the knaveries and lecheries of idle
priests and bawdy monks, and to cover the shame of their lovers and concubines.

And alas, when great learned men have been so abused, with the imagination of
Incubus his carnal society with women, misconstruing the Scriptures, to wit,
the place in Genesis 6. to the seducing of many others; it is the less wonder,
that this error has passed so generally among the common people.

But to use few words herein, I hope you understand that they affirm and say,
that Incubus is a spirit; and I trust you know that a spirit has no flesh nor
bones, etc. and that he neither does eat nor drink. Indeed your gran dames
maids were wont to set a boll of milk before him and his cousine Robin
good fellow, for grinding of malt or mustard, and sweeping the house at
midnight: and you have also heard that he would chase exceedingly, if the maid
or good-wife of the house, having compassion of his nakedness, laid any
clothes for him, besides his mess of white-bread and milk, which was his
standing fee. For in that case he says; What have we here? Hemton hamten, here
will I never more tread nor stampen. Quia humor spermaticus ex succo alimentari
provenit.


But to proceed in this con^^tation. Where there is no meat eaten, there can be
no feed which thereof is engendered: although it be granted, that Robin could
both eat and drink, as being a cosening idle friar, or some such rogue, that
wanted nothing either belonging to lechery or knavery, etc. Item, where the
genitall members want, there can be no lust of the flesh: neither does nature
give any desire of generation, where there is no propagation or succession
required. And as spirits cannot be greeved with hunger, so can they not be
inflamed with lusts. And if men should live ever, what needed succession or
heirs? For that is but an ordinance of God, to supply the place, the number,
the world, the time, Ad facultatem generandi tam interna quam externa organa
requiruntur.
and specially to accomplish his will. But the power of generation consists
not only in members, but chiefly of vital spirits, and of the heat: which
spirits are never in such a body as Incubus has, being but a body assumed, as
they themselves say. And yet the most part of writers herein affirm, that it
is a palpable and visible body; though all be phansies and fables that are
written hereupon.

CHAP. XI.
That Incubus is a natural disease, with remedies for the same, besides
magical cures herewithall expressed.

What Incubus is, and who be most troubled therewith.
BUt in truth, this Incubus is a bodily disease (as has been said) although it
extend unto the trouble of the mind which of some is called the mare,
oppressing many in their sleep so sore, as they are not able to call for help,
or stir themselves under the burden of that heavy humor which is engendered
of a thick vapor proceeding from the crudity and rawnesse in the stomach; which
ascending up into the head oppresses the brain, insomuch as many are much
infeebled thereby, as being nightly haunted subject therewith. They are most
troubled with this di^ease, that being thereunto, ly right upward; so as, to
turn and ly on the one side, is present remedy. Likewise, if any hear the
groaning of the party, speak unto him, so as he wake him, he is presently
releeved. Howbeit, there are magical cures for it; as for example.

S. George, S. George, our ladies knight.
He walked by day, so did he by night;
Until such time as he her found,
He her beat and he her bound,
Until her troth she to him plight,
She would not come to her that night.
Whereas S. George our ladies knight, was named three times S. George.

Item, hang a stone over the afflicted persons bed, which stone has naturally
such a hole in it, as wherein a string may be put through it, and so he hanged
over the diseased or bewitched party: be it man, woman, or horse.

Item, M. malefie. par. 2. quae. 2. cap. 1. col. 2. Leon. Fuchsius de curandi
ratione.
you shall read in M. Malefie. that excommunic^tion is very notable, and better
than any charm for this purpose. There are also other verses and charms for
this disease devised, which is the common cloak for the ignorance of bad
physicians. But Leonard Fuchsius in his first book and 31 chapter, does not
only describe this disease, and the causes of it; but also seetteth down very
learnedly the cure thereof, to the utter confusion of the witch-mongers folly
in this behalf. Hyperius being much bewitched and blinded in this matter of
witchcraft, hovering about the interpretation of Genesis 6. from whence the
opinion of Incubus and Succubus is extorted, Viderunt filii Dei filias hominum,
quod elegantes essent, acceperunt sibi in uxores ex omnibus, quas elegerant,
etc. seems to maintain upon hear say, that absurd opinion; and yet in the
end is driven to conclude thus, to wit: Of the evil spirits Incubus and
Succubus there can be no firm reason or proof brought out of Scriptures, using
these very words; Hec ut probabilia dicta sunto, quandoquidem scripturarum
praesidio hac in causa destituimur. As if he should say, Take this as spoken
probably; to wit, by humane reason, because we are destitute of Scriptures to
maintain the goodness of the cause.

Tertullian and Sulpitius Severus do interpret Filios Dei in that place to be
angels, Turtull, in libro de habitu muliebri. Sulp. Sever. in epitome hist.
sacr.
or evil spirits, and to have been enamored with the beauty of those wenches,
and finally, begat giants by them. Which is thoroughly confuted by Chrysostom,
Hom. 22. in Genesis but specially by the circumstance of the text.

CHAP. XII.
The censure of G. Chaucer upon the knavery of Incubus.

NOw will I (after all this long discourse of abominable cloked knaveries)
here conclude with certain of G. Chaucers verses, who as he smelt out the
absurdities of popery, so found he the priests knavery in this ma^ter of
Incubus, and (as the time would suffer him) he decided their folly and falsehood
in this wise: For now the great charity and prayers Geffs. Chau. in the
beginning of the wife of Bath^ tale.

Of limitors and other holy friars,
That searchen every land and every stream
As thick as motes in the sunne-beame,
Blissing halles, kitchens, chambers and bowers,
Cities, borroughes, castles and high towers,
Thropes, barnes, sheep-pens, and dairies.
This makes that there been now no fairies;
For there as wont to walken was an elfe,
There walks now the limitor himself,
In under meals, and in mornings,
And says his mattens and his holy things
As he goes in his limitation,
Women may go safely up and down,
In every bush, and under every tree,
There is none other Incubus but he, etc.


The Fifth Book.
CHAP. I.
Of transformations, ridiculous examples brought by the adversaries for the
confirmation of their foolish doctrine.

NOw that I may with the very absudities, contained in their own authors, and
even in their principal doctors and last writers, confound them that maintain
the transubstantiations of witches; I will show you certain proper stuff, I.
Bod. lib. 2. de demon. cap. 5.
which Bodin (their chief champion of this age) has gathered out of M. Mal.
and others, whereby he labors to establish this impossible, incredible, and
supernatural, or rather unnatural doctrine of transubstantiation.

First, I. Bodin abuses scripture^ to prove a ly. Pudendis tunc primum
erumpentibus.
as touching the devil ( Bodin says) that he does most properly and commonly
transform himself into a goat, confirming that opinion by the 33. and 34. of
Esaias: where there is no one tittle sounding to any such purpose. Howbeit, he
sometimes allows the devil the shape of a blackmoore, and as he says he
used to appear to Mawd Cruse, Ka^e Darey, and Ione Harviller But I marvel,
whether the devil creates himself, when he appears in the likeness of a
man; or whether God createh him, when the devil wishes it. As for witches, he
says they specially transsubstantiate themselves into wolves, and them whom
they bewitch into asses: though elsewhere he differ somewhat herein from
himself. But though he affirm, that it may be naturally brought to pass,
that a girl shall become a boy; and that any femall may be turned into the
male: yet he says the same has no affinity with Lycanthropia; wherein he
says also, that men are wholly transformed, and cites infinite examples
hereof. First, that one Garner in the shape of a woolfe killed a girl of the
age of twelve years, and did eat up her arms and legs, and carried the rest
home to his wife. Item, that Peter Burge^, and Michael Werdon, having turned
themselves with anointment into wolves, Io Wier. lib. 6. de mag. ca. 12.
killed, and finally did ^at up an infinite number of people. Which ly Wierus
does sufficiently confute. But until you see and read that, consider whether
Peter could eat raw flesh without sur^etting, specially flesh of his own kind.
Item, that there was an arrow shot into a wolves thigh, who afterward being
turned into his former shape of a man, was found in his bed, with the arrow in
his thigh, which the archer that shot it knew very well. Item, that another
being Lycanthropus in the form of a wolf, had his wolves feet cut off, and in
a moment he became a man without hands or feet. I. Bodinus, mendaci^rum helue.


He accuses also one of the mightiest prince in christendom, even of ^ate
days, to be one of those kind of witches, so as he could* when ^e ^ist, turn
himself to a wolf, affirming that he was espied etc oftentimes seen to
perform that villainy; because he would be counted the king of all witches. He
says that this transubstantiation is most common in Greece, and through out
all Asia, as merchant strangers have reporteed to him. For Anno Domini. 1542,
when Sultan Solimon reigned, there was such force and multitude of these kind
of wolves in Constantinople, that the Emperor drove together in one stock 150.
of them, which departed out of the city in the presence of all the people.

A warm season to swim in
To persuade us the more thoroughly herein, he says, that in Livon^a, yearly
(about the end of December) a certain knave or devil warns all the witches
in the country to come to a certain place: if they fail, the devil comes
and whippeth them with an iron rod; so as the print of his lashes remain^ upon
their bodies for ever. The captain witch leads the way through a great poole
of water; I marvel that they forsake not the devil, who punishes them so
sore* ywis they get not so much at his hands.
many millions of witches swim after. They are no sooner passed through that
water, but they are all transformed into wolves, and fly upon and devour both
men, women, cattle, etc. After twelve days they return through the same
water, and so receive humane shape again.

Item, that there was one Bajanu^ a Jew, being the son of Simeo^, which
could, when he list, turn himself into a wolf; and by that means could
escape the force and danger of a whole army of men* Which thing (says Bodin)
is wonderful: but yet (says he) it is much more marvelous, that men will not
believe it. For many Poets affirm it; yea, and if you look well into the
matter (says he) you shall find it easy to do. Item, he says, that as
natural wolves persecute beasts; so do these magical wolves devour men,
Leviti. 5.
women and children. And yet God sa^^^ to the people, I trow, and not to the
cattle of Israel; If you observe no^ my commandments, Deuteronomy. ^2.
I will send among you the beasts of the f^eld, which shall devour both you
and your cattle. Item, I will send the teeth (...) beasts upon you. Where is
Bodins distinction now become? He ne^^^ says, I will send witches in the
likeness of wolves, etc. to devour you or your cattle. Nevertheless, Bodin
says it is a clear case: for the m^^^ter was disputed upon before Pope Leo the
seventh, and by him all the matters were judged possible: and at that time,
says he, were the transformations of Lucian and Apuleius made canonical.

Furthermore he says, that through this art they are so cunning that (...) man
can apprehend them, S^asas a witch could not ^e apprehended, and why?

I. Bodin. Mal. mal^f. John* Bodin. Mal. Mal^f. Barth. Spin. etc. Mal. mal^f.
part. 3.

An error about Lycanthropia.


but when they are a sleep. Item, he named another witch, that, a^ M. Mal.
says, could not be caught, because he would transform himself into a mouse,
and run into every little holes till at length he was killed coming out of
the hole of a ^amme in a windo^ which indeed is as possible, as a camel to go
through a needles eye. Ite^ he says, that diverse witches at V^rnon, turned
themselves into cats, an^ both committed and received much hurt. But at
Argentine there was ^ wonderful matter done, by three witches of great wealth,
who transform^ing themselves into three cats, assaulted a faggot-maker: who
having (...) them all with a faggot-sticke, was like to have bin put to death.
But he was miraculously delivered, and they worthily punished; as the story
says, from whence Bodin had it.

After a great many other such beastly fables, he inveyeth against such
Physicians, as say that Lycanthropia is a disease, and not a transformation.
Item, he maintains, as sacred and true, all Homers fables of Circes an^
Ulysses his companions: inveying against Chrysostom, who rightly interprets
Homers meaning to be, that Ulysses his people were by the harlot Circes made in
their brutish manners to resemble swine.

But least some Poets fables might be thought lies (whereby the witch-mongers
arguments should quail) he maintains for true the most part of Ovids
Metamorphosis, and the greatest absurdities and impossibilities in all that
book: marry he thinks some one tale therein may be fained. Finally, he
confirms all these toies by the story of Nabuchadnezzar. And because (says
he) Nabuchadnezzar continued seven years in the shape of a beast; therefore may
witches remain so long in the form of a beast; having in all the mean time,
the shape, hair, voice, strength, agility, swiftness, food and excrements of
beasts, and yet reserve the minds and souls of women or men. Howbeit, S.
Augustine (whether to confute or confirm that opinion judge you) says;
August. lib. 8. de civit. Dei. cap. 18. Idem, lib. de. spiritu and anima, cap.
26.
Non est credendum, humanum corpus daemonum art vel potestate in bestialia
lineamenta converti posse: We may not believe that a man's body may be altered
into the lineaments of a beast by the devils art or power. Item, Bodin ^aith,
that the reason why witches are most commonly turned into wolves, is; because
they usually eat children, as wolves eat cattle. Item, that the cause why
other are truly turned into asses, is; for that such have been desirous to
understand the secrets of witches. Why witches are turned into cats, Ironia.
he alleges no reason, and therefore (to help him forth with that paraphrase)
I say, that witches are cursed queanes, and many times scratch one another, or
their neighbors by the faces, and therefore perchance are turned into cats.
But I have put twenty of these witch-mongers to silence with this one question;
to wit, Whether a witch that can turn a woman into a cat, etc. can also turn a
cat into a woman?

CHAP. II.
Absurd reasons brought by Bodin, and such others, for confirmation of
transformations.

THese Examples and reasons might put us in doubt, that every Ass, wolf, or
cat that we see, were a man, a woman, or a child. I marvel that no man uses
this distinction in the definition of a man. But to what end should one dispute
against these creations and recreations; when Bodin washes away all our
arguments with one word, confessing that none can create any thing but God;
acknowledging also the force of the canons, and embracing the opinions of such
Divines, as write against him in this behalf? Yea he does now (contrary to
himself elsewhere) affirm, that the devil cannot alter his form. I. Bod. lib
2. de mag demon. cap. 6.
And lo, this is his distinction, Non essentialis forma (id est ratio) sed
figura solum permutatur: The essential form (to wit, reason) is not changed,
but the shape or figure. And thereby he proves it easy enough to create men
or beasts with life, so as they remain without reason. Howbeit, I think it is
an easier matter, to turn Bodins reason into the reason of an ass, then his
body into the shape of a sheep: which he says is an easy matter; because Lots
wife was turned into a stone by the Devil. Genesis 19, 24. and 26. and 27.
Whereby he shows his gross ignorance. As though God that commanded Lot upon
pain of death not to look back, who also destroyed the city of Sodom at that
instant, had not also turned her into a salt stone. And as though all this
while God had been the devils drudge, to go about this business all the night
before, and when a miracle should be wrought, the devil must be fain to do it
himself.

I. Bod. lib. de demon. 2. cap. 20. M. Mal. pa. 1. quae. 9. I. Bod. lib. de.
demon. 2. ca. 1.
Item, he affirms, that these kind of transfigurations are more common with
them in the west parts of the world, then with us here in the east. Howbeit,
this note is given withal; that that is meant of the second persons, and not
of the first: to wit, of the bewitched, and not of the witches. For they can
transform themselves in every part of the world, whether it be east, west,
north or south. Marry he says, that spirits and devils vex men most in the
north-countries, as Norway, Finland, etc. and in the western islands, as in
the west India: but among the heathen specially, and wheresoever Christ is not
preached. And that is true, though not in so foolish, gross, and corporal a
sense as Bodin takes it. One notable instance of a witches cunning in this
behalf touched by Bodin in the chapter aforesaid, I thought good in this place
to repeat: he takes it out of M. Mal. which tale was delivered to Sprenger by
a knight of the Rhodes, being of the order of S. Jones at Jerusalem and it
follows thus. M. mal. part. 2. quae. 2 cap. 4.


CHAP. III.
Of a man turned into an ass, and returned again into a man by one of Bodins
witches: S. Augustines opinion thereof.

IT happened in the City of Salamin, in the kingdom of Cyprus (wherein is a
good haven) that a ship laden with merchandise stayed there for a short space.
In the mean time many of the Soldiers and Ma^riners went to shore, to provide
fresh victuals. Among which number a certain English man, being a sturdy young
fellow, went to a woman's house, a little way out of the city, and not far
from the sea side, to see whether she had any eggs to sell. Who perceiving him
to be a lusty young fellow, What the devil should the witch mean to make
choice of the English man?
a stranger, and far from his country (so as upon the loss of him there would
be the less miss or inquiry) she considered with her self how to destroy him;
and willed him to stay there a while, whilst she went to fetch a few eggs for
him. But she tarryed long, so as the young man called unto her, desiring her to
make haste: for he told her that the tide would be spent, and by that means
his ship would be gone, and leave him behind. Howbeit after some detracting of
time, she brought him a few eggs, willing him to return to her, if his ship were
gone when he came. The young fellow returned toward his ship: but before he
went abroad, he would needs eat an egg or twain to satisfy his hunger, and
within short space he became dumb and out of his wits, as he afterward said.
When he would have entered into the ship, the mariners be^ him back with a
cudgel, saying; What a murren lacks the ass? Wh^^ther the devil will this
ass? A strange metamorphosis, of body, but not of mind.
The ass or young man, I cannot tell by which name I should tea^m him, being
many times repelled, and understanding their words that called him ass,
considering that he could speak never a word, and yet could understand every
body; he thought that he was bewitched by the woman, at whose house he was. And
therefore when by no means he could get into the boat, but was driven to
tarry and see her departure; being also beaten from place to place, as an ass:
he remembered the witches words, and the words of his own fellows that called
him ass, and returned to the witches house, in whose service he remained by
the space of three years, doing nothing with his hands all that while, but
carried such burdens as she laid on his back; having only this comfort, that
although he were reputed an ass among strangers and beasts, yet that both
this vvitch, and all other witches knevv him to be a man.

After three years were passed over, in a morning betimes he went to town
before his dame; who upon some occasion, of like to make water, stayed a
little behind. In the mean time being near to a church; he heard a little
saccaring bell ring to the elevation of a morrow mass, and not daring to go
into the church, Note th devotion of the ass.
least he should have been beaten and driven out with cudgels, in great
devotion he fell down in the churchyard, upon the knees of his hinder-legs,
and did lift his forefeet over his head, as the priest does hold the sacrament
at the elevation. Which prodigious sight when certain merchants of Genua
espied, and with wonder beheld; anon comes the witch with a cudgel in her
hand, beating forth the ass. And because, as it has been said, such kinds of
witchcrafts are very usual in those parts, the merchants aforesaid made such
means as both the ass and the witch were attached by the judge. And she
being examined and set upon the rack, confessed the whole matter, and promised
that if she might have liberty to go home, she would restore him to his old
shape: and being dismissed, she did accordingly. So as notvvithstanding they
apprehended her again; and burned her: and the young man returned into his
country with a joyful and merry heart.

Upon the advantage of this story M. Mal. Bodin, August. lib. 18. de civi. Dei.
cap. 17. and 18.
and the residue of the vvitchmongers triumph; and specially because S.
Augustine subscribeth thereunto; or at the least to the very like. Which I must
confess I find too common in his books, insomuch as I judge them rather to be
foisted in by some fond papist or witchmonger, than so learned a man's doings.
The best is, that he himself is no eyewitness to any of those his tales; but
speaks only by report; wherein he utters these words, to wit, that it were
a point of great incivility, A^ the alps in Arcadia.
etc. to discredit* so many and so certain reports. And in that respect he
justifies the corporal transfigurations of Ulysses his mates, through the
witchcraft of Circes: and that foolish fable of Praestantius his father, who,
he says, did eat provender and hay among other horses, being himself turned
into an horse. Yea he veryfieth the starkest ly that ever was invented, of the
two alewives that used to transform all their guests into horses, and to sell
them away at markets and faires. And therefore I say with Cardanus that how
much Augustine says he has seen with his eyes, so much I am content to
believe. Card. de. var. rerum. lib. 15. cap. 80. August. Li. 18. de ciuit. Dei.
Howbeit S. Agustine concludes against Bodin. For he affirms these
tra^ssustrutiations to be but fantastical, and that they are not according to
the verity; but according to the appearance. And yet I cannot allow of such
appearances made by witches, or yet by devils* for I find no such power given
by God to any creature. And I would wit of S. Augustine, where they became,
whom Bodins transformed wolve^ devoured But?

o quam Credula men's hominis, and erectae fabulis aures!
Englished by Abraham Fleming.
Good Lord! how light of credit is
the wavering mind of man!
How unto tales and lies his ears
attentive all they can*
General councels, and the Popes canons, which Bodin so regards do condemn
and pronounce his opinions in this behalf to be absurd; and the residue of
witchmongers, with himself in the number, to be worse than infidels. And these
are the very words of the canons, which elsewhere I have more largely
repeated; Whosoever believes, th^^ any creature can be made or changed into
better or worse, Canon. 26. quae. 5. episcopi ex con. acquir. etc.
or transformed into any other shape, or into any other similitude, by any
other th^^ by God himself the creator of all things, without all doubt is an
infidel and worse than a pagan. And there withal this reason is rendered, to
wi^^ because they attribute that to a creature, which only belongs to God
the creator of all things.

CHAP. IV.
A summary of the former fable, with a refutation thereof, after (...)
examination of the same.

COncerning the verity or probability of his interlude, betwixt Bod^^ M. Mal.
the witch, the ass, the mass, the merchants, the inquis^^tors, the
tormentors, etc. First I wonder at the miracle of transubstantiation; Secondly
at the impudency of Bodin and James Sprenger, for affirming so gross a ly,
devised belike by the knight of the Rhodes, to make a fool of Sprenger, and an
ass of Bodin; Thirdly, that the ass had no more wit than to kneel down and
hold up his forefeet to a piece of starch of flower, which neither would, nor
could, nor did help him, Fourthly* that the mass not reform that which the
witch transformed; Fifthly, that the merchants, the inquisitors, and the
tormentors, could nor either severally or jointly do it, His shape was in the
woods: where else should it be? Mal. malef. par. 1. quae. 2.
but refer the matter to the witches courtes^^ and good pleasure.

But where was the young man's own shape all these three years, wherein he was
made an ass? It is a certain and a general rule, that two substantial
forms cannot be in one subject simul and semel, both at once which is
confessed by themselves. The form of the beast occupied some place in the air,
and so I think should the form of a man do also. For to bring the body of a
man, without feeling, into such a thine airy nature, as that it can neither be
seen nor felt, it may well be unlikely, but it is very impossible; for the air
is inconstant, and continues not in one place. So as this airy creature would
soon be carried into another region; In my discourse of spirits and devils,
being the 17. book of this volume
as else where I have largely proved. But indeed our bodies are visible,
sensitive, and passive, and are endued with many other excellent properties,
which all the devils in hell are not able to alter; neither can one hair of
our head perish, or fall away, or be transformed, without the special
providence of God Almighty.

But to proceed unto the probability of this story. What luck was it, that this
young fellow of England, landing so lately in those parts, and that old woman
of Cyprus, being both of so base a condition, should both understand one
another communication; England and Cyprus being so many hundred miles distant,
and their languages so far differing? I am sure in these days: wherein
traffic is more used, and learning in more price; few young or old mariners
in this realm can either speak or understand the language spoken at Salamin
in Cyprus, which is a kind of Greek; and as few old women there can speak our
language. But Bodin will say, You hear, that at the inquisitors commandment,
and through the tormentors correction, she promised to restore him to his own
shape: and so she did, as being thereunto compelled. I answer, that as the
whole story is an impious fable; so this assertion is false, and disagree^ble
to their own doctrine, which maintains, that the witch does nothing but by
the permission and leave of God. For if she could do or undo such a thing at
her own pleasure, or at the commandment of the inquisitors, or for fear of the
tormentors, or for love of the party, or for remorse of conscience: then is it
not either by the extraordinary leave, nor yet by the like direction of God;
except you will make him a con^ederate with old witches. I for my part wonder
most, how they can ^urne and toss a man's body so, and make it smaller and
greater, to wit, like a mouse, Dan. in dialog. cap. 3. August. lib. de civit.
Dei. cap. 17.18.
or like an ass, etc. and the man all this while to feel no pain. And I am
not alone in this maze: for Danaeus a special maintainer of their follyes
says, that although Augustine and Apuleius do write very credible of these
matters; yet will he never believe, that witches can change men into other
forms; as asses, apes, wolves, bears, mice, etc.

CHAP. V.
That the body of a man cannot be turned into the body of a beast by a witch,
is proved by strong reasons, scriptures, and authorities.

BUt was this man an ass all this while? Or was this ass a man? Bodin says
(his reason only reserved) he was truly transubstantiated into an ass; so as
there must be no part of a man, but reason remaining in this ass. and yet
Hermes Trismegistus thinks he has good authority and reason (...) say;
Hermer Trismeg. in suo Periandro.
Aliud corpus quam humanum non capere animam humanam; nec fas esse in corpus
animae ratione carentis animam rationalem corruere; that is: An humane soul
cannot receive any other than an humane body, nor yet can light into a body
that wants reason of mind. But S. James says; The body without the spirit is
dead. And surely, when the soul is departed from the body, Jam. 2.26. Phili.
1.23.
the life of man is dissolved: and therefore (...) wished to be dissolved, when
he would have been with Christ. The body of man is subject to diverse kinds of
agues, sicknesses, and infirmities, whereunto an asses body is not inclined:
and man's body must be fed with bread, etc. and not with hay. Bodins asse-headed
man must either eat hay or nothing: as appears in the story. Man's body also
is subject unto death, and has his days numbered. If this fellow had died in
the mean time, as his hour might have been come, for any thing the devils, the
witch, or Bodin knew; I marvel then what would have become of this ass, or
how the witch could have restored him to shape, or whether he should have risen
at the day of judgment in an asses body and shape. For Paul says, that that
very body which is sown and buried a natural body is raised a spiritual
body. 1. Cor. 15.44.
The life of Jesus is made manifest in our ^^rall flesh, and not in the flesh
of an ass.

God has endued every man and every thing with his proper nature substance,
form, qualities, and gifts, and directs their ways. ^ for the ways of an
ass, he takes no such care: howbeit, they have so their properties and
substance several to themselves. For there is (...) flesh (says Paul) of men,
another flesh of beasts, another of fishes, (...) other of birds. And therefore
it is absolutely against the ordinance (...) God (who has made me a man) that
I should fly like a bird, 1 Cor. 15.39.
or (...) like a fish, or creep like a worm, or become an ass in shape: (...)
much as if God would give me leave, I cannot do it; for it were con^ry to his
own order and decree, and to the constitution of any body which he has made.
Psalm. 119.
Yea the spirits themselves have their laws and limits prescribed, beyond the
which they cannot pass one hairs breadth; otherwise God should be contrary to
himself: which is far from him. N^^^ther is Gods omnipotency hereby
qualified, but the devils impotency manifested, who has none other power, but
that which God from (...) beginning has appointed unto him, consonant to his
nature and substance. He may well be restrained from his power and will, but
beyond the^^ he cannot pass, as being Gods minister, no further but in that
which has from the beginning enabled him to do: which is, that he being
spirit, may with Gods leave and ordinance viciate and corrupt the (...) and
will of man; wherein he is very diligent.

What a beastly assertion is it, that a man, whom GOD has made according to
his own similitude and likeness, should be by a witch turn into a beast? What
an impiety is it to affirm, that an asses body is (...) temple of the Holy
Ghost? Or an ass to be the child of God, and (...) to be his father, as it is
said of man? Which Paul to the Corinthia^ divinely confuteth, 1 Cor. 6.19.
verse, 15. etc. v^rse, 2. verse, 13.
who says, that our bodies are the members of Christ. In the which we are to
glorify God, for the body is for the Lord. (...) the Lord is for the body.
Surely he means not for an asses body, by this time I hope appears: in such
wise as Bodin may go hide him (...) shame; especially when he shall understand,
that even into these our bodies, which God has framed after his own likeness,
he has also breathed that spirit, which Bodin says is now remaining within an
asses body, which God has so subjected in such servility under the foot of
man; of whom God is so mindful, Psalm. 8. ^^ verses 5, 6, 7, 8.
that he has made him little lower than angels, yea than himself, and crowned
him with glory and worship, and made him to have dominion over the works of his
hands, as having put all things under his feet, all sheep and oxen, yea wolves,
asses, and all other beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, the fishes of
the sea, etc. Bodins Poet, Ovid, whose Metamorphosis makes so much for him,
says to the overthrow of this fantastical imagination: Os homini sublime
dedit, coelumque videre
Iussit, and erectos ad sydera tollere vultus,
The effect of which verses in this;
The Lord did set man's face so hie,
That he the heavens might behold,
And look up to the starry sky,
To see his wonders manifold.


Now, if a witch or a devil can so alter the shape of a man, as contrarily to
make him look down to hell, like a beast; Gods works should not only be defaced
and disgraced, but his ordinance should be wonderfully ^tered, and thereby
confounded.

CHAP. VI.
The witchmongers objections, concerning Nabuchadnezzar answered, and their
error concerning Lycanthropia confuted.

MAlleus Maleficarum, Bodin, and many other of them that maintain witchcraft,
triumph upon the story of Nabuchadnezzar as though Circes had transformed him
with her sorceries into an ox, as she did others into swine, Their groundwork
is as sure as to hold a quick eele by the tale. Dan. 4.
etc. I answer, that he was neither in body nor shape transformed at all,
according to their gross imagination; as appears both by the plain words of
the text, and also by the opinions of the best interpreters thereof: but that
he was, for his beastly government and conditions, thrown out of his kingdom
and banished for a time, and driven to hide himself in the wilderness,
therein exile to lead his life in a^beastly sort, among beasts of the field,
and fowls of the air (for by the way I tell you it appears by the text, that
he was rather turned into the shape of a foul than of a beast) until he
rejecting his beastly conditions, was upon his repentance and amendment called
home, and restored unto his kingdom. Howbeit, this (by their confession) was
neither devils nor witches doing; but a miracle wrought by God, whom alone I
acknowledge to be able to bring to pass such works at his pleasure. Wherein I
would know what our witch-mongers have gained.

Cor. Agrip. de vanit scient. cap. 44.
I am not ignorant that some write, that after the death of Nabuchadnezzar, his
son Evilmorodath gave his body to the ravens to be devoured, least afterward
his father should arise from death, who of a beast became a man again. But
this tale is meeter to have place in the Cabalisticall art, to wit, among
unwritten verities than here. To conclude, I say that the transformations,
which these witchmongers do so rave and rage upon, is (as all the learned sort
of Physicians affirm) a disease proceeding partly from melancholy, whereby
many suppose themselves to be wolves, or such ravening beasts. For Lycanthropia
is of the ancient Physicians called Lupina melancholia, or Lupina insania. I.
Wierus declares very learnedly, the cause, the circumstance, and the cure of
this disease. I have written the more herein; Paul. Aeginet. li. 3. c. 16.
Aetins. lib. 6. cap. 11. I. Wier. de praest. them. lib. 4. cap. 23.
because hereby great princes and potentates, as well as poor women and
innocents, have been de^amed and accounted among the number of witches.

CHAP. VII.
A special objection answered concerning transportations, with the consent of
diverse writers thereupon.

FhOr the maintenance of witches transportations, they object the words of the
Gospel, where the devil is said to take up Christ, and to set him on a
pinnacle of the temple, Math. 4.8. Luke 3.9.
and on a mountain, etc. Which if he had done in manner and form as they
suppose, it follows not therefore that witches could do the like; nor yet
that the devil would do it for them at their pleasure; for they know not their
thoughts, neither can otherwise communicate with them. But I answer, that if it
were so grossly to be understood, Answered to the former objection.
as they imagine it, yet should it make nothing to their purpose. For I hope
they will not say, that Christ had made any ointemnts or entered into any league
with the devil, and by virtue thereof was transported from out of the
wilderness, unto the top of the temple of Jerusalem; or that the devil could
have masteries over his body, whose soul he could never lay hold upon;
especially when he might (with a beck of his finger) have called unto him, and
have had the assistance of many legions of angels. Neither (as I think) will
they presume to make Christ partaker of the devils purpose and sin in that
behalf. Mat. 26.53.
If they say; This was an action wrought by the special providence of God, and
by his appointment, that the scripture might be fulfilled, then what gain our
witchmongers by this place; First, for that they may not produce a particular
example to prove so general an argument. And again, if it were by Gods
special providence and appointment; then why should it not be done by the hand
of God, as it was in the story of Job? Or if it were Gods special purpose and
pleasure, that there should be so extraordinary a matter brought to pass by
the hand of the devil; Job. 1.11. Job. 2.5.
could not God have given to the wicked angel extraordinary power, and
clothed him with extraordinary shape; whereby he might be made an instrument
able to accomplish that matter, as he did to his angel that carried Abacuck to
Daniell, and to them that he sent to destroy Sodom? But you shall understand,
that this was done in a vision, and not in verity of action. So as they have a
very cold pull of this place, which is the special piece of Scripture alleged
of them for their transportations.

Hear therefore that Calvine says in his commentary upon that place, in these
words; I. Calvine in harmon Evang. in Math. 4. and Luke 4.
The question is, whether Christ were carried aloft indeed, or whether it were
but in a vision? Many affirm very obstinately, that his body was truly and
really as they say taken up: because they think it too great an indignity for
Christ to be made subject to Satan's illusions. But this objection is easily
washed away. For it is no absurdity to grant all this to be wrought through
Gods permission, or Christ's voluntary subjection: so long as we yield not to
think that he suffered these temptations inwardly, that is to say, in mind or
soul. And that which is afterward set down by the Evangelist, where the devil
showed him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of the same, and that
to be done (as it is said in Luke) in the twinkling of an eye, does more agree
with a vision than with a real action. So far are the very words of Calvin.
Which differ not one syllable nor five words from that which I had written
herein, before I looked for his opinion in the matter. And this* I hope will be
sufficient to overthrow the assertions of them that lay the ground of their
transportations and flying in the air hereupon.

He that will say, that these words; to wit, that Christ was taken up, etc. can
hardly be applied to a vision, let him turn to the prophecy of Ezechiel and
see the self same words used in a vision: saving that where Christ is said to
be taken up by the devil, Ezechiel is taken up, and lifted up, and carried by
the spirit of God, and yet in a vision. But they have less reason that build
upon this sandy rock, Ezec. 3.12. and 14.
the supernatural frame of transubstantiation; as almost all our witching
writers do. For Sprenger and Institor say, that the devil in the liknesse of a
falcon caught him up; Danaeus says, it was in the similitude of a man; others
say, of an angel painted with wings; others, invisible: Ergo the devil can
take (say they) what shape he list. But though some may cavil upon the devils
transforming of himself; Mal. malef.
yet, that either devil or witch can transform or transubstantiate others,
there is no tittle nor color in the Scriptures to help them. If there were
authority for it, and that it were. Past all peradventure, lo, what an easy
matter it is to resubstantiate an ass into a man. For Bodin says upon the
word of Apuleius, that if the ass eat new roses, I. Bod. lib. de them. 3. cap.
5. In Mal. mal.
anise, or bay leaves out of spring water, it will presently return him into a
man. Which thing Sprenger says may be done, by washing the ass in fair water:
yea he shows an instance, where, by drinking of water an ass was turned into
a man.

CHAP. VIII.
The witch-mongers objection concerning the history of Ioh answered.

THese witch-mongers, for lack of better arguments, do many times object Io^
against me; although there be never a word in that story which either makes
for them, or against me: insomuch as there is not the name of a witch mentioned
in the whole book. But (I pray you) what witchmonger now seeing one so
afflicted as Job, would not say he were bewitched, as Job never says? For
first there came a messenger unto him, and said; Thy oxen were plowing, and thy
asses were feeding in their places, Job 1.14
and the Sabeans came violently and took them; yea they have slain thy servants
with the edge of the sword; but I only am escaped to tell thee. And whilst he
was yet speaking, another came, and said; The fire of God is fallen from the
heaven, and has burnt up thy sheep and thy servants, and devoured them; but I
only am escaped to tell thee. And whilst he was yet speaking, verse, 15.
another came, and said, The Chaldeans set out their bands, and fell upon thy
camels, and have taken them, and have slain thy servants with the edge of the
sword; but I only am escaped alone to tell thee. And whilst he was yet
speaking, came another, and said; verse. 16.
Thy sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking wine in their elder
brothers house, and behold there came a great wind from beyond the wilderness,
and smote the four corners of the house, which fell upon thy children, and they
are dead; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee. Besides all this, he was
smitten with biles, from the sole of his foot to the crown of his head. verse,
17. verse, 18. verse, 19. Ibid. ca. 2. verse, 7.
If any man in these days called Job should be by the appoinment or hand of
God thus handled, as this Job was; I warrant you that all the old women in the
country would be called Coran nobis: warrants would be sent out on every side,
public and private inquiry made what old women lately resorted to Jobs house,
or to any of those places, where these misfortunes fell. If any poor old woman
had chanced within two or three months to have borrowed a courtesy of seasing,
or to have fetched from thence a pot of milk, or had she require^ some alms,
and not obtained it at Jobs hand; there had been argument enough to have
brought her to confusion: and to be more certain to have the right witch
apprehended, figures must have been cast, the sive and sheares must have been
set on work; yea rather than the witch should escape, a conjurer must have
earned a little money, a circle must have been made, and a devil raised to
tell the truth: mother Bungy must have been gone unto, and after she had learned
her name, whom Job (...) suspected, she would have confirmed the suspicion with
atificiall accus^^tions; in the end, some woman or other must have been hanged
for it. But as Job said; I. Calvin. in Job cap. 1.21.
Dominus dedit: so said he not; Diabolus vel Lami^, (...) Dominus abstulit.
Which agrees with the tenor of the text, where (...) is written, that the
devil at every of Jobs afflictions desired God to (...) his hand upon him.
Insomuch as Job imputed no part of his calamity unto devils, witches, nor yet
unto conjurers, or their enchantments; a^ we have learned now to do. I. Calvin.
in Job. cap. 2. Sermon. 8. Muscul. in loc. comm. Idem, ibidem.
Neither sinned he, or did God any wrong when he laid it to his charge: but we
dishonor God greatly, when we attribute either the power or propriety of God
the creator unto ^ creature.

Calvine says; We derogate much from Gods glory and omnipotency, when we say
he does but give Satan leave to do it: which is (says he) (...) mock Gods
justice; and so fond an assertion, that if asses could speak they would speak
more wisely than so. For a temporal judge says not to the hangman; I give
thee leave to hang this offender, but commands him to do it. But the
maintainers of witches omnipotency, say; Do you not see how really and palpably
the devil tempted and plagued Job? I answer first, that there is no corporal
or visible devil named nor seen in any part of that circumstance; secondly,
that it was the hand of God that did it: thirdly, that as there is no community
between the person of a witch, and the person of a devil, so was there not any
conference or practice between them in this case.

And as touching the communication betwixt God and the devil, I. Calvine in
his sermon upon Job.
behold what Calvine says, writing or rather preaching of purpose upon that
place, whereupon they think they have so great advantage; When Satan is said to
appear before God, it is not done in some place certain, but the scripture
speaks so to apply it self to our rudeness. Certainly the devil in this
and such like cases is an instrument to work Gods will, and not his own; and
therefore it is an ignorant and an ungodly saying (as Calvine judges it) to
affirm, that God does but permit and suffer the devil: For if Satan were so
at his own liberty (says he) we should be overwhelmed at a sudden. And
doubtless, if he had power to hurt the body, there were no way to resist: for
he would come invisibly upon us, and knock us on the heads; yea he would watch
the best and dispatch them, whilst they were about some wicked act. If they
say; God commands him, no body impugneth them, but that God should give him
leave, I say with Calvine, that the devil is not in such favor with God, as
to obtain any such request at his hands.

And whereas by our witch-mongers opinions and arguments, the witch procures
the devil, and the devil asks leave of God to plague whom the witch is
disposed: I. Calvine in Job. cap. 1. sermon 5. Mal. malef. pa. 1. quaest. 1.
Idem part. 1. quaest. 4.
there is not (as I have said) any such corporal communication between the
devil and a witch, as witch-mongers imagine. Neither is God moved at all at
Satan's suit, who has no such favor or grace with him, as to obtain any thing
at his hands.

But M. Mal. and his friends deny, that there were any witches in Jobs time:
yea the witchm-ongers are content to say, that there were none found to
exercise this are in Christ's time, from his birth to his death, even by the
space of thirty three years. If there had been any (say they) should have been
there spoken of. As touching the authority of the book of Job, there is no
question but that it is very canonical and authentike. Howbeit, many writers,
both of the Jews and others, are of opinion, that Moses was the author of this
book; Note what is said touching the book of Job.
and that he did set it as a looking glass before the people: to the intent
the children of Abraham (of whose race he himself came) might know, that God
showed favor to others that were not of the same line, and be ashamed of their
wickedness: seeing an uncircumcised Painime had so well demeaned himself.
Upon which argument Calvine (though he had written upon the same) says, that
for so much as it is uncertain, whether it were Res gesta or Exempli gratia, we
must leave it in suspense. Nevertheless (says he) let us take that which is
out of all doubt; namely, that the holy ghost has indicted the book, to the end
that the Jews should know that God has had a people always to serve him
throughout the world, even of such as were no Jews, not segregated from other
nations.

Howbeit, I for my part deny not the verity of the story; though indeed I must
confess, that I think there was no such corporal interlude between God, the
devil, and Job, as they imagine: neither any such to all presence and
communication as the witch-mongers conceive and maintain, who are so gross
herein, that they do not only believe but publish so palpable absurdities
concerning such real actions betwi^^ the devil and man, as a wise man would
be ashamed to read, but much more to credit: In legends aurea.
as that S. Dunst^n lead the devil about the house by the nose with a pair of
pinsors or tongs, and made him ^ore so loud, (...) the place rung thereof, etc.
with a thousand the like fables, without which neither the art of popery nor of
witchcraft could stand. But you may see more of this matter elsewhere, where in
few words (which I thought good here to omit, least I should seem to use too
many repetitions) I answer effectually to their cavils about this place.

CHAP. IX.
What several sorts of witches are mentioned in the Scriptures, and how the
word witch is there applied.

BUt what sorts of witches soever M. Mal. or Bodin say there are; (...) spoke
only of four kinds of impious coseners or witches (whereof (...) witch-mongers
old women which dance with the fairies, etc. are none* The first were
Praestigiatores Pharaonis, Praestigiatores Pharaonis.
which (as ^ll divines, both ^^^brews and others conclude) were but coseners
and jugglers, deceiving the Kings eyes with illusions and sleights, and making
false things to appear as true: which nevertheless our witches cannot do. The
^^^cond is Mecasapha, which is she that destroys with poison. The (...) are
such as use sundry kinds of divinations, and hereunto pertain (...) words,
Mecasapha.
Kasam, Onen, Ob, Idoni. The fourth is Habar, to wit: when magicians, or rather
such, Kasam. Onen. Ob. Idoni 4. Habar.
as would be reputed cunning therein, (...) certain secret words, wherein is
thought to be great efficacy.

These are all coseners and abusers of the people in their several kind^^ But
because they are all termed of our translators by the name of witch in the
Bible: thefore the lies of M. Mal and Bodin, and all our old (...) tales are
applied unto these names, and easily believed of the common people, who have
never hitherto been instructed in the understanding (...) these words. In which
respect, I will (by Gods grace) show you (co^^cerning the signification of
them) the opinion of the most learned in o^^ age; specially of Johannes Wierus;
who though he himself were similarly learned in the tongues, yet for his
satisfication and full resolution in the same, he sent for the judgment of
Andr^us Massius, the most ^^^mous Hebrician in the world, and had it in such
sense and order, as I me^^^ to set down unto you. And yet I give you this note
by the way, the witchcraft or enchantment is diversely taken in the scriptures;
Note. 1. Sa. 15.23.
sometime^ nothing tending to such end as it is commonly thought to do. For ^^
Samuel, 15.23. it is all one with rebellion. Iesabel for her idolatrous (...)
is called a witch. Also in the new testament, 2. Re. 9.22. Gal. 3.1. Math. 2.1.
Daniel 4.
even S. Paul says the Galathians are bewitched, because they were seduced and
lead from the true understanding of the Scriptures.

Item sometimes it is taken in good part; as the magicians that came to worship
and offer to Christ; and also where Daniel is said to be an inchanter, yea a
principal inchanter: which title being given him in diverse places of that
story; he never seems to refuse or dislike; but rather entreats for the
pardon and qualification of the rigor toward other inchanters, Dan. 2.8. Acts.
19.
which were mere coseners indeed: as appears in the second chapter of Daniel,
where you may see that the king espied their fetches.

Sometimes such are called conjurers, as being but rogues, and lewd people,
would use the name of Jesus to work miracles, whereby, though they being
faithless could work nothing; yet is their practice condemned by the name of
conjuration. Sometimes jugglers are called witches. Sometimes also they are
called sorcerers, that impugn the gospel of Christ, Genesis 4.18. Exodus 7.13.
etc. Acts 13. Exodus 22. etc Acts 13. Acts 19. Canticles of Solomon chap. 4.
versep. Deuteronomy. 18.2. Ierem. 27. Acts 8.
and seduce others with violent persuasions. Sometimes a murderer with poison
is called a witch. Sometimes they are so termed by the very signification of
their names; as Elima^, which signifies a sorcerer. Sometimes because they
study curious and vain arts. Sometimes it is taken for wounding or grieving of
the heart. Yea the very word Magus, which is Latin for a magician, is
translated a witch; and yet it was heretofore always taken in the good part.
And at this day it is indifferent to say in the English tongue; She is a witch,
or, She is a wise woman.

Sometimes observers of dreams, sometimes sooth sayers, sometimes the
observers of the flying of fowle^, of the meeting of todes, the falling of
salt, etc. are called witches. Sometimes he or she is called a witch, that take
upon them either for gain or glory, to do miracles; and yet can do nothing.
Sometimes they are called witches in common speech that are old, lame, cursed,
or melancholic, as a nickname. But as for our old women, that are said to
hurt children with their eyes or lambs with their looks, or that pull down the
moon out of heaven, or make so foolish a bargain, or do such homage to the
devil; you shall not read in the bible of any such witches, or of any such
actions imputed to them.

The sixth Book.
CHAP. I.
The exposition of this Hebrew word Chasaph, wherein is answer^^ the objection
contained in Exodus 22. to wit: Thou shall not (...) a witch to live, and of
Simon Magus, Acts. 8*

CHasaph, being an Hebrew word, is latined Venefi^^^ and is in English,
poisoning, or witchcraft; if you will so have it. The Hebrew sentence written
in Exodus 22. is by the 70. interpreters translated thus in Greek (...) which
in Latin is, Veneficos (sive) veneficas non retinebitis in vita, in English^
You shall nor suffer any poisoners, Joseph. in Iudeorum antiquit^^.
or (as it is translated^ witches to live. The which sentence Josephus an
Hebrew borne, and man of great estimation, learning and fame, interprets in
this (...) Let none of the children of Israel have any poison that is deadly,
or pr^^pared to any hurtful use. If any be apprehended with such stuff, let
(...) be put to death, and suffer that which he meant to do to them, for wh^^
he prepared it. The Rabbis exposition agrees herewithall. Lex Cor^^^
differs not from this sense, to wit, that he must suffer death; which other
makes, sells, or has any poison to the intent to kill any (...) This word
is found in these places following: Exodus 22.18 Deuteronomy. 18.^^ 2 Samuel 9.22. Dan.
2.2. 2 C^r. 33.6. Esaias 47.9.12. Malach. 3.5. Ierem. 27. Mich. 5.2. Nab. 3.4.
bis. Howbeit, in all our English translations, Chasaph translated, witchcraft.

And because I will avoid prolixity and contention both at once, I (...) admit
that Veneficae were such witches, as with their poisons did (...) hurt among
the children of Israel; and I will not deny that there (...) such until this
day, bewitching men, and making them believe, (...) by virtue of words, and
certain ceremonies, they bring to (...) such mischiefs, Gal. 3.1.
and intoxications, as they indeed accomplish by poiso^^ And this abuse in
cosenage of people, together with the taking of Go^^ name in vain, in many
places of the scripture is reproved, especial^^ by the name of witchcraft,
even where no poisons are. According (...) the sense which S. Paul used to the
Galathians in these words, where ^^ shows plainly, that the true
signification of witchcraft is cosenage; ye foolish Galathians (says he) who
has bewitched you? to wit, cosened or abused you, making you believe a thing
which is neither so (...) so. Whereby he means not to ask of them, who has
with charme^ etc. or with poisons deprived them of their health, Job. 15.12.
Acts 8.9.
life, cattle, or chil^dren, etc. bu^ who has abused or cosened them, to make
them belee^^ lies. This phrase is alsoused by Job. 15. But that we may be
througly resolved of the true meaning of this phrase used by Paul, Gal. 3. let
us examined the description of a notable witch called Simon Magus, made by S.
Luke. There was (says he) in the city of Samaria, a certain man called Simon
which used witchcraft, and bewitched the people of Samaria, saying that he
himself was some great man. I demand, in what other thing here do we see any
witchcraft, than that he abused the people, making them believe he could work
miracles, whereas in truth he could do no such thing; as manifestly may appear
in the 13. and 19. verses of the same chapter: where he wondered at the
miracles wrought by the apostles, and would have purchased with money the power
of the Holy Ghost to work wonders.

It will be said, Acts 8, 11.
the people had reason to believe him, because it is written, that he of long
time had bewitched them with sorceries But let the bewitched Galathians be a
warning both to the bewitched Samaritans, and to all other that are cosened or
bewitched through false doctrine, or legierdemaine; least while they attend to
such fables and lies, they be brought into ignorance, and so in time be led
with them away from God. And finally, let us all abandon such witches and
coseners, as with Simon Magus set themselves in the place of God, boasting that
they can do miracles, expound dreams, foretell things to come, raise the dead,
1 Reg. 8.39. Math. 9.4.12.25.22 Acts 1 24. and 15.8. Romans 8.27. Mark. 2. Luke
6.17. and 11. and 9. Joh. 1. and 2. and 6. and 13. Apoc. 2. and 3. Luk 11.29.
Eccl. 34.5. Eccl. 348. Levi. 19.31.
etc. which are the works of the Holy Ghost, who only searches the heart and
reins, and only works great wonders, which are now stayed and acomplished
in Christ, in whom who so steadfastly believes shall not need to be by such
means resolved or confirmed in his doctrine and gospel. And as for the
unfaithful, they shall have none other miracle showed unto them, but the sign
of Jonas the prophet.

And therefore I say, whatsoever they be that with Simon Magus take upon them
to work such wonders, by sooth-saying, sorcery, or witchcraft, are but liers,
deceivers, and coseners, according to Syrachs saying; Sorcerie, witchcraft,
sooth-saying, and dreams, are but vanity, and the law shall be fulfilled
without such lies. God commanded the people, that they should not regard them
that wrought with spirits, nor soothsayers: for the estimation that was
attributed unto them, offended God.

CHAP. II.
The place of Deuteronomie expounded, whrein are recited all kind of witches;
also their opinions confuted, which hold that they can work such miracles as
are imputed unto them. Deuteronomy. 18.11.10.


THe greatest and most common objection is, that if there were not some, which
could work such miraculous or supernatural fears, by themselves, or by their
devils, it should not have been said; Let none be found among you, that makes
his son or his daughter to go through the fire, of that uses witch craft, or
is a regarder of times, or a marker of the flying of fowls, or a sorcerer, or
a charmer, or that counsels with spirits, or a sooth-sayer, or that asks
counsel of the dead, or (as some translate it) that raises the dead. But as
there is no one place in the scripture that says they can work miracles, so
it shall be easy to prove, that these were all coseners, every one abusing the
people in his several kind; Esaias, 42.8. Ps. 24.8.10.
and are accursed of God. Not that they can do all such things indeed, as there
is expressed; but for that they take upon them to be the mighty power of God,
and to do that which is the only wo^^ of him, seducing the people, and
blaspheming the name of God, when will not give his glory to any creature,
being himself the king of glory and omnipotency.

First I ask, what miracle was wrought by their passing through the fire?
Truly it cannot be proved that any effect followed; but that the people were
bewitched, to suppose their sins to be purged thereby; (...) the Spaniards
think of scourging and whipping themselves. So as Gods power was imputed to
that action, and so forbidden as an idolatrous sorcery. What wonders works
the regarder of times? What other devil deals he withal, than with the
spirit of superstition? Does he not deceive himself and others, and therefore
is worthily condemned for (...) witch? What spirit uses he, which marketh the
flying of fowls? Nevertheless, he is here condemned as a practiser of
witchcraft; because he coseneth the people, and takes upon him to be a
prophet; impi^^^ly referring Gods certain ordinances to the flittering feathers
and (...) ways of a bird? The like effects produces sorcery, charming
consultation with spirits, sooth-saying, and consulting with the dead (...)
every of the which Gods power is obscured, his glory defaced, and (...)
commandment infringed. Deuteronomy. 18.14. Sap. 3.1. Luk 16.23. Joh 14.12. Psml.
88.10. Deuteronomy. 18.11. Luke. 16.29.31. Luke 16.22. John 5.21. Ose. 6. Act.
17.25.28. 1 Timothy 6.13.


And to prove that these soothsayers and witches are but lying (...) and
coseners; note these words pronounced by God himself, even (...) the self
same place to the children of Israel. Although the Gentiles (...) themselves to
be abused, so as they give ear to these sorcerers, (...) he would not suffer
them so, but would raise them a prophet, who shou^^ speak the truth. As if he
should say; The other are but lying and co^^^sening mates, deceitful and
undermining merchants, whose abuses I (...) make known to my people. And that
every one may be resolved herein let the last sentence of this precept be well
weighed; to wit, Let (...) be found among you, that asks counsel of, or
raises the dead.

First you know the souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, (...)
resting with Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, do sleep in Jesus Christ* And from
that sleep, man shall not be raised, till the heavens be (...) more: according
to this of David; Will thou show wonders amo^^ the dead? Nay, the Lord says,
the living shall not be taught by the dead, but by the living. As for the
unrighteous, they are in hell, when is no redemption; neither is there any
passage from heaven to earth, (...) by God and his angels. As touching the
resurrection and restoration (...) body, read John 5. and you shall manifestly
see, that it is the only work of the father, who has given the power thereof
to the (...) and to none other, etc. Dominus percu^ie, and ipse modetur: Ego
acoid^^ and ego vivefaciam. And in many other places it is written, that God
saves life and being to all. Although Plato, with his master Socrates, the
chief pillars of these vanities, say, th^^ one Pamphilus was called up and of
hell, who when he earne among the people, told many incredible tales concerning
infernal actions. But herein I take up the proverbs Amicus Plato, amicus
Socrates, sed major amica veritas.

So as this last precept, or last part thereof, extending to that which neither
can be done by witch nor devil, may well expound the other parts and points
thereof. For it is not meant hereby, that they can do such things indeed; but
that they make men believe they do them, and thereby cosen the people, and take
upon them the office of God, and therewithal also blaspheme his holy name, and
take it in vain; as by the words of charms and conjurations does appear, which
you shall see, if you look into these words Habar and Idoni.

In like manner I say you may see, that by the prohibition of divination by
augurie, and of sooth-sayings, etc. who are witches, and can indeed do nothing
but ly and cosen the people, the law of God condemns them not, for that they
can work miracles, but because they say they can do that which pertains to
God, and for cosenage, etc. Concerning other points of witchcraft contained
therein, 26 quae. 7. non obser. fact. 1398. act. 17. August. de spirit. and
anima. cap. 28.
and because some cannot otherwise be satisfied, I will allege under one
sentence, he decretals, the mind of S. Augustine, the council Aurelian, and
the determination of Paris, to wit: Who so observes, or gives heed unto
sooth-sayings, divinations, witchcraft, etc. or does give credit to any such
he renounceth christianity, and shall be counted a pagan, and an enemy to God;
yea and he erreth both in faith and philosophy. And the reason is therewithal
expressed in the canon, to wit; Because hereby is attributed to a creature,
that which pertains to God only and alone. So as, under this one sentence
(Thou shall not suffer a poisoner or a witch to live) is forbibden both murder
and witchcraft; and the murder consisting in poison; the witchcraft in
cosenage or blaspehmy.

CHAP. III.
That women have used poisoning in all ages more than men, and of the
inconvenience of poisoning.

AS women in all ages have been counted most apt to conceive witchcraft, and
the devils special instruments therein, and the only or chief practisers
thereof: so also it appears, that they have been the first inventers, and the
greatest practisers of poisoning, and more naturally addicted and given
thereunto than men: according to the saying of Quintilian; Latrocinium facilius
in viro, veneficium in foemina credam. From whom Pliny differs nothing in
opinion, when he says, Scienti^m foeminarum in veneficiis praevalere. To be
short, Augustine, Livie, Va^erius, Diodorus, and many other agree, that women
were the first inventers and practisers of the art of poisoning. Plin. lib. 25.
cap. 2.
As for the rest of their cunning in what estimation it was had, may appear by
these verses of Horace, wherein he does not only declare the vanity of
witchcraft, but also expounds the other words, wherewithal we are now in
hand.

Somnie, terrores mugicos, miracula, sagas,
Nocturnos lemures; portentaque Thessala rider:
These dreams and terrors magical,
These miracles and witches,
Night-walking sprites, or Thessal bugs,
Esteem them not two rushes.
Here Horace (you see) contemns as ridiculous, all our witches turning: marry
herein he comprehends not their poisoning art, which hereby he only seemed
to think hurtful. Pythagoras and Democri^^^ give us the names of a great many
magical herbs and stones, whereas now, both the virtue, and the things
themselves also are unknown: (...) Marmaritin, whereby spirits might be raised:
Archimedon, which would make one bewray in his sleep, all the secrets in his
heart. Adincan^i^^ Calicia, Mevais, Chirocineta, etc. which had all their
several virtues or rather poisons. But all these now are worn out of
knowledge: mary in their stead we have hogs-turd and chervil, as the only
thing whereby our witches work miracles.

Truly this poisoning art called Veneficium, of all others is most ab^^minable;
as whereby murders may be committed, where no suspicion may be gathered, nor
any resistance can be made; the strong cannot avoid the weak, the wise cannot
prevent the foolish, the godly cannot (...) preserved from the hands of the
wicked; children may hereby kill the parents, the servant the master, the wife
her husband, so privily, (...) unevitably, and so incurably, that of all other
it has been thought (...) most odious kind of murder; according to the saying
of Ovid.

-- non bospes ab hospite tutus,
Ovid metamo. lib. 1. a
Non socer a genero, fratrum quoque gratia rara est:
Imminet exitio vir conjugis, illa mariti,
Lurida terribiles miscent aconita novercae,
Filius ante diem patrios inquirit in annos.
The traveling guest oppressed
Englished by Abraham Fleming.
Does stand in danger of his host,
The host eke of his guest:
The father of his son-in-law,
Yea rare is seen to rest
'Twixt brethren love and amity,
And kindness void of strife;
The husband seeks the goodwifes death,
And his again the wife.
Ungentle stepdames grizly poi-
son temper and do give:
The son too soon does ask how long
His father is to live.
The monk that poisoned king John, was a tight Veneficus; to^ both a witch and
a murderer: for he killed the king with poison, (...) persuade the people with
lies, that he had done a good and a meritorious act; and doubtless, many were
so bewitched, as they thought he did very well therein. Antonius Sabellicus
writes of a horrible poisoning murder, committed by women at Rome, where were
executed (after due conjunction, Aeneid. 4. lib. 4.
170. women at one time; besides 20. women of that consort, who were poison
with that poisoned which they had prepared for others.

CHAP. IIII.
Of diverse poisoning practices, otherwise called veneficia, committed in Italy
Genua, Millen, Wittenberge, alse how they were discovered and executed.

ANother practice, Veneficae in Italy.
not unlike to that mentioned in the former chapter, was done in Cassalis at
Salassia in Italy, Anno 1536. where 40. Veneficae or witches being of one
confederacy, renewed a plague which was then almost ceased, besmeering with an
ointment and a powder, the posts and doors of men's houses; so as thereby whole
families were poisoned: and of that stuff they had prepared above 40. crocks
for that purpose. Herewithall they conveied inheritances as it pleased them,
till at length they killed the brother and only son of one Necus (as lightly
none died in the house but the masters and their children) which was much
noted; and therewithal that one Androgina haunted the houses, specially of them
that died: and she being suspected, apprehended, and examined, confessed the
fact, conspiracy, and circumstance, as has been showed. The like villainy was
afterward practiced at Genua, and execution was done upon the offenders. At
Millen there was another like attempt that took none effect. Veneficae Genua
and Millen.
This art consists as well in poisoning of cattle as men: and that which is
done by poisons unto cattle, toward their destruction, is as commonly
attributed to witches charms as the other. And I ^^ubt not, but some that
would be thought cunning in incantations, and to do miracles, have experience
in this behalf. For it is written by diverse authors, that if wolves dung be
hidden in the mangers, racks, or else in the hedges about the pastures, where
cattle go (through the antipathy of the nature of the wolf and other cattle)
all the beasts that savor the same do not only forbear to eat, but run about
as though they were mad, or (as they say) bewitched.

But Wierus tells a notable story of a Veneficus, or destroyer of cattle,
which I thought meet here to repeat. There was (says he) in the dukedom of
Wittneberge, Of a butcher a right veneficall which.
not far from Tubing, a butcher, anno. 1564. that bargained with a town for
all their hides which were of sterven cattle, called in these parts Morts. He
with poison privily killed in great numbers, their bullocks, sheep, swine, etc.
and by his bargain of the hides and ^allow he grew infinitely rich. And at last
being suspected, was examined, confessed the matter and manner thereof, and was
put to death with hot tongs, wherewith his flesh was pulled from his bones. We
for our parts would have killed five poor women, before we would suspect (...)
rich butcher.

CHAP. V.
A great objection answered concerning this kind of witchcraft called
Veneficium.

IT is objected, that if Veneficium were comprehended under the title
manslaughter, it had been a vain repetition, and a disordered (...) undertaken
by Moses te set forth a law against Venefic^s severally. But (...) might
suffice to answer any reasonable christian, that such was the (...) of the Holy
Ghost, to institute a particular article hereof, as of a (...) more odious,
wicked and dangerous, then any other kind of murder. But he that shall read
the law of Moses, or the Testament of Christ himself shall find this kind of
repetition and reiteration of the law most com^^^ For as it is written, Exodus
22.21. Thou shall not grieve nor affect stranger, for thou wast a stranger in
the land of Egypt: so are the (...) words found repeated in Levit. 19.33.
Levit. 19.33.
polling and shaving of heads (...) beards is forbidden in Duet, 27. which was
before prohibited in 22. (...) is written in Exodus the 20. Thou shall not
steal^ and it is repeated (...) Leviticus 19. and in Duet. 5. Murder is
generally forbidden in Exodus and likewise in 22. and repeated in Number. 35. But
the aprest example that magic is forbidden in three several places, to wit,
once in (...) 19. and twice in Levit. 20. For the which a man might as well
cavill^ the Holy Ghost as for the other.

CHAP. VI.
In what kind of confection^ that witchcraft, which is called Ve^^ficium,
consists: of love-caps, and the same confuted by p^e^*

AS touching this kind of witchcraft, the principal part thereof ^^^sisteth
in certain confections prepared by lewd people to proo^^ love; which indeed are
mere poisons, bereaving some of the bene^^ the brain, and so of the sense and
understanding of the mind. And (...) some it takes away life, and that is
more common then the other (...) be called Philtra, or Pocula amato^^^, or
Venenosa, pocula or Hippome^^ which bad and blind Physicians rather practice,
than witches or conj^^^ etc. But of what value these bables are, toward the
end why they (...) provided, may appear by the opinions of Poets themselves,
from wh^ was derived the estimation of that stuff. And first you shall hear
(...) Ovid says, who wrote of the very art of love, and that so cunningly
(...) feelingly, that he is reputed the special doctor in that science.

Ovid. lib. 2. ^e art amandi.
Fallitur Aemonias si quis decurrit ad arts,
Datque quod a teneri front revellet epui.
Non facient ut vivat amor Meddeides berbae,
Mistaque cum magicis mersa venena sonis.
Phasius Aesonidem, Circe tenuisset Vlyssem.
Si modo servari carmine posset amor:
Nec data profuerin^ pallentia philtra puellis,
Philtra nocent animis, vimque furoris habent.
Who so does run to Haemon arts, Englished by Abraham Fleming.

I dub him for a dolt,
And gives that which he does pluck
from forehead of a colt.
Medeas herbs will not procure
that love shall lasting live,
Nor steeped poison mixed with ma-
gicke charms the same can give.
The witch Medea had full fast
held Jason for her own.
So had the grand witch Circe too
Ulysses, if alone
With charms maintaind and kept might be
the love of twain in one.
No slibbersawees given to maids,
to make them pale and wan, Philtra, slibbersawes to procure love.

Will help: such slibbersawces mar
the minds of maid and man,
And have in them a furious force
of frenzy now and than.
Viderit Aemoniae si quis mala pabula terra Ovib. lib. de remedio amoris. 1.

Et magicas arts posse juvare putate.
If any think that evil herbs
in Haemon land which be, Ab. Fleming.

Or witchcraft able is to help,
let him make proof and se^.
These verses precedent do show, that Ovid knew that those beggarly ^orceries
might rather kill one, or make him stark mad, than do him ^ood toward the
atteinment of his pleasure of love; and therefore he ^iveth his counsel to
them that are amorous in such hot manner, that either they must enjoy their
love, or else needs die; saying.

Sit procul omne nefas, ut ameris amabilis est^.
^arre off be all unlawful means,
thou amiable be,
^oving I mean, that she with love
may quit the love of thee.
CHAP. VII.
It is proved by more credible writers, that love-cups rather engender death
through venom, than love by art: and with what toies they destroy cattle, and
procure love.

BUt because there is no hold nor trust to these Poets, who say and (...) say,
dallying with these causes; so as indeed the wise may percei^^ they have them
in derision: let us see that other graver authors spe^^ hereof. Eusebius
Caesariensis writes what the poet Lucretius was killed with one of those
lovers poisoned cups. Hierome reports that one (...) herewith killed her
husband, Hierenym in Ruff. Plin. lib. 25. ca. 3. Joseph lib. 11. de Iudeorum
antiquit. Aristet. lib. 8. de natura animal cap. 24. Io. Wier. denef. cap. 40.

Toies to mock apes.


whom she too much hated; and (...) killed hers, whom she too much loved
Calisthenes killed Luciu's Luciu the Emperor with a love-pot, as Plutarch and
Cornelius Nepos (...) Pliny and Josephus report, that Caesonia killed her
husband Caligula (...) rio poculo with a lovers cup, which was indeed stark
poison. Aristo^^^ says, that all which is believed touching the efficacy of
these matter lies and old wives tales. He that will read more arguments and
hist^^^ concerning these poisons, let him look in 1. Wier de veneficiis.

The toies, which are said to procure love, and are exhibited in (...) poison
loving cups, are these: the hair growing in the nerhern (...) part of a wolves
tail, a wolves yard, a little fish called Remora, the (...) of a cat, of a
newt, or of a lizzard: the bone of a green frog, the (...) thereof being
consumed with pismiers or ants; the left bone where^^ gendreth (as they say)
love* the bone on the right side, hate. Also said, that a frogs bones, the
flesh being eaten off round about with whereof some will swim, and some will
sink: those that sink, b^^ hanged up with a white linen cloth, engender
love, but if a man touched therewith, hate is bred thereby. Another experiment
is thereof with young swallows, whereof one brood or nest being taken and
(...) in a crock under the ground, till they be starved up; they that be (...)
open mouthed, serve to engender love; they whose mouths are shut, (...) to
procure hate. Besides these, many other follies there be to this purp^^^
proposed to the simple; as namely, the garments of the dead, (...) that burn
before a dead corpse, and needles wherewith dead bodies sown or sockt into
their sheets: and diverse other things, which the reverence of the reader, and
in respect of the unclean speech to used in the description thereof, I omit;
which (if you read Diosco^^^ or diverse other learned physicians) you may see
at large. Dioscorid. de materia medicin.

L. Vairus de fafcin. lib. 2. caq. 11. prope. finem.


In the me^^^ while, he that desires to see more experiments concerning this
mat^^^ let him read Leonardus Vairus de fascino, now this present year 15^^
newly published; wherein (with an incestuous mouth) he affirms da^^ly, that
Christ and his Apostles were Venefici; very fondly prosecuting (...) argument,
and with as much popish folly as may be; laboring to (...) it lawful to
charm and inchant vermin, etc.

CHAP. VIII.
John Bodin triumphing against John Wier is overtaken with false Greek and
false interpretation thereof.

MOnsieur Bodin triumphs over doctor Wier herein, I. bodin.
pronouncing a heavy sentence upon him; because he refers this word to
poison. But he reigns or rather rides over him, much more for speaking false
Greek; affirming that he calls Veneficos (...), which is as true as the rest
of his reports and fables of witches miracles contained in his book of devilish
devises. For in truth he has no such word, but says they are called (...),
whereas he should have said (...) the true accent being omitted, and (...)
being enterpoled, which should have been left out. Which is nothing to the
substance of the matter, but must needs be the Printers fault.

But Bodin reasons in this wise; (...) is sometimes put for Magos or
Praestigiatores ^ Ergo in the translation of the Septuaginta, it is so to be
taken. Wherein he manifests his bad Logic, more then the others ill Greek.
For it is well known to the learned in this tongue, that the usual and proper
signification of this word, with all its derivations and compounds does
signify Veneficos, Poisoners by medicine. Which when it is most usual and
proper, why should the translators take it in a signification less usual, and
nothing proper? Thus therefore he reasons and concludes with his newfound
Logic, and old found Greek; Sometimes it signifies so, though unproperly, or
rather metaphorically: Ergo in that place it is so to be taken, when another
fitter word might have been used. Which argument being vain, agrees well with
his other vain actions. The Septuaginta had been very destitute of words, found
for this purpose. But if no proper word could have been found where they have
occasion to speak of witchcraft in their translations, they use Magian,
Maggagian, etc. and therefore belike they see some difference betwixt them and
the other, and knew some cause that moved them to use the word (...),
Veneficium.

The seventh book.
CHAP. I.
Of the Hebrew word Ob, what it signifies, where it is found, of P^^^thonisses
called ventriloquae, who they be, and what their practi^^^ are experience and
examples thereof showed.

THis word Ob, is translated Pytho, or Pythonicus spirit^^^ Deuteronomy. 18 Isay. 19.
1 Samuel 28. 2 Reg. 23. etc. sometime, though unproperly, Magus, as 2 Samuel 33.
(...) Ob signifies most properly a bottle and is used in (...) place, because
the Pythonists spoke hollow; as in the bottom of their bellies, whereby they
are aptly in L^tin called Ventriloqui: of which sort was Elizabeth ^^^ton, the
holy maid of Kent, etc. These are such as take upon them (...) give oracles, to
tell where things lost are become, and finally to ^ppeach others of mischiefs,
which they themselves most commonly (...) brought to pass. the holy maid of
Kent a ventriloqua.
whereby many times they overthrow the good (...) of honest women, and of such
others of their neighbors, with whom they are displeased. For trial hereof,
letting pass a hundred coseni^^ that I could recite at this time, I will begin
with a true story of a (...) practicing her diabolical witch craft, and
ventriloquie An. 1574. at W^^^well in Kent, within six miles where I dwell,
taken and noted by (...) ministers and preachers of Gods word, four substantial
yeomen, and th^^ women of good fame and reputation, whose names are after
written.

Mildred, the base daughter of Alice Norrington, and now servant (...) William
Sponer of Westwell in the county of Kent, being of the age of seventeen years,
An Do. 1574. October. 13.
was possessed with Satan in the night and day aforesaid. About two of the
clock in the afternoon of the same day, there came in the same Sponers house
Roger Newman minister of Westwell, John Brainford minister of Kinington, with
others, whose names are underwritten, who made their prayers unto God, Confer
this story with the woman of Endor, 1 Samuel 28. and see whether the same might
not be accomplished by this devise
to assist them in that needful case; and then commanded Satan in the name of
the eternal God, and of his son Jesus Christ, to speak with such a voice as
they might understand, and to declare from whence he came. But he would not
speak, but rosed and cried mightily. And though we did command him many times,
in the name of God, and of his son Jesus Christ, and in his mighty power (...)
speak; yet he would not: until he had gone through all his delays, a roaring,
crying, striving, and guashing of teeth; and otherwhile with mowing, and other
terrible countenances, and was so strong in the maid, that four men could
scarce hold her down. And this continued by the space almost of two hours. So
sometimes, we charged him earnestly to spoke, and again praying unto GOD that
he would assist us, at the last he spoke, but very strangely; and that was
thus* He comes, he comes^ and that oftentimes he repeated; and he goes, he
goes. and then we charged him to tell us who sent him. And he said, I lay in
her way like a log, and I made her run like fire, but I could not hurt her.
And why so, said we? Because God kept her, said he. When came thou to her,
said we? To night in her bed, said he. Then we charged him as before, to tell
what he was, and who sent him, and what his name was. At the first he said, The
devil, the devil. Then we charged him as before. Then he rored and cried as
before, and spoke terrible words; I will kill her, I will kill her; I will
tear her in pieces, I will tear her in pieces. We said, Thou shall not hurt
her. He said, I will kill you all. We said, Thou shall hurt none of us all.
Then we charged him as before. Then he said, you will give me no rest. We said,
Thou shall have none here, for thou must have no rest within the servants of
God: but tell us in the name of God what thou art, and who sent thee? Then he
said he would tear her in pieces. We said, Thou shall not hurt her. Then he
said again he would kill us all. We said again, Thou shall hurt none of us all,
for we are the servants of God. And we charged him as before. And he said
again, Will you give me no rest? We said, Thou shall have none here, neither
shall thou rest in her, for thou have no right in her, since Jesus Christ has
redeemed her with his blood, and she belongs to him; and therefore tell us
thy name and who sent thee? He said his name was Satan. We said, Who sent thee?
He said, Old Alice, old Alice. Which old Alice, said we? Old Alice, said he.
Where dwells she, said we? In Westwell street, said he. We said, How long
have thou been with her? These twenty years, said he. We asked him where she
did keep him? In two bottels, said he. Where be they, said we? In the backside
of her house, said he. In what place, said we? Under the wall, said he. Where
is the other? In Kenington. In what place, said we? In the ground, said he.
Then we asked him, what she did give him. He said, her will, her will. What did
she bid thee do, said we? He said, Kill her maid. Wherefore did she bid thee
kill her, said we? Because she did not love her, said he. We said; How long is
it ago, since she sent thee to her? More then a year, said he. Where was that,
said we? At her masters, said he. Which masters, said we? At her master
Brainfords at Kinington, said he. How often were thou there, said we? many times,
said he. Where first, said we? In the garden, said he: Where the second time?
In the hall: Where the third time? In her bed: Where the fourth time? In the
field: Where the fifth time? In the court: Where the sixth time? In the water,
where I cast her into the mote: Where the seventh time? In her bed. We asked
him again, where else? He said, in Westwell. Where there, said we? In the
vicarige, said he. Where there? In the loft. How came thou to her, said we?
In the likeness of two birds, said he. Who sent thee to that place, said we?
Old Alice, said he. What other spirits werewith thee there, said we? My
servant, said he. What is his name said we? He said, little devil. What is thy
name, said we? Satan, said he? What does old Alice call thee, said we? Partner,
said he. What does she give thee, said we? Her will, said he. How many have
thou killed for her, said we? Three, said he. Who are they, said we? A man and
his child, said he. What were their names, said we? The child's name was Edward
said he: what more then Edward, said we? Edward Ager, said he. What was the
man's name, said we? Richard said he. What more, said we? Richard Ager, said he.
Where dwelt the man and the child, said we? At Dig at Dig, said he. This
Richard Ager of Dig, was a Gentleman of forty pounds land by the year, a very
honest man, but would often (...) he was bewitched, and languished long before
he died. Whom else (...) thou killed for her, said we? Woltons wife said he.
Where did she dwell? In Westwell said he. What else have thou done for her said
we? What she would have me, said he. What is that said we? To fetch (...) meat,
drink, and corn, said he. Where had thou it said we? In e^e^^ house, said he.
Name the houses, said we? At P^tmans, at Farms, a^ Millens, at Fullers, and in
every house. After this we commanded (...) in the name of Jesus Christ to
depart from her, and never to trouble her any more, nor any man else. Then he
said he would go, he would go: but he went not. Then we commanded him as before
with some more word^. Then he said, I go, I go; and so he departed. Then said
the maid, he is gone, Lord have mercy upon me, for he would have killed me. And
then we kneeled down and gave God thanks with the maiden; prayed that God would
keep her from Satan's power, and assist her with his grace. And noting this in a
piece of paper, we departed. Satan's voice did difer much from the maids voice,
and all that he spoke, was in his o^^ name. subscribed thus: Witnesses to this,
that heard and saw this whole matter, as follows:
Roger Newman, vicar of Westwell. John Brainford, vicar of Kenington. Thomas
Tailor. Henry Tailors wife. John Tailor. Thomas Frenchbornes wife. William
Spooner. John Frenchborne, and his wife.


CHAP. II.
How the lewd practice of the Pythonist of Westwell came to light, and by whom
she was examined; and that all her diabolical speech (...) but ventriloquie
and plain cousenage, which is proved by her ow^ confession.

Mat. 24.44.
IT is written, that in the latter days there shall be showed strange
illusions, etc. in so much as (if it were possible) the very elect (...) be
deceived: howbeit, Saint Paul says, they shall be lying and false wonders.
Nevertheless this sentence, and such like, have been often laid in my dish,
and are urged by diverse writers, to approve the miraculous working of witches,
whereof I will treat more largely in another place. Howbeit, by the way I must
confess, that I take that sentence to be spoken of Antichrist, to wit, the
pope: who miraculously, contrary to nature, philosophy, and all divinity, being
of birth and calling base, in learning gross; in valor, beauty, or activity
most commonly a very lubber, has placed himself in the most lofty and
delicate seat, putting almost all christian princes heads not only under his
girdle, but under his foot, etc.

Surely, the tragedy of this Pythonist is not inferior to a thousand stories,
which will hardly be blotted out of the memory and credit either of the common
people, or else of the learned. How hardly will this story suffer discredit,
having testimony of such authority? How could mother Alice, escape condemnation
and hanging, being arraigned upon this evidence: when a poor woman has been
cast away, upon a cosening oracle or rather a false lie, devised by Feats the
juggler, through the maliciou^ ^nstigation of some of her adversaries?

But how cunningly soever this last cited certificat be penned, The ventriloqua
of Westwel discovered.
or what show soever it carries of truth and plain dealing, there may be found
contained therein matter enough to detect the cosening knavery thereof; and yet
diverse have been deeply deceived therewith, and can hardly be removed from the
credit thereof, and without great disdain cannot endure to hear the reproof
thereof. And know you this by the way, that heretofore Robin good fellow, and
Hob-gobblin were as terrible, and also as credible to the people, as hags and
witches be now: and in time to come, a witch will be as much derided and
contemned, and as plainly perceived, as the illusion and knavery of Robin
good fellow. And in truth, ^hey that maintain walking spirits, with their
transformation, etc. have no reason to deny Robin good fellow, upon whom there
have gone ^s many and as credible tales, as upon witches; saving that it has
not pleased the translators of the Bible, to call spirits, by the name of Robin
good fellow, as they have termed diviners, soothsayers, poisoners, and
coseners by the name of witches.

But to make short work with the confutation of this bastardly queanes
enterprise, and cosenage, you shall understand, that upon the ^ruite of her
divinity and miraculous trances, she was convented before M. Thomas Worton of
Bocton Mather be, a man of great worship and wisdom, and for deciding and
ordering of matters in this commonwealth, of rare and singular dexterity;
through whose discreet handling of the matter, with the assistance and aid of
M. George Darrell esquire, being also a right good and discreet Justice of the
same limit, The Pythonist of vvestvvel ^^victed by her own co^^ession.
the fraud was ^ound, the cosenage confessed, and she received condign
punishment. Neither was her confession won, according to the form of the
Spanish ^nquisition; to wit, through extremity of tortures, nor yet by guile or
^attery, nor by presumptions; but through wise and perfect trial of every
circumstance the illusion was manifectly disclosed: nor so (I say) as witches
are commonly convinced and condemned; to wit, through malicious accusations, by
guesses, presumptions, and extorted confessions contrary to sense and
possibility, and for such actions as they can show in trial nor example before
the wise, either by direct or indirect means but after due trial she showed
her feats, illusions, and trances, with the residue of all her miraculous
works, in the presence of diverse gentlemen and gentlewomen of great worship and
credit, at Bocton Malherbe, (...) the house of the said M. Wotton. Now compare
this wench with the witch of Endor, and you shall see that both the cosenages
may be (...) by one art.

CHAP. III.
Bodins stuff concerning the Pythonist of Endor, with a true story of
counterfeit Dutchman.

UPon the like tales does Bodin build his doctrine, calling them Atho^^ that
will not believe him, I. Bodin. lib. de demon. 3. cap. 2.
adding to this kind of witchcraft, (...) miraculous works of diverse maidens,
that would spue pins, clowts, (...) as one Agnes Brigs, and Rachel Pinder of
London did, till the miracle were detected, and they set to open penance.
Others he cites (...) that sort, the which were bound by devils with garters,
or some (...) like stuff to posts, etc. with knots that could not be undone,
which an Egyptians juggling or cosening seat. And of such foolish lies (...)
with bawdy, tales, his whole book consists: wherein I warrant (...) there are
no fewer then two hundred fables, and as many impossibility. And as these two
wenches, with the maiden of Westwell, were dete^^ of cosenage; so likewise a
Dutchman at Maidstone long after he h^^ complished such knaveries, to the
astonishment of a great number (...) good men, was revealed to be a cosening
knave; although his (...) were imprinted and published at London: anno 1572.
with this (...) before the book, as follows.

A very wonderful and strange miracle of God showed upon a Dutchman the age of
23. years, which was possessed of ten devils, and was by Gods mighty providence
dispossessed of them again, the 27. of January last past. 1572.
UNto this the Major of Maidston, with diverse of his brethren sob^^bed, chiefly
by the persuasion of Nicasius Vander Sceure, the ^^^nister of the Dutch church
there, John Stikelbow, whom (as it is there said) God made the instrument to
cast out the devils, and four other credible persons of the Dutch church. The
history is so strange, and so cunningly performed, that had not his knavery
afterward brought him into suspicion, he should have gone away unsuspected of
this fraud. A great many other such miracles have been lately printed, whereof
diverse have been bewraied: all the residue doubtless, if trial had been made,
would have been found like unto these. But some are more finely handled than
othersome. Some have more advantage by the simplicity of the audience, some by
the majesty and countenance of the confederates: as namely, that cosening of
the holy maid of Kent. Some escape utterly unsuspected, some are prevented by
death; so as that way their examination is untaken. Some are weakly examined:
but the most part are so reverenced, as they which suspect them, are rather
called to their answers, than the others.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the great oracle of Apollo the Pythonist, and how men of all sorts have
been deceived, and that even the Apostles have mistaken the nature of spirits,
with an unanswerable argument, that spirits can take no shapes.

WIth this kind of witchcraft, Apollo and his oracles abused and cosened the
whole world: which idol was so famous, that I need not stand long in the
description thereof. The amphibologies of oracles.
The princes and monarchs of the earth reposed no small confidence therein: the
Priests, which lived thereupon, were so cunning, as they also overtook almost
all the godly and learned men of that age, partly with their doubtful answers;
as that which was made unto Pyrrhus, in these words, Aio te Aeacida Roma^os
vincere posse, and to Croesus his ambassadors in these words, Si Croesus armae
persis inferat, magnum imperium evertet; and otherwise thus, Croesus Halin
penetrans, magnam subvertet opum vim: or thus, Croesus perdet Halin,
transgressus plurima regna, etc. partly through confederacy, whereby they knew
men's errands ere they came, and partly by cunning, as promising victory upon
the sacrificing of some person of such account, as victory should rather be
neglected, than the murder accomplished And if it were, The subtilty of our
oracles.
yet should there be such conditions annexed thereunto, as always remained
unto them a starting hole, and matter enough to cavil upon; as that the party
sacrificed must be a virgin, no bastard, etc. Furthermore, of two things only
proposed, and where yea or nay only does answer the question, it is an even
lay, that an idiot shall conjecture right. So as, if things fell out contrary,
the fault was always in the interpreter, and not in the oracle or the prophet.
But what marvel (I say) though the multitude and common people have been abused
herein; since Lawiers, Philosophers, Physicians, Astronomers, divines, General
councels, and princes have with great negligence and ignorance been deceived
and seduced hereby, as swallowing up and devouring an inveterate opinion,
received of their elders, without due examination of the circumstance?

Howbeit, the godly and learned fathers (as it appears) have always had a
special care and respect, that they attributed not unto God such devilish
devices; but referred them to him, who indeed is the invent^r and author,
though not the personal executioner, in manner and for^^ as they supposed: so
as the matter of faith was not thereby by them is peached. But who can assure
himself not to be deceived in mat^^^ concerning spirits, Joh. 20.9.
when the Apostles themselves were so far from knowing them, as even after
the resurrection of Christ, having heard h^^ preach and expound the Scriptures,
all his life time, they showed themselves not only ignorant therein, but also
to have misconceived there. Did not the Apostles Thomas think that Christ
himself had been a spirit until Christ told him plainly, that a spirit was no
such creature, as h^^ flesh and bones, the which (he said) Thomas might see to
be in h^^. And for the further certifying and satisfying of his mind, he
commended unto him his hands to be seen, and his tides to be felt. Thomas,
(...) answer be true that some make hereunto, to wit, that spirits take form
and shapes of bodies at their pleasure, might have answered Christ, (...)
remaining unsatisfied might have said; Oh sir, what do you tell me (...)
spirits have no flesh and bones? Why, they can take shapes and fore and so
perchance have you done. Which argument all the witch-mon(...) in the world
shall never be able to answer.

Some of them that maintain the creation, the transformation, transportation,
and transubstantiation of witches; object that spirits not palpable, though
visible; and answer the place by me before (...) so as the feeling and not the
seeing should satisfy Thomas. But he shall well weigh the text and the
circumstances thereof, shall perceive, (...) the fault of Thomas his
incredulity was secondly bewraied, and conde^^ed, in that he would not trust
his own eyes, nor the view taken by (...) fellow-Apostles, who might have been
thought too credulous in this (...) if spirits could take shapes at their
pleasure. Jesus says to him* cause thou have seen (and not, because thou have
felt) thou beleevest (...) he says; John. 20.29.
Blessed are they that believe and see not (and not, they (...) believe and
feel not.) Whereby he notes that our corporal eyes (...) discern betwixt a
spirit and a natural body; reproving him, (...) he so much relied upon his
external senses, in cases where faith (...) have prevailed; and here, in a
matter of faith revealed in the word, (...) not credit the miracle which was
exhibited unto him in most natural (...) sensible sort.

Howbeit, Erastus says, and so does Hyperius, Hemingius, Danaeus, (...) Bodin,
Erast. fol. 62.
etc. that evil spirits eat, drink, and keep company with (...) and that they
can take palpable forms of bodies, producing example thereof, to wit: Spectrum
Germanicum seu Augustanum, and the (...) whose feet Lot washed; as though
because God can indue his mess(...) with bodies at his pleasure, therefore the
devil and every spirit can (...) the like. Luke 24.37.
How the eleven Apostles were in this case deceived, appear^^^ in Luke 24. and
in Mark. 16, as also in Matthew. 14. where the Apostles a^^ disciples were all
deceived, Mark. 16.14. Mat. 14.26 Matthew. 20. Matt. 16.11.
taking Christ to be a spirit, when he walked on the sea. And why might not
they be deceived herein, as well as in that they thought Christ had spoken of
a temporal kingdom, when he preached of the kingdom of heaven? Which thing
they also much misconceived; as likewise when he did bid them beware of the
leaven of the Pharisees, they understood that he spoke of material bread.

CHAP. V.
Why Apollo was called Pytho, whereof those witches were called Pythonists:
Gregory his letter to the devil.

BUt to return to our oracle of Apollo at Delphos, who was called Pytho, for
that Apollo slew a serpent so called, whereof the Pythonists take their name: I
pray you consider well of this tale, which I will truly rehearse out of the
Ecclesiastical history, Eusebius. lib 7. cap. 25.
written by Eusebius, wherein you shall see the absurdity of the opinion, the
cosenages of these oracles, and the deceived mind or vain opinion of so great
a doctor bewraied and deciphered altogether as follows.

Gregory Neocaesariensis in his journey and way to pass over the Alps, came to
the temple of Apollo: where Apollo's priest living richly upon the revenues and
benefit proceeding from that idol, did give great intertainment unto Gregory,
and made him good cheer. But after Gregory was gone, Apollo waxed dumb, so as
the priest's gains decayed: for the idol growing into contempt, the pilgrimage
ceased. The spirit taking compassion upon the priest's case, and upon his grief
of mind in this behalf, appeared unto him, and told him flatly, that his late
guest Gregory was the cause of all his misery. For (says the devil) he has
banished me, so that I cannot return without a special license or pasport
from him. It was no need to bid the priest make haste; for immediately he took
post horses, and galloped after Gregory, till at length he overtook him, and
then expostulated with him for this discourtesie proffered in recompense of his
good cheer; and said, that if he would not be so good unto him, as to write
his letter to the devil in his behalf, he should be utterly undone. To be
short, his importunity was such, that he obtained Gregory his letter to the
devil, who wrote unto him in manner and form following, word for word:
Permitto tibi redire in locum ^uum, and agere quae consuevisti; which is in
English; I am content thou return into thy place, and do as thou wast wont.
Immediately upon the receipt of this letter, the idol spoke as before. And here
is to be noted, that as well in this, Note the cosenage of oracles.
as in the execution of all their other oracles and cosenages, the answers were
never given Ex tempore, or in that day wherein the question was demanded;
because forsooth they expected a vision (as they said) to be given the night
following, whereby the cosenage might the more easily be wrought.

CHAP. VI.
Apollo, who was call^ Pytho, compared to the Roe of grace: Gregory's letter to
the devil confuted.

WHat need many words to confute this fable? For if Gregory (...) been an
honest man, he would never have willingly (...) that the people should have
been further cosened with such alying spirit^ if he had been half so holy as
Eusebius makes him, he would not are consented or yielded to so lewd a request
of the priest, nor have write such an impious letter, no not though good might
have come there^^. And therefore as well by the impossibility and folly
contained therein, of the impiety (whereof I dare excuse Gregory) you may
perceive it to (...) a ly. Me thinks they which still maintain that the devil
made answer the idol of Apollo, etc. may have sufficient persuasion to revoke
their ^^roneous opinions: in that it appears in record, that such men were
skilful in Augurie, did take upon them to give oracles at Delph^^ the place of
Apollo: Zach. 10.
of which number Tisanius the son of (...) was one. But vain is the answer of
idols. Our Rood of grace, with (...) help of little S. Rumbal, was not
inferior to the idol of Apollo: for (...) could not work eternal miracles, but
manifest the internal thought^ the heart, I believe with more lively show,
both of humanity and (...) of divinity, W. Lambert in titulo Boxley.
than the other. As if you read M. Lamberts book of (...) perambulation of
Kent, it shall partly appear. But if you talk (...) them that have been
beholders thereof, you will be satisfied herein* (...) yet in the blind time of
popery, no man might under pain of dama^^ on, nor without danger of death,
suspect the fraud. Nay, what (...) will yet confess they were idols, though
the wiers that made their ^^gogle, the pins that fastened them to the posts to
make them seem (...), were seen and burnt together with the images themselves
the knavery of the priests bewraied, and every circumstance thereof detected
and manifested?

CHAP. VII.
How diverse great clerks and good authors have been abused in the matter of
spirits through false reports, and by means of their ^^dulity have published
lies, which are confuted by Aristotle and Scriptures.

PLutarch, Livy, and Valerius Maximus, with many other grave ^^^thors, being
abused with false reports, write that in times past be^^ spoke, and that images
could have spoken and wept, and did let (...) drops of blood, yea and could
walk from place to place: which the say was done by procuration of spirits.
But I rather think with Aristole, that it was brought to pass Hominum and
sacerdotum deceptionibus, to wit, by the cosening art of crafty knaves and
priests. And therefore let us follow Esaies advise, who says; When they shall
say unto you, enquire of them that have a spirit of divination, and at the
soothsayers, which whisper and m^mble in your ears to deceive you, Esai. 8.19.
etc. enquire at your own God, etc. And so let us do. And here you see they are
such as run into corners, and cosen the people with lies, etc. For if they
could do as they say, they could not aptly be called liers, neither need they
to go into corners to whisper etc.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the witch of Endor, and whether she accomplished the raising of Samuel
truly, or by deceit: the opinion of some divines hereupon.

THe woman of Endor is comprised under this word Ob: 1 Samuel 28.
for she is called Pythonissa. It is written in 2 Samuel chap. 28. that she
raised up Samuel from death, and the other words of the text are strongly
placed, to enforce his very resurrection. The mind and opinion of Jesus Syrach
evidently appears to be, that Samuel in person was raised out from his grave,
as if you read Eccl. 46.19, 20. you shall plainly perceive. Howbeit he
disputes not there, whether the story be true or false, but only cites
certain verses of the 1 book of Samuel chap. 18. simply according to the
letter, persuading manners and the imitation of our virtuous predecessors, and
repeating the examples of diverse excellent men; namely of Samuel: even as the
text it self urges the matter, according to the deceived mind and
imagination of Saul, and his servants. And therefore in truth, Sirach spoke
there according to the opinion of Saul, which so supposed^ otherwise it is
neither heresy nor treason to say he was deceived.

He that weighs well that place, and looks into it advisedly, shall ^ee
that Samuel was not raised from the dead; but that it was an illusion or
cosenage practiced by the witch. For the souls of the righteous are in the
hands of God: Sap. 3. Ps. 92 and. 97. Chrysostom. homilia. 21. in Math. Luke 16.
according to that which Chrysostom says; Souls in a certain place expecting
judgment, and cannot remove from thence. Neither is it Gods will, that the
living should be taught by the dead. Which things are confirmed and approved by
the example of Lazarus and Dives: where it appears according to Deuteronomy. 18.
that he will not have the living taught by the dead, but will have us stick to
his word, wherein his will and testament is declared. Indeed Lyra and Dionyfius
incline greatly to the letter. And Lyra says, that as when Balaam would have
raised a devil, God interposed himself: so did he in this case bring up
Samuel, when the witch would have raised her devil. Which is a probable
interpretation. But yet they dare not stand to that opinion, least they should
impeach S. Augustines credit, who, they confess, remained in judgment and
opinion, without contradiction of the church, that Samuel was not raised.
August lib. quae vet. et novi testam. quaest. 27. item, part. 2. cap. 26. item.
quae. 5. nec mirum ad Simplician. lib. 2. 93. ad Dulci^i^^m. quae. 6. item.
lib. 2. de doct. ^hri. Deuteronomy. 18. Exodus. 20.
For he says directly, that Samuel himself was not called up. And indeed, if
he were raised, it was either willingly, or per force: if it were willingly,
his sin had been equal with the witches.

And Peter Martyr, me thinks, says more to the purpose, in the words, to wit:
This must have been done by Gods good will, or a force of art magic: it could
not be done by his good will, because he forbad it; nor by art, because witches
have no power over the godly. Where it is answered by some, that the
commandment was only to prohibit the Jews to ask counsel of the dead, and so
no fault in Samuel to give counsel: We may as well excuse our neighbors wife,
for consenting to our filthy desires, because it is only written in the
decalogue; Thou shall not desire thy neighbors wife. But indeed Samuel was
directly forbidden to answer Saul before he died: and therefore it was not like
that God would appoint him, when he was dead, to do it.

CHAP. IX.
That Samuel was not raised indeed, and how Bodin and all pa^i^^ dote herein,
and that souls cannot be raised by witchcraft.

FUrthermore, it is not likely that God would answer Saul by dead S^^muel, when
he would not answer him by living Samuel: and most ^^^likely of all, that God
would answer him by a devil, that denied (...) by a prophet. That he was not
brought up perforce; the whole (...) the scripture witnesses, and proves; as
also our own reason (...) us to understand. For what quiet rest could the
souls of the elect (...) or possess in Abraham's bosom, if they were to be
plucked from them at a witches call and commandment? But so should the devil
have (...) in heaven, where he is unvvorthy to have any place himself, and
then for e^^ meet to command others.

Many other of the fathers are flatly against the raising up of Samuel namely,
Tertullian in his book De anima. Iustine Martyr In explicat^^ quae. 25. Rabanus
In epistolis ad Bonos. Abat. Origin in historia de (...) etc. some other dote
exceedingly herein, as namely Bodin, and all ^^^pists in general: also Rabbi
Sedias Hajas, and also all the Hebrews, sa^^^ R. David Rimhi, which is the
best writer of all the Rabbis: though^ ^^ver a good of them all. But Bodin,
in maintenance thereof, falls (...) many absurdities, proving by the small
faults that Saul had commi^^^^ that he was an elect; for the greatest matter,
says he, laid (...) charge, I. Bod. lib. de daem. 2. cap. 3. 1. Samu. 28. 1.
Cor. 5. ^. Martyr in colloquio cum Triphoon Iudeo.
is the reserving of the Amalekits cattle, etc. He was (...) elect, etc
confirming his opinion with many ridiculous fables and with this argument, to
wit: His fault was too little to deserve damnation; for Paul would not have
the incestuous man punished to sore, (...) his soul might be saved. Iustine
Martyr in another place was not only deceived in the actual raising up of
Samuels soul, but affirmed that all the souls of the prophets and just men are
subject to the power of vvitche^* And yet were the Heathen much more fond
herein, Lact. lib. 7. cap. 13.
who (as Lactantius affirms) boasted that they could call up the souls of
the dead, and yet did think that their souls died with their bodies. Whereby
is to be seen, how always the world has been abused in the matters of
witchcraft and conjuration. The Necromancers affirm, that the spirit of any
man may be called up, or recalled (as they term it) before one year be past,
after their departure from the body. Which C. Agrippa in his book de occulta
philosophia says, may be done by certain natural forces and bonds. And
therefore corpses in times past were accompanied and watched with lights,
sprinkled with holy water, perfumed with incense, and purged with prayer all
the while they were above ground: otherwise the serpent (as the masters of the
Hebrews say) would devour them, as the food appointed him by God, Genesis 3.
alleging also this place; We shall not all sleep, but we shall be changed;
because many shall remain for perpetual meat to the serpent: whereupon rises
the contention between him and Michael, concerning the body of Moses; wherein
Scripture is alleged. Jud. verse. 9.
I confess that Augustine, and the residue of the doctors, that deny the
raising of Samuel, conclude, that the devil was fetched up in his likeness:
from whose opinions (with reverence) I hope I may dissent.

CHAP. X.
That neither the devil nor Samuel was raised, but that it was a mere cosenage,
according to the guise of our Pithonists.

Again, if the devil appeared, and not Samuel; why is it said in Eccl. that he
slept? for the devil neither sleeps nor dies. But in truth we may gather,
that it was neither the devil in person, nor Samuel: but a circumstance is here
described, according to the deceived opinion and imagination of Saul. Howbeit
Augustine says, that both these sides may easily be defended. But we shall not
need to fetch an exposition so far off: for indeed (me thinks) it is Long
petita; nor to descend so low as hell, to fetch up a devil to expound this
place. For it is ridiculous (as Pompanacius says) to leave manifest things,
Pompanacius lib. de incant. cap. 2.
and such as by natural reason may be proved, to seek unknown things, which by
no likelihood can be conceived, nor tried by any rule of reason. But insomuch
as we have liberty by S. Augustines rule, in such places of Scripture as seem
to contain either contrariety or absurdity: to vary from the letter; and to
make a godly construction agreeable to the word; let us confess that Samuel
was not raised, for that were repugnant to the word, and see whether this
illusion may not be contrived by the art and cunning of the woman, without any
of these supernatural devises, for I could cite a hundred papistical and
cosening practices, as difficult as this and as cleanly handled. And it is to
be surely thought, if it had been a devil, the text would have noted it in some
place of the story: as it does not. But Bodin helps me exceedingly in this
point, wherein he forsakes, he says, I. Bod. lib. de daem. 2. cap. 3
Augustine, Tertullian, and D. Kimhi himself, who say it was the devil that
was raised up, which, says Bodin, could not be; (...) that in the same
communication between Saul and Samuel, the name of Jehovah is five times
repeated, of which name the devil cannot able the hearing.

CHAP. XI.
The objection of the witchmongers concerning this place fully answered, and
what circumstances are to be considered for the understanding of this story,
which is plainly opened from the beginning of the 28. chap. of the 1 Samuel, to
the 12. verse.

WHere such a supernatural miracle is wrought, no doubt it is a testimony of
truth; P. Martyr in comment. in 1 Samuel 28. ver. 9.
as Peter Martyr affirms. And in this case it should have been a witness of
lies: for, says he, a matter of such weight cannot be attributed unto the
devil, but it is the mighty power of God that does accomplish it. And if it lay
in a witches power to call up ^ de^vil, yet it lies not in a witches power to
work such miracles: for God will not give his power and glory to any creature.
Isai 42. 1. Sam. 28.
To understand t^^ place, we must diligently examine the circumstance thereof.
It was wel^ known, that Saul, before he resorted to the witch, was in despair
of the mercies and goodness of God; partly for that Samuel told him long
^^^fore, that he should be overthrown, and David should have his (...) and
partly because God before had refused to answer him, either by Samuel when he
lived, or by any other prophet, or by Urim or Thummim, ^^. And if you desire to
see this matter discussed, I turn to the first of Samuel the 28. chapter, and
confer my words therewith.

Saul seeing the host of the Philistines come upon him, which (...) could not
be unknown to all the people, fainted, because he saw (...) strength, and his
own weakness, and specially that he was forsaken (...) as being now strait of
mind, desperate, and a very fool, he goes (...) certain of his servants,
that saw in what taking he was, and asked them for a woman that had a familiar
spirit, 1 Samuel 28.7.
and they told him by and by the^ there dwelt one at Endor. By the way you
shall understand, that both Saul and his servants meant such a one as could by
her spirit raise up Samuel, or any other that was dead and buried. Wherein you
see they were deceived, though it were true, that she took upon her so to do.
To (...) use then served her familiar spirit, which you conceive she had,
because Saul's servants said so? Surely; as they were deceived and abused in
(...) so doubtless were they in the rest, for to what purpose, I say, should
(...) familiar serve, if not for such intents as they reported, and she
undertoo^^ I think you will grant that Saul's men never saw her familiar: for I
never heard any yet of credit say, that he was so much in the witches favor,
^^ to see her devil; although indeed we read among the popish trumpe^^ that S.
Cicilie had an angel to her familiar, S. Cicilies familiar.
and that she could show ^^ to whom she would, and that she might ask and have
what she or her friend list: as appears in the lesson read in the popish
church on Saint Cicilies day. Well, I perceive the woman of Endors spirit was a
counterfeit, and kept belike in her closet at Endor, or in the bottle, with
mother Alices devil at Westwel, and are now bewraied and fled together to Limbo
patrum, etc. And though Saul were bewitched and blinded in the matter; yet
doubtless a wise man would have perchance espied her knavery. Me thinks Saul
was brought to this witch, much after the manner that doctor Burcot was brought
to Feats, who sold master Doctor a familiar, whereby he thought to have wrought
miracles, D. Burcot. Feats.
or rather to have gained good store of money. This fellow by the name of Feats
was a jugler, by the name of Hills a witch or conjurer, everyway a cosener:
his qualities and feats were to me and many other well known and detected. And
yet the opinion conceived of him was most strange and wonderful; even with
such and in such cases, as it grieveth me to think of; specially because his
knavery and cosenage reached to the shedding of innocent blood. But now
forsooth Saul covers himself with a net: and because he would not be known,
1 Samuel 28 8.
he put on other garments. But to bring that matter to pass, he must have been
cut shorter by the head and shoulders; 1 Samuel 10.13.
for by so much he was higher than any of the people. And therefore whatsoever
face the crafty queen did set upon it, she knew him well enough. And for
further proof thereof, you may understand, that the princes of the Jews were
much conversant with the people. Ibidem.
And it appears manifestly, that Saul dwelt very near to Endor, so as she
should the rather know him; for in the evening he went from his lodging unto
her house: neither should it seem that she was gone to bed when he came. But
because that may be uncertain, you may see in the process of the text, that
in a piece of the night he went from his house to hers, and with much ado
entreated her to consent to his request. She finished her conjuration, so as
both Saul's part, the witches part, and also Samuels part was played: and after
the solemnization thereof, a calfe was killed, a batch of bread baked, and a
supper made ready and eaten up; and after all this, he went home the same
night: and had need so to do, for he had some business the next day. By these
and many other circumstances it may be gathered, that she dissembled, in
saying, she knew him not, Ibidem.
and consequently counterfeited, and made a fool of him in all the rest.

It appears there, that he, with a couple of his men, went to her by night,
and said; conjecture unto me by thy familiar spirit, and bring me up whom I
shall name unto thee. The godly-learned know, that this was not in the power of
the witch of Endor, but in the God of heaven only to accomplish. Howbeit, Saul
was bewitched so to suppose: and yet is he more simple that will be overtaken
with the devises of our old witches, which are produced to resemble her. And
why should we think, that God would rather permit the witch to raise Samuel,
than that Dives could obt^ine Lazarus to come out of Abraham's bosom, upon more
likely and more reasonable conditions? Well now does this strumpet (according
to the guise of our cosening witches and conjurers) make the matter strange
unto Saul, saying, that he came to her in a snare, etc. But witches seldom
make this objection, 1 Samuel 28.9.
saving when they mistrust that he which comes to them will epsy their
juggling: for otherwise, where the witchmonger is simple and easy to be abused,
the witch will be (...) easy to be entreated, and nothing dangerous of her
cunning; as you see this witch was soon persuaded, notwithstanding that
objection, because she perceived and saw that Saul was afraid and out of his
wits. And therefore she said unto him; Whom shall I raise up? As though she
could h^^e brought unto him Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob; who cannot hear* us,
therefore cannot rise at our call. 1 Samuel 28.12. Isa. 93.15, 16.
For it is written; Look thou down from heaven and behold us, etc. as for
Abraham he is ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not.

CHAP. XII.
The 12, 13, and 14. verses of 1 Samuel 28. expounded: wherein is showed that
Saul was cosened and abused by the witch; and (...) Samuel was not raised, is
proved by the witches own talk.

THe manner and circumstance of their communication, or of her conjuration, is
not verbatim set down and expressed in the text; (...) the effect thereof
breefly touched: yet will I show you the common order of their conjuration, and
specially of hers at this time used. When Saul had told her, The manner of the
witch of Endors cosening of Saul.
that he would have Samuel brought up to him, she departed from his presence
into her closet, where doubtless she had her familiar; to wit, some lewd
crafty priest, and made Saul stand at the (...) like a fool (as it were with
his finger in a hole) to hear the cosening answers; but not to see the cosening
handling thereof, and the counter^^^^ing of the matter. And so goes she to
work, using ordinary words o^ conjuration, of which there are sundry varieties
and forms (whereof I shall have occasion to repeat some in another place) as you
see the juglers (which be inferior conjurors) speak certain strange words of
course, to lead away the eye from espying the manner of their conveyance,
whilst they may induce the mind to conceive and suppose that he deals with
spirits; saying, Hay, fortune fury, nunque credo, pass, pass, when come you
s^^ra. (...) belike after many such words spoken, she says to her self; Lo
now the matter is brought to pass, 1 Samuel 28.13.
for I see wonderful things. So as Saul hearing these words, longed to know
all, and asked her what she saw. Wherein you may know that Saul saw nothing,
but stood without like a mom^^^ whilst she played her part in her closet: as
may most evidently appear by the 21. verse of this chapter, where it is said;
Then the woman came (...) unto Saul. 1 Samuel 28.21.
Howbeit, a little before she cunningly counterfeited that she saw Samuel, and
thereby knew it was Saul that was come unto her. Where^by all the world may
perceive the cosening, and her dissimulation. For by that which has been
before said, (...) must needs be that she knew him. And (I pray you) why should
she not have suspected as well him to be (...) before, when in express words
he required her to bring unto him Samuel, as now, when Samuel appeared unto her?

Well, 1 Samuel 28 14.
to the question before proposed by Saul, she answers and (...) that she saw
angels or Gods ascending up out of the earth. Then (...) she with her
enchanting phrases and words, of course: so as ^^reby Saul gathers and
supposes that she has raised a man. For otherwise his question depends not
upon any thing before spoken. For then she has said; I saw angels ascending,
etc. the next word he says (...) What fashion is he of? Which (I say) hangs
not upon her last ^xpressed words. And to this she answered not directly, that
it was Samuel, but that it was an old man lapped in a mantle: as though she
^^ew not him that was the most notorious man in Israel, that had been ^er
neighbor by the space of many years, and upon whom (while he ^^ed) every eye
was fixed, and whom also she knew within less than a ma^ter of an hour before:
as by whose means also she came acquainted with Saul. Read the text and see.

But she describes his personage, 1 Samuel 28.12.
and the apparel which he did usually care when he lived: which if they were
both buried together, were consumed and rotten, or devoured with worms before
that time. Belike ^e had a new mantle made him in heaven: and yet they say
Tailors are ^^anty there; for that their consciences are so large here. In this
country, men give away their garments when they die: if Samuel had so done, ^^
could not have borrowed it again: for of likelihood it would have been ^orne
out in that space, except the donee had been a better husband than (...) for
the testator was dead (as it is supposed) two years before.

CHAP. XIII.
The residue of 1 Samuel 28. expounded: wherein is declared how cunningly this
witch brought Saul resolutely to believe that she raised Samuel; what words are
used to color the cosenage, and how all might also be wrought by ventriloquie.

NOw comes in Samuel to play his part: but I am persuaded it was performed in
the person of the witch her self, or of her confederate. ^e says to Saul; 1 Samuel 28.15. Ibidem.
Why have thou disquieted me, to bring me up? As though without guile or
packing it had been Samuel himself. Saul answered that ^e was in great
distress: for the Philistines made war upon him. Where^y the witch, or her
confederate priest might easily conjecture that his ^eart failed, and direct
the oracle or prophecy accordingly: especially under^^anding by his present
talk, and also by former prophesies and doings ^^at were past, that God had
forsaken him, and that his people were de^lining from him. 1 Samuel 13.15. 1.
Sam. 13.15.
For when Jonathan (a little before) overthrew the ^hilistines, being thirty
thousand chariots and six thousand horsemen; Saul could not assemble above six
hundred soldiers.

Then said Samuel (which some suppose was Satan, and as I think was ^^e witch,
with a confederate; for what need so far fetches, as to fetch devil
supernaturally out of hell, when the illusion may be here by natural means
deciphered? And if you note the words well, you shall ^^^ceive the phrase not
to come out of a spiritual mouth of a devil; but (...) a lying corporal tongue
of a cosener, that cares neither for God no^ (...) devil: from whence issues
such advice and communication, as greatly (...) greeth from Satan's nature and
purpose. For thus (I say) the said (...) speaks: 1 Samuel 28.16.17. 1 Sa. 15.28.
Wherefore do thou ask me, seeing the Lord is gone (...) thee, and is thine
enemy? Even the Lord has done unto him as he (...) by my hand: for the Lord
will rent thy kingdom out of thine hand, (...) give it to thy neighbor David;
because thou obeyedst the voice of (...) Lord, etc. This (I say) is no phrase
of a devil, but of a cosener, (...) knew before what Samuel had prophesied
concerning Saul's destru^^^^^. For it is the devils condition, to allure the
people unto wickedness, (...) not in this sort to admonish^ warn, and rebuke
them for evil. An^ (...) popish writers confess, that the devil would have
been gone at the (...) naming of God. If it be said, that it was at Gods
special commande^^^^ and will, that Samuel or the devil should be raised, to
propound ^^^monition, to the profit of all posterity: I answer, that then he
(...) have done it by some of his living prophets, and that Satan (...) been so
fit an instrument for that purpose. After this falls the (...) (I would say
Samuel) into the vein of prophesying, and speake^^ Saul on this wise: 1 Samuel
28.18.19.
The Lord will rent thy kingdom out of thine (...) and give it to thy
neighbor David; because thou obeyedst not the (...) of the Lord, nor
executedst his fierce wrath upon the Amalekitesi (...) fore has the Lord done
this unto thee this day. Moreover, the Lord (...) deliver thee into the hands
of the Philistines, and to morrow shall tho^ thy sons be with me, and the
Lord shall give the host of Israel in^o (...) hands of the Philistines. What
could Samuel have said more?

Me thinks the devil would have used another order, encouragin^ (...) rather
than rebuking him for his evil. The devil is craftier than (...) such an
admonition to all posterities, as should be prejudici^^ (...) his kingdom, and
also be void of all impiety. But so divine a sense makes much for the
maintenance of the witches credit, and to (...) ^^^vancement of her gains.
Howbeit, concerning the verity of this ^^^^phesie, there be many disputable
questions: first, whether the (...) were fought the next day? secondly, whether
all his sons were (...) with him? item, whether they went to heaven or hell
together, a^ (...) with Samuel, they must be in heaven, and being with (...)
they must be in hell. But although every part of this (...) were false, as that
all his sons were not slain ( Ishhosheth (...) and reigning in Israel two
years after Saul's death) and that the (...) not on the morrow, and that wicked
Saul, after that he had killed (...) self, 2 Reg. 4.
was not with good Samuel; yet this witch did give a shrewd (...) to the
sequel. Which whether it were true or false, pertains (...) purpose; and
therefore I will (...) it. But as ^ouching the (...) them that say it was the
devil, because that such things came to (...) would ^ain know of them where
they learn that devils foreknow (...) come? Canon. 26. quaest. cap. 5. nec
mirum.
If they say, he guesse^h only upon probabilities, the wit^^ may (...) do the
like. But here I may not forget the decrees, which conclude* (...) Samuel
appeared not unto Saul; but that the historiographer set for (...) mind and
Samuels estate, Right Ventriloquie.
and certain things which were said and seen, (...) whether they were true or
false: and further, that it were a (...) offense for a man to believe the bare
words of the story. And if (...) exposition like you not, I can easily frame my
self to the opinion of ^ne of great learning expounding this place, and that
with great pro^^bility, in this sort; to wit. that this Pythonist being
Ventriloqua, that (...) Speaking as it were from the bottom of her belly, did
cast her self ^^to a trance, and so abused Saul, answering to Saul in Samuels
name, in (...) counterfeit hollow voice: as the wench of Westwel spoke, whose
his^^ry I have rehearsed before at large, in page* 94. and this is right
^^n^riloquie.

CHAP. XIV.
^^inions of some learned men, that Samuel was indeed raised, not by the
witches art or power, but by the special miracle of God: that there are no such
visions in these our days; and that our witches cannot do the like.

AIas and Sadajas write, that when the woman saw the miracle indeed, and more
than she looked for, of wa^ wont to do; she be^n to cry out, that this was a
vision indeed, and a true one, not done by (...) art, but by the power of God.
Which exposition is far more pro^^ble than our late writers judgments
hereupon, and agrees with the ^^position of diverse good divines. Gelasius
says, it was the very spirit (...) Samuel: and where he suffered himself to
be worshipped, it was but (...) civil salutation and courtesy; and that God
did interpose Samuel, as he did Elias to the messenger of Ochossas, when he
sent to Beelzebub the god Acharon. I. Bod. and L. Vairus differ herein.
And here is to be noted, that the witchmongers are set up this point: for the
papists say, that it cannot be a devil, because Jeho, it is thrice of five
times named in the story. Upon this piece of scrip^^re arguments are daily
devised, to prove and maintain the miraculous ^^tions of witch craf^, and the
raising of the dead by conju^ations. And ^r if it were true, that Samuel
himself were raised, or the devil in his ^^^enesse; and that the witch of
Endor by her art and cunning did it, etc. it ^aketh rather to the disproofe
than to the proof of our wi^ches, which (...) neither do that kind of miracle,
or any other, in any such place or ^^mpany, where their juggling and cosenage
may be seen and laid open. and I challenge them all (even upon the adventure of
my life) to show ^he piece of a miracle, A bold, discreet, and faithful
challenge.
such as Christ did truly, or such as they suppose his witch did diabolically,
be it not with art nor confederacy, whereby the color thereof maybe made;
neither are there any such visions in these ^^yes showed.

Heretofore God did send his visible angels to men: but now we hear ^ot of such
apparitions, neither are they necessary. Indeed it pleased ^od heretofore, by
the hand of Moses and his prophets, and specially by (...) son Christ and his
Apostles, to work great miracles, for the establishing of the faith: but now
whatsoever is necessary for our salvation, it ^^^tained in the word of God: our
faith is already confirmed, and our (...) established by miracles; so as now to
seek for them is a point of (...). Which the papists (if you note it) are
grealy touched withal in their lying legends appears. But in truth, our
miracles are (...) most commonly, and specially of priests, whereof I could
cite a (...) sand. If you read the story of Bell and the Dragon, you shall
find (...) miracle of some antiquity. If you will see newer devices, re^
^^^tus, Cardanus, Baleus, and specially Lavaterns, etc. There have (...) some
At Canterbury by Rich. Lee esquire, and others, anno. 1573. At Rye by master
Gaymor and other, anno. 1577.
walking spirits in these parts so conjured not long since, as (...) wards they
little delighted to make any more apparitions.

CHAP. XV.
Of vain apparitions, how people have been brought to fear (...) which is
partly reformed by preaching of the gospel: the true (...) Christ's miracles.

BUt certainly, some one knave in a white sheet has cosened and (...) many
thousands that way; specially when Robin good (...) kept such a coile in the
Country. But you shall understand, (...) these bugs specially are spied and
feared of sick folk, children, (...) and cowards, which through weakness of
mind and body, are (...) with vain dreams and continual fear. The Scythians,
being a (...) a warlike nation (as diverse writers report) never see any, vain
(...) spirits. I. Wier. lib. 3. cap. 8. Theodor. Bizantius. Lavat de spect. and
lemurib. Cardan. de var. rerum.
It is a common saying; A Lion fears no bugs. But (...) childhood our mothers
maids have so terrified us with an ugly (...) having horns on his head, fire
in his mouth, and a tail in his (...) eyes like a basin, fanges like a dog,
claws like a bear, a skin^ (...) a Niger, and a voice roaring like a Lion,
whereby we start and are (...) when we hear one cry Bough: and they have so
fraied us with bull-(...) spirits, witches, ^urchens, elves, hags, fairies,
satyrs, pans, faun^^lens, kit with the cansticke, tritons, centaures, dwarfes,
giants, imp^^ cars, conjurors, nymphs, changelings, Incubus, Robin good
fellow, spoorn, the mare, the man in the oak, the hell-waine, the fired rake,
puckle, Tom thombe, hob-gobblin, Tom tumbler, boneles, and other bugs, that we
are afraid of our own shadows: insomuch (...) never fear the devil, but in a
dark night; and then a polled sheep perilous beast, and many times is taken
for our fathers soul, specially a churchyard, where a right hardy man
heretofore scant durst pass night, but his hair would stand upright. For
right grave writers (...) that spirits most often and speciallly take the shape
of women appearing monks, Pencer. etc. Lavat. despect.
etc. and of beasts, dogs, swine, horses, goats, cats, hairs, fowls, as
crows, night owls, and shreek owls, but they delight (...) in the likeness
of snakes and dragons. Well, thanks be to Go^, (...) wretched and cowardly
infidelity, since the preaching of the gospel (...) part forgotten: and
doubtless, the rest of those illusions will in short (...) (by Gods grace) be
detected and vanish away.

Diverse writers report, Car. de var. rerum. l. Wier. de praest. daemo. etc.
Athanas. de humanitate verbi.
that in Germany, since Luthers time, spirits and devils have not personally
appeared, as in times past they were wont to do. This argument is taken in hand
of the ancient fathers, to prove the determination and ceasing of oracles. For
in times past (says Athanasius devils in vain shapes did intricate men with
their illusions, hiding themselves in waters, stones, woods, etc. But now that
the word of GOD has appeared, those sights, spirits, and mockeries of images
are ceased. Truly, if all such oracles, as that of Apollo, etc. (before the
coming of Christ) had been true, and done according to the report, which has
been brought through diverse ages, and from far countries unto us, without
priestly fraud or guile, so as the spirits of prophecy, and working of
miracles, had been inserted into an idol, as has been supposed: yet we
christians may conceive, that Christ's coming was not so frutelesse and
prejudicial in this point unto us, as to take away his spirit of prophecy and
divination from out of the mouth of his elect people, and good prophets, giving
no answers of any thing to come by them, nor by Vrim nor Thummim, as he was
wont, etc. And yet to leave the devil in the mouth of a witch, or an idol to
prophecy or work miracles, etc. to the hinderance of his glorious gospel, The
true end of miracles. John. 2.
to the discountenance of his church, and to the furtherance of infidelity and
false religion, whereas the working of miracles was the only, or at least the
most special means that moved men to believe in Christ, as appears in
sundry places of the gospel, and specially in John, where it is written, that a
great multitude followed him, Act 2.22. John 5.
because they saw his miracles which he did, etc. Nay, is it not written, that
Jesus was approved by God among the Jews, with miracles, wonders and signs,
etc? And yet, if we confer the miracles wrought by Christ, and those that are
imputed to witches; witches miracles shall appear more common, and nothing
inferior unto his.

CHAP. XVI.
Witches miracles compared to Christ's, that God is the creator of all things,
of Apollo, and of his names and portraiture.

IF this witch of Endor had performed that, An ironical collation.
which many conceive of the matter, it might have been compared with the
raising up of Lazarus. I pray you, is not the converting of water into milk,
as hard a matter as the turning of water into wine? Mal. malef. par. 2. quae.
1. cap. 14. Acts. 17. 1 Timothy 6.13. Col. 1.16. Athanas. symbol.
And yet, as you may read in the gospel, that Christ did the one, as his first
miracle; so may you read in M. Mal. and in Bodin, that witches can easily do
the other: yea, and that which is a great deal more, of water they can make
butter. But to avoid all ca^ils, and least there should appear more matter in
Christ's miracle, than the others, you shall find in M. Mal. that they can
change water into wine: and what is it to attribute to a creature, the power
and work of the creator, if this be not? Christ says, Opera quae ego facio
nemo potest facere. Creation of substance was never granted to man nor angel;
Ergo neither to witch nor devil: for God is the only giver of life and being,
and by him all things are made, visible and invisible.

Finally, this woman of Endor is in the scripture called Py^honissa: whereby it
may appear that she was but a very censener. For Pytho himself whereof
Pythonissa is derived, Apollo Pytho uncased.
was a counterfeit. And the original (...) of Apollo, who was called Pytho,
because he killed a serpent of that (...) is but a poetical fable. For the
Poets say, he was the god of Music, Ph^sick, Poetry, and shouting. In heaven
he is called Sol, in earth (...) Pater, in hell Apollo. He flourishes always
with perpetual youth* (...) therefore he is painted without a beard: his
picture was kept as an or^^cle-giver: and the priests that attended thereon at
Delphos were cousen^^ and called Pythonists of Pytho, as Papists of Papa; and
afterward all (...) men that used that trade, were named Pythonissae, as was
this women Endor. But because it concerns this matter, I will breefly note
the ^^pinions of diverse learned men, and certain other proofs, which I (...)
in the scripture touching the ceasing of miracles, prophesies and orac^^.

The eight book.
CHAP. I.
That miracles are ceased.

ALthough in times past, Psalm. 136.4. Psalm. 72.18. Psalm 88.10.
it pleased God, extraordinarily to show miracles amongst his people, for the
strengthening of their faith in the Messiah; and again at his coming to
confirm their faith by his wonderful doings, and his special graces and gifts
bestowed by him upon the Apostles, etc. yet we ordinarily read in the
scriptures, that it is the Lord that works great wonders. Yea David says,
that among the dead (as in this case of Samuel) God himself shows no
wonders. I find also that God will not give his glory and power to a creature.
Isay. 42. John 3.2. Ibid. 7.16. In annotat. in Johan. 3.
Nicodemus being a Pharisee could say, that no man could do such miracles as
Christ did except God were with him, according to the saying of the prophet to
those gods and idols, which took on them the power of God; Do either good or
ill if you can, etc. So as the prophet knew and taught thereby, that none but
God could work miracles. Infinite places for this purpose might be brought out
of the scripture, which for brevity I omit and ove^slip.

S. Augustine, among other reasons, whereby he proves the ceasing of miracles,
Isa. 45. August. de verbis Dom. secundum Mat. sermon. 18.
says; Now blind flesh does not open the eyes of the blind ^y the miracle of
God, but the eyes of our heart are opened by the word ^f God. Now is not our
dead carcass raised any more up by miracle, but our dead bodies be still in the
g^ave, and our souls are raised to life by christ. Now the ears of the deaf
are not opened by miracle, but they which had their ears shut before, have them
now opened to their salvation. The miraculous healing of the sick, by
anointing, spoken of by S. James, is ^bjected by many, specially by the
papists, for the maintenance of their ^^crament of extreme unction: which is
apishly and vainly used in the ^^omish church, James 5.14. I. Calvin. Institute
lib. 4. ca. 19. sect 18. Idem. ibid. sect. 19. Isay. 9.7. Acts 20.10. Idem.
ibid. nempe I. Call.
as though that miraculous gift had continuance till this ^ay: herein you shall
see what Calvine speaks in his institutions. ^he grace of healing (says he)
spoken of by Saint James, is ^^nished away, as also the other miracles, which
the Lord would have ^^ewed only for a time, that he might make the new
preaching of the ^ospel mervellous for ever. Why (says he) do not these
(meaning mira^^e-mongers) appoint some Siloah to swim in, whereinto at certain
or^^nary recourses of times sick folk may plunge themselves? Why do ^^ey nor
lie along upon the dead, because Paul raised up a dead child (...) that means?
Verily (says he) James in the miracle to anoint, spoke ^^r that time, whiles
the church still enjoyed such blessings of God. Item, (...) says, that the
Lord is present with his in all ages; and so often as need (...) he helps
their sicknesses, no less than in old time. But he does (...) so utter his
manifest powers, nor distributeth miracles, as by the hands (...) the Apostles,
because the gift was but for a time. Calvine even their ^ncludeth thus; They
say such virtues or miracles remain, but exper^^^ce says nay. And see how
they agree among themselves. Danaeus says, at neither witch nor devil can
work miracles. Giles Alley says directly, that witches work miracles.
Calvine says, they are all ceased. All witchmongers say, they continue. But
some affirm, that popish miracles are vanished and gone away: howbeit witches
miracles remain in full force. So as S. Loy is out of credit for a horseleach,
Master T. and mother B^^gy remain in estimation for prophets: nay Hobgoblin
and Robin (...) fellow are contemned among young children, and mother Alice and
another Bungy are fea^ed among old fools. The estimation of these continue,
because the matter has not been called in question: the credit (...) the other
decays, because the matter has been looked into. Where I say no more, but
that S. Anthonies bliss will help your pig, where ever mother Bungy does hurt
it with her curse. And therefore we (...) warned by the word of God, Prove. 5.1.
in any wise not to fear their curses. ^e let all the witchmongers, and
specially the miracle-mongers in the (...) answer me to this supposition; Put
case that a woman of credit, (...) a woman-witch should say unto them, that she
is a true prophet of (...) Lord, and that he reveals those secret mysteries
unto her, whereby ^^ detecteth the lewd acts and imaginations of the wicked,
and th^^ (...) him she works miracles, and prophesies, etc. I think they
must (...) yield, or confess that miracles are ceased. But such thing: (says
C^^dane) as seem miraculous, H. Card. de miracul.
are chiefly done by deceit, legierdema^ or confederacy; or else they may be
done, and yet seem unpossible else things are said to be done, and never were
nor can be done.

CHAP. II.
The gift of prophecy is ceased.

Isai. 41.
THat witches, nor the woman of Endor, nor yet her familiar or devil can tell
what is to come, may plainly appear by the words of (...) prophet, who says;
Show what things are to come, and we will say (...) are gods indeed. According
to that which Solomon says; who (...) a man what shall happen him under the
sun? 1 Samuel 28. Romans 12. 1 Cor. 12. 1 Pet. 1
Marry that can I (says witch of Endor to Saul.) But I will rather believe
Paul and Peter's (...) say, that prophecy is the gift of God, and no worldly
thing. The cousening queen, that takes upon her to do all things and can do
thing but beguile men: up steppeth also mother Bungy, and she (...) you where
your horse or your ass is bestowed, or anything that you (...) lost is
become, as Samuel could; and what you have done in all (...) age past, as
Christ did to the woman of Sichar at Jacobs well; yea (...) what your errand
is, John. 4.
before you speak, as Elizeus did.

Peter Martyr says, that only God and man knows the heart of (...) and
therefore, that the devil must be secluded, alleging these place Solus Deus
est scrutator cordium, Only God is the searcher of hearts. (...) Nemo scit
quae sunt hominis, nisi spiritus hominis qui est in eo, None ^o^^eth the thigs
of man, P. Martyr: loc. com. 9. sect 17.
but the spirit of man which is within him. So^^mon says, Tu solus nosti
cogitationes hominum, Thou only know (...) thoughts of men. And Jeremy
says in the person of God, Ego (...) scrutans corda and renes* I am God
searching hearts and reins. Also (...) thew faith of Christ, Jesus autem
videus cogitationes eorum. And (...) seeing their thoughts, who in Scripture is
called the searcher and (...) of the thoughts in the heart: as appears in
Acts, 1. and 15. Romans 8. Matthew. 9.12. and 22. Mark 2. Luke 6. and 7. and 11.
John 1.2.6. and 13. Apoc. 2. and 3. and in other places infinite.

The same Peter Martyr also says, that the devil may suspect, but not know our
thoughts: P. Martyr in loc. com.
for if he should know our thoughts, he should understand our faith; which if
he did, he would never assault us with one temptation. Indeed we read that
Samuel could tell where things lost were straied, etc. but we see that gift
also ceased by the coming of Christ, according to the saying of Paul; at sundry
times, and in diverse manners God sp^ke in the old times by our fathers the
prophets, in these last days he has spoken unto us by his son, Heb. 1.8.
and 2.
etc. And therefore I say, that gift of prophecy, wherewith God in times past
endued his people, is also ceased, and counterfeits and coufeners are come in
their places, according to this saying of Peter: There were false prophets
among the people, even as there shall be false teachers among you, etc. And
think not that so notable a gift should be taken from the beloved and the elect
people of God, 2 Pet. 2.1.
and committed to mother Bungy, and such like of her profession.

The words of the prophet Zachary are plain touching, Zach. 13.^
the ceasing both of the good and bad prophets, to wit: I will cause the
prophets and unclean spirits to depart out of the land, and when any shall yet
prophecy, his parents shall say to him; Thou shall not live, for thou speak
lies in the name of the Lord; and his parents shall thrust him through when he
prophesies, I. Chrysostom. in evang. Johan. hom. 18. Pet. Blessed. epist. 49.
etc. No, no: the foretelling of things to come, is the only work of God, who
disposes all things sweetly, of whose counsel there has never yet been any
man. And to know our labors, the times and moments God hoth placed in his own
power. Also Phavorinus says, that if these cold prophets or oraclers tell thee
of prosperity, and deceiv thee, thou art made a miser through vain expectation:
if they tell thee of adversity, etc. and ly, thou art made a miser through
vain fear. And therefore I say, we may as well look to hear prophesies at the
tabernacle, in the bush, of the cherubin, among the clouds, from the angels,
within the arc, or out of the flame, etc. as to expect an oracle of a prophet
in these days.

But put the case, that one in our Commonwealth should step up and say he were
a prophet (as many frantic persons do) who would believe him, Canon. de malef.
and mathemat.
or not think rather that he were a lewd person? See the statutes Elizab. 5.
whether there be not laws made against them, condemning their arrogance and
cousenage: so also the canon laws to the same effect.

CHAP. III.
That Oracles are ceased.

TOuching oracles, which for the most part were Idols of silver, gold, wood,
stones, etc. within whose bodies some say unclean spirits hid themselves, and
gave answers as some others say, that exhalations rising out of the ground;
Thucidid. lib. 2 Cicer. de divin. lib. 2.
inspire their minds, whereby their priests gave out oracles; so as spirits and
winds rose up out of that soil, and endued those men with the gift of
prophecy of things to come, though in truth they were all devises to cosen
the people, and for the profit of priests, who received the idols answers over
night, and delivered them back to the idolaters the next morning: you shall
understand, that although it had been so as it is supposed; yet by reasons and
proofs before rehearsed, they should now cease: and whatsoever has affinity
with such miraculous actions, as witehcraft, conjuration, etc. is knocked on
the head, and nailed on the cross with Christ, who has broken the power of
devils, and satisfied Gods justice, Zach. 13.2. Mich. 5.12. Genesis 3. Eusebius. lib.
5. cap. 1. Idem. Ibid. Porphyr. in lib. contra christ. relig. Cic. de divin.
lib. 2. I. Chrysostom. de laud. Paul. hom. 4.
who also has trodden them under his feet, and subdued them, etc. At whose
coming the prophet Zachary says, that the Lord will cut the names of idols
out of the land, and they shall be no more remembered; and he will then cause
the prophets and uncle^ne spirits to depart out of the land. It is also
written; I will cut off thine inchanters out of thine hand, and thou shall have
no more soothsayers* And indeed, the gospel of Christ has so laid open their
knavery, etc. that since the preaching thereof, their combs are cut, and ^ew
that are wise regard them. And if ever these prophesies came to take effect, it
must be upon the coming of Christ, whereat you see the devils were troubled and
fainted, when they met him, saying, or rather exclaming upon (...) on this
wise, Fili Dei cur venisti nos cruciare ante tempus? O thou son of God, why
come thou to molest us (or confound us) before our tim^ appointed? Which he
indeed prevented, and now remains he our defender and keeper from his claws.
So as now you see here is no room left for such guests.

Howbeit, you shall hear the opinion of others, that have been ^ much
deceived as your selves in this matter: and yet are driven to confess, that
GOD has constituted his son to beat down the power^ of devils, and to
satisfy Gods justice, and to heal our wound received by the fall of Adam,
according to Gods promise in Genesis 3. The seed of the woman shall tread down
the serpent, or the devil. Eusebius) in his first book De praedicatione
Evangelij, the title whereof is this, that the po^^^ of devils is taken away by
the coming of Christ) says; All answers made by devils, all soothsayings and
divinations of men are gone and vanished away. Item he ci^eth Porphyrie in his
book against christian religion, wherein these words are rehearsed; It is no
marvel, though the plague be so hot in this city: for ever since Jesus has
been worshipped, we can obtain nothing that good is at the hands of our Gods.
And of this defection and ceasing of oracles writes Cicero long before, and
that to have happened also before his time. Howbeit, Chrysostom living long
since Cicero, says, that Apollo was forced to grant, that so long as any
relike of a martyr was held to his nose, he could not make any answer or
oracle. So as one may perceive, that the heathen were wiser in this behalf
than many christians, who in times past were called Oppugnatores
incantamentorum, as the English Princes are called Defens^^es fidei. Plutarch
calls Poeo^ia (as we call bablers) by the name of many words, because of the
multitude of oracles there, which now (says he) are like to a spring or
fountain which is dried up. If any one remained I would ride five hundred
miles to see it: but in the whole world there is not one to be seen at this
hour; popish cousenages excepted.

But Plutarch says, Porphyr. writes verses i^ Apollos name, of the death of
Apollo cited by l. Bod. fol. 6.
that the cause of this defection of oracles, was the devils death, whose life
he held to be determinable and mortal, saying they died for very age; and that
the divining priests were blown up with a whirle-winde, and sunk with an
earthquake. Others imputed it to be the sight or the place of the planets,
which when they passed over them, carried away that art with them, and by
revolution may return, etc. Eusebius also cites out of him the story of Pan,
which because it is to this purpose, I will insert the same; and since it
mentions the devils death, you may believe it if you list: for I will not, as
being assured that he is reserved alive to punish the wicked, and such as
impute unto those idols the power of Almighty God.

CHAP. IIII.
A tale written by many grave authors, and believed by many wise men of the
devils death. Another story written by papists, and believed of all catholics,
approving the devils honesty, conscience and courtesy.

PLutarch says, that his countryman Epotherses told him, that as he passed
by sea into Italy, many passengers being in his boat, in an evening, when they
were about the islands Echinadae, the wind quite ceased, and the ship driving
with the tide, was brought at last to Paxe. And whilst some slept and others
quaft, and othersome were awake (perhaps in as ill case as the rest) after
supper suddenly a voice was heard calling Thamus; Thamus having little to do,
thought to play with his company, whom he might easily overtake with such a
jest.
in such sort as every man marvelled. This Thamus was a pilot borne in Egypt,
unknown to many that were in the ship. Wherefore being twice called, he
answered nothing; but the third time he answered: and the other with a louder
voice commanded him, that wheu he came to Palodes, he should tell them that the
great God Pan was departed. Whereat every one was astonished (as Epitherses
affirmed.) And being in consultation what were best to do, Thamus concluded,
that if the wind were high, they must pass by with silence; but if the
weather were calm, he must utter that which he had heard. But when they came
to Palodes, and the weather calm, Thamus looking out toward the land, cried
aloud, that the great god Pan was deceased: and immediately there followed a
lamentable noise of a multitude of people, as it were with great wonder and
admiration. And because there were many in the ship, they said, the same
thereof was speedily brought to Rome, and Thamus sent for by Tiberius the
Emperor, who gave such credit thereto, that he diligently inquired and asked,
who that Pan was. The learned men about him supposed, that Pan was he who was
the son of Mercury and Penelope, etc. Eusebius says, that this chanced in the
time of Tiberius the Emperous, when Christ expelled all devils, etc. Paulus
Marsus, in his notes upon Ovids Fasti, says, that this voice was heard out of
Paxe, that very night that Christ suffered, in the year of Tiberius the
nineteenth. A detection of Thamus his knavery.
Surely, this was a merry jest devised by Thamus who with some confederates
thought to make sport with the passengers, who were some asleep, and some
drunk, and some other at play, etc. while the first voice was used. And at the
second voice, to wit, when he should deliver his message, he being an old
Pilot, knew where some noise was usual, by means of some echo in the sea,
and thought he would (to the astonishment of them) accomplish his devise, if
the wether proved calm. Whereby may appear, that he would in other cases of
tempests, etc. rather attend to more serious business, then to that ridiculous
matter. For why else should he not do his errand in rough wether, as well as in
calm? Or what need he tell the devil thereof, when the devil told it him
before, and with much more expedition could have done the errand himself?

But you shall read in the Legend a fable, an oracle I would say, more
authentike. Legend. aur. in vita sancti Andreae. fol. 39.
For many will say that this was a profane story, and not so canonical as
those which are verifyed by the Popes authority: and this it is written. A
woman in her travel sent her Sister to Di^n^, which was the devil in an idol
(as all those oracles are said to be) and will led her to make her prayers, or
rather a request, to know of her safe deliverie; which thing she did. But the
devil answered; Why praye^ thou to me? I cannot help thee, but go pray to
Andrew the Apostle* and he may help thy sister, A gentle and a godly devil.
etc. Lo, this was not only a gentle, bot^ godly devil, pitying the woman's
case, who revealing his own disability, enabled S. Andrew more. I know some
protestants will say, tha^ the devil, to maintain idolatry, etc. referred the
maid to S. Andrew. But what answer will the Papists make, who think it great
piety to pray unto Saints, and so by consequence honest courtesy in the devil,
to se^^ her to S. Andrew, who would not fail to serve her turn, etc.

CHAP. V.
The judgments of the ancient fathers touching oracles, and their abolishment,
and that they be now transferred from Delphos (...) Rome.

THe opinions of the Fathers, that oracles are ceased by the coming of Christ,
you shall find in these places following, to wit: (...) In dialogis adversus
Iudaeos, Athanas de human. verbi. fol. 55 and 64.
Athanasius De humanitate verbi, Augustine De civitate Dei, Eusebius Lib. 7.
cap. 6. Item lib. 5. cap. 1.8. Rupertu^^ Joan. lib. 10.12. Plutarch De
abolitione oraculorum, Pliny lib. 30. natural historiae. Finally, Athanasius
concludes, that in times past there were oracles in Delphos, Boeolia, Lycia,
and other places: but now since Christ is preached unto all men, this madness
is ceased. So as you see, th^^ whatsoever estimation in times past, the ancient
Fathers conceived (by hearesay) of those miraculous matters of idols and
oracles, etc. they themselves refuse now, not only to bear witness of; but
also affirm, that (...) ^^nce Christ's coming their mouths have been stopped.

For the ceasing of the knaveries and cousening devises of priests, I see no
authority of Scripture or ancient Father, but rather the contrary; to wit,
that there shall be strange illusions showed by them even till the end. And
truly, whosoever knows and notes the order and devises of and in popish
pilgrimages, shall see both the oracles and their conclusions remaining, and as
it were transferred from Delphos to Rome, where that adulterous generation
continually seeks a sign, though they have Moses and the prophets, yea even
Christ and his Apostles also etc.

CHAP. VI.
Where and wherein couseners, witches, and priests were wont to give oracles,
and to work their feats.

THese cousening oracles, or rather oraclers used (I say) to exercise their
feats and to do their miracles most commonly in maids, in beasts, in images, in
dens, in cloisters, in dark holes, in trees, in churches or churchyards, etc.
where priests, monks, and friars had laid their plots, and made their
confederacies aforehand, to beguile the world, to gain money, and to add
credit to their prosession. Strabo Geog. lib. 16. I. Wier. lib. 1. de praest.
daem. cap. 12.
This practice began in the oaks of Dodona, in the which was a wood, the trees
thereof (they say) could speak. And this was done by a knave in a hollow tree,
that seemed sound unto the simple people. This wood was in Molossus a part of
Greece, called Epyrus, and it was named Dodonas oracles There were many oracles
in Egypt; namely, of Hercules, of Apollo, of Minerva, of Diana, of Mars, of
Jupiter, and of the ox Apys, who was the son of Jupiter, but his image was
worshipped in the likeness of an ox. Lato^a, who was the mother of Apollo, was
an oracle in the city of Bute. The priests of Apollo, who always counterfeited
fury and madness, gave oracles in the temple called Clarius, within the city
of Colophon in Greece. At Thebes in Boeotia, and also in Loebadia, Trophonius
was ^he chief oracle. At Memphis a cow, at Corinth an ox called Mineus, in
Arsinoe a crocodile, in Athens a prophet called Amphiaraus, who indeed ^ied at
Thebes, where they say the earth opened, and swallowed him up quick. At Delphos
was the great temple of Apollo, where devils gave oracles by maids (as some
say) hough indeed it was done by priests. ^t was built upon Parnassus hill in
G^eece. And the defenders of oracles ^ay, that even as rivers oftentimes are
diverted to another course; so ^^kewise the spirit, which inspired the chief
prophets, may for a time ^e silent, and revive again by revolution.

Demetrius says, that the spirits, which attended on oracles, waxed ^eary of
the peoples curiosity and importunity, and for shame forsook ^he temple. But
as one that of late has written against prophesies says; ^t is no marvel, H.
Haw. in his defensative against prophesies.
that when the familiars that speak in tru^ks were repel^ed from their harbor
for fear of discovery, the blocks almighty lost their ^enses. For these are
all gone now, and their knavery is espied, (...) as they can to longer abu^^
the world with such bables. But whereas these great doctors supp^se, that the
cause of their dispatch was the coming of Christ; if they mean that the devil
died, so soon as he was born or that then he gave over his occupation: they
are deceived. For the popish church has made a continual practice hereof,
partly for their own private profit, lucre, and gain; and partly to be had in
estimation of the world, and in admiration among the simple. But indeed, (...)
that have learned Christ, and been conversant in his word, have discovered and
shaken off the vanity and abomination hereof. But if those doctors had lived
till this day, they would have said and written, that oracles had ceased, or
rather been driven out of England in the time (...) King Henry the eight, and
of Queen Elizabeth his daughter; who (...) done so much in that behalf, In
whose days oracles ceased in England.
as at this hour they are not only all gone but forgotten here in this
English nation, where they swarmed as this as they did in Boe^tia, or in any
other place in the world. But the credit they had, depended not upon their
desert, but upon the credulity (...) others. Now therefore I will conclude and
make an end of this ^^^ter, with the opinion and saying of the prophet; Vain
is the answer (...) idols. Zach. 10. Isay. 44.
For they have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, mounthes (...) speak not,
etc. and let them show what is to come, and I will say ^^ are gods indeed.

The ninth Book.
CHAP. I.
The Hebrew word Kasam expounded, and how far a Christian may conjecture of
things to come.

KAsam (as John Wierus upon his own knowledge affirms, and upon the word of
Andraeas Masius reports) differs little in signification from the former
word Ob; betokening Vaticinari, I. Wier. lib. de praest demon.
which is, To prophecy, and is most commonly taken in evil part; as in Deuteronomy.
18. Jer. 27. etc. howbeit, sometime in good part; as in Esaias 3. verse 2. To
foretell things to come upon probable conjectures, so as therein we reach no
further than becomes humane capacity, is not (in mine opinion) unlawful, but
rather a commendable manifestation of wisdom and judgment, All divinations
are not condemnable.
the good gifts and notable blessings of GOD, for the which we ought to be
thankful; as also to yield due honor and praise unto him, for the noble order
which he has appointed in nature: praying him to lighten our hearts with the
beams of his wisdom, that we may more and more profit in the true knowledge
of the workmanship of his hands. But some are so nice, that they condemn
generally all sorts of divinations, denying those things that in nature have
manifest causes, and are so framed, as they soreshew things to come, and in
that show amonish us of things after to ensue, exhibiting ^ignes of unknown
and future matters to be judged upon, by the order, law, and course of nature
proposed unto us by God.

And some on the other side are so bewitched with solly, as they attribute to
creatures that estimation, which rightly and truly appertains to God the
creator of all things; affirming that the public and private destinies of all
humane matters, and whatsoever a man would know of things come or gone, is
manifested to us in the heavens: so as by the stars and planets all things
might be known. These would also, that nothing should be taken in hand or gone
about* without the favorable aspect of the planets. By which, and other the
like devises they deprave and profane the ancient and commendable observations
of our forefathers: as did Colebrasus, who taught, that all man's life was
governed by the seven planets; Colebrasus erroneus and impious opinion.
and yet a christian, and condemned for heresy. But let us so far forth
embrace and allow this philosophy and prophesying, as the word of God gives
us leave, and commends the same unto us.

CHAP. II.
Proofs by the old and new Testament^ that certain observations of the
weather are lawful.

WHen God by his word and wisdom had made the heavens, and placed the stars
in the firmanent, Psalm. 13. Ierem. 54. Genesis 1. Ezech 1. Genesis 9.
he said; Let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years.
When he created the rainebowe in the clouds, he said it should be for a sign
and token unto us. Which we find true, not only of the ^^ood past, but also of
the shewers to come. And therefore according to Jesus Sirachs advise, let us
behold it, and praise him that made it. The ^rophet David says; The heavens
declare the glory of God, Ecclus. 43. Ps. 19. and 50
and the earth shows his handy work: day unto day utters the same, and
night unto night teaches knowledge. It is also written that by the
commandment of the holy one the stars are placed, and continue in their
order, and ^aile not in their watch. I^ should appear, Ecclus. 43. Baruch. 3.
that Christ himself did not altogether neglect the course and order of the
heavens, in that he said; When you see a cloud rise out of the west,
streightway you say a shewer comes: and so it is. And when you see the
southwinde blow; Luke 12.24.
you say it will be hot, and so it comes to pass. Again, when it is evening,
you say ^aire weather, for the sky is red: and in the morning you say, to day
shall be a tempest, for the sky is red and louring. Matt. 16.2, 3.
Wherein as he notes that these things do truly come to pass, according to
ancient observation, and to the rule astronomical: so does he also by other
words following admonish us, that in attending too much to those observations,
we neglect not specially to follow our christian vocation.

The physician is commended unto us, and allowed in the scriptures: but so to
put trust in him, as to neglect and distrust God, is severely forbidden and
reproved. Surely it is most necessary for us to know and observe diverse rules
astrological; Lactant contra astrologos. Pe^cer. de astrol. page 383
otherwise we could not with opportunity dispatch our ordinary affairs. And
yet Lactantius condemns and recounteth it among the number of witchcrafts:
from whose censure Calvine does not much vary. The poor husbandman perceives
that the increase of the moon makes plants and living creatures fruitful: so
as in the full moon they are in best strength, decaying in the wane, and in
the conjunction do utterly wither and sade. Which when by observation, use and
practice they have once learned, they distribute their business accordingly;
(...) their times and seasons to sow, to plant, to pruine, to let their (...)
blood, to cut etc.

CHAP. III.
That certain observations are indifferent, certain ridiculous, and certain
impious, whence that cunning is derived of Apollo, and of Aruspices.

I Know not whether to disallow or discommend the curious observation used by
our elders, The ridiculous art of nativity-casting.
who conjectured upon nativities: so as, if Saturn and Mercury were opposite
in any brute sign, a man then borne should be dumb or stammer much; whereas it
is d^yly seen, that children naturally imitate their parents conditions in
that behalf. Also they have noted, that one borne in the spring of the moon,
shall be healthy; in that time of the wane, when the moon is utterly decayed,
the child then borne cannot live; and in the conjunction, it cannot long
continue.

But I am sure the opinion of Julius Maternus is most impious, who writes,
that he which is borne when Saturn is in Leone, shall live long, and after his
death shall go to heaven presently. Julius Maternus his most impious opinion.
And so is this of Albumazar, who says, that whosoever prays to God, when
the moon is in Capite draconis, shall be heard, and obtain his prayer.
Furthermore, to play the cold prophet, as to recount it good or bad luck, when
salt or wine falls on the table, or is shed, etc. or to prognosticate that
guests approach to your house, upon the chattering of pies or haggisters,
whereof there can be yielded no probable reason, is altogether vanity and
superstition: as hereafter shall be more largely showed. But to make simple
people believe, that a man or woman can foretell good or evil fortune, is mere
witchcraft or cousenage: for God is the only searcher of the heart, and
delivers not his counsel to so lewd reprobates I know diverse writers affirm,
that witches foretell things, as prompted by a real devil; and that he again
learneth it out of the prophesies written in the scriptures, Bodinus. Danaeus.
Erastus. Hemingius. Mal. malef. Thom. Aquinas etc.
and by other nimble sleights, wherein he passes any other creature earthly;
and that the same devil, or some of his fellows runs or flies as far as
Rochester, to mother Bungy: or to Canturbury to M. T. or to Delphos, to Apollo;
or to Aesculapius, in Pergamo; or to some other idol or witch, and there by way
of oracle answers all questions, through his understanding of the prophesies
contained in the old testament, especially in Daniel and Esaias: whereby the
devil knew of the translation of the monarchy from Babylon to Graecia, etc.
But either they have learned this of some oracle or witch; or else I know not
where the devil they find it. Marry certain it is, that herein they show
themselves to be witches and ^ond diviners: for they find no such thing written
in Gods word.

Of the idol called Apollo, I have somewhat already spoken in the former title
of Ob or Pytho; and some occasion I shall have to speak thereof hereafter: and
therefore at this time it shall suffice to tell you, tht the credit gained
thereunto, was by the craft and cunning of the priests, which tended thereupon;
who with their counterfeit miracles so bewitched the people, as they thought
such virtue to have been contained in the bodies of those idols, as God has
not promised to any of his angels, or elect people. For it is said, that if
Apollo were in a chafe, he would sweat: Apollos passions.
if he had remorse to the afflicted, and could no^ help them, he would shed
tears, which I believe might have been wiped away with that handkerchiefe, that
wiped and d^yed the Rood of graces face, being in the like perplexities. Even
as another sort of witching priests called Ar^spices prophesied victory to
Alexander, because (...) eagle lighted one his head: which eagle might (I
believe) be cooped or caged with Mahomets dove, that picked ^eason out of his
ear.

CHAP. IV.
The predictions of soothsayers and lewd peiests, the prognostications of
Astronomers and Physicians allowable, Divine Prophecy holy and good.

THe cousening tricks of oracling priests and monks, are and have been
specially most abominable. The superstitious observations of se^lesse augurors
and soothsaiers (contrary to Philosophy, and without authority of scripture)
are very ungodly and ridiculous. What prophesies allowable.
Howbeit, I reject not the prognostications of astronomers, nor the conjectures
or fore warnings of Physicians, nor yet the interpetations of Philosophers;
although in respect of the divine prophesies contained in holy Scriptures; they
are not to be weighed or regarded. For the end of these and the other is not
only far differing; but whereas these contain only ^he words and will of God,
with the other are mingled most horrible lies and cousenages. For though there
be many of them learned and godly, yet lurk there in corner, of the same
profession, a great number of counterfeits and couseners. I. Bodin puts this
difference between divine prophets and inchantors; I.B. lib. de dae. lib. 1.
cap. 4.
to wit, the one says always true, the others words (proceeding from the
devil) are always false; or for one truth they tell a hundred lies. And then
why may not every witch be thought as cunning as Apollo? And why not every
counter^eit consener as good (...) witch as mother Bungie? For it is ods, but
they will hit the truth once in a hundred divinations as well as the best.

CHAP. V.
The diversity of true Prophets, of Vrim, and of the prophetical use of the
twelve precious stones contained therein, of the divine voice called Echo.

IT should appear, that even of holy prophets there were diverse sor^^. For
David and Solomon, Diverse degrees of prophecy.
although in their psalms and parables are contained most excellent mysteries,
and notable allegories: yet they were not endued with that degree of prophecy,
that Ely and Elisha were, etc. For as often as it is said, 2 Reg. 2.
that God spoke to David or Solomon, it is meant to be done by the prophets.
For NATHAN or GAD were the Messengers and Prophets to reveal Gods will to
David. And Ahiam the Silonite was sent from God to Solomon. Item, the spirit of
prophecy which Elias had, was doubled upon Elisha. Also some prophets
prophesied all their lives, some had but one vision, and some had more
according to Gods pleasure; yea some prophesied unto the people of such things
as came not to pass, and that was where Gods wrath was pacifyed by repentance.
But these prophets were always reputed among the people to be wise and godly;
whereas the Heathen prophets were evermore known and said to be mad and
foolish: as it is written both of the prophets of Sibylla, and also of Apollo;
and at this day also in the Indies, etc.

But that any of these extraordinary gifts remain at this day, I Bodin.
Bodin, nor any witchmonger in the world shall never be able to prove: though
he in his book of devilish madness would make men believe it. For these were
miraculously maintained by God among the Jews, who were instructed by them of
all such things as should come to pass; or else informed by Urim: so as the
priests by the brightness of the twelve precious stones contained therein,
Joseph. de antiquit.
could prognosticate or expound any thing. Which brightness and virtue ceased
(as Josephus reports) two hundred years before he was born. So as since that
time, no answers were yielded thereby of Gods will and pleasure. Iosue filius
Levi. lib. Pirkeaboth.
Nevertheless, the Hebrews write; that there has been ever since that time,
a divine voice heard among them, which in Latin is called Filia vocis, in
Greek (...), in English the Daughter of speech.

CHAP. VI.
Of Prophesies conditional: whereof the Prophesies in the old testament do
entreat, and by whom they were published; witchmongers answers to the
objections against witches supernatural actions.

CHrist and his Apostles prophesied of the calamities and afflictions, which
shall greeve and disturb the church of God in this life: also of the last day,
and of the signs and tokens that shall be showed before that day: and finally
of all things, which are requisite for us to foreknow. Howbeit, such is the
mercy of God, that all prophesies, threatenings, plagues, Prophesies
conditional.
and punishments are annexed to conditions of repentance: as on the other side,
corporal blessings are tied under the condition of the cross and castigation.
So as by them the mysteries of our salvation being discovered unto us, we are
not to seek new signs and miracles; but to attend to the doctrine of the
Apostles, who preached Christ exhibited and crucified for our sins, his
resurrection, ascension, and thereby the redemption of as many as believe, etc.

The prophesies in the old testament treat of the conti^ance, the government,
and the difference of estates: of the distinction of the four Monarchies, of
their order, decay and instauration; of the changes and ruins of the Kingdoms
of Juda, The subject of the prophesies of the old testament.
Israel, Egypt, Persia, Graecia, etc. and specially of the coming of our
Savior Jesus Christ; and how he should be borne of a Virgin, and where, of his
Tribe, passion, resurrection, etc. These prophesies were published by Gods
special and peculiar Prophets, endued with his particular and excellent gifts,
according to his promise; I will raise them up a Prophet out of the midst of
their Brethren, I will put my words in his mouth, etc. Which though it were
specially spoken of Christ, yet was it also spoken of those particular
prophets, which were placed among them by God to declare his will which were
also figures of Christ the prophet himself. Now if prophecy be an
extraordinary gift of God, and a thing peculiar to himself, as without whose
special assistance no creature can be a Prophet, or show what is to come; why
should we believe, that those lewd persons can perform by divinations and
miracles that which is not in humane but in Divine power to accomplish?

Howbeit when I deny that witches can ride in the air, and the miraculous
circumstance thereof: by and by it is objected to me, that Enoch and Ely were
rapt into the heaven bodily; and Abacuck was carried in the air, 2 Reg. 2.13.
to feed Daniel: and so falsely oppose a devils or a witches power against the
virtue of the Holy Ghost. If I ^eride the Poets opinions, saying, that witches
cannot Coelo deducere lunam, fetch the moon from heaven, etc. they tell me that
at Joshua's battle the sun stayed, and at the passion of Christ there was
palpable darkness. If I deny their cunning in the exposition of dreams,
advising them to remember Jeremie's counsel, not to follow or credit the
expositors of dreams; they hit me in the teeth with Daniel and Joseph: for that
the one of them expounded Pharaoh the Persian Kings, the other N^buchadn^zzer
the Egyptian Kings dream. If I say with Solomon, Eccles. 9.5.
that the dead know nothing, and that the dead know us not, neither are
remooveable out of Abraham's bosom, etc. they produce the story of Samuel: 1 Samuel 28.
wherein; I say, they set the power (...) creature as high as the Creator. If I
say, that these witches cannot transubstantiate themselves, nor others into
beasts, etc. they ci^e the story of Nebuchadnezzer; as though indeed he were
made a ma^e^iall beast, and that also by witchcraft; and strengthen that their
assertion with the fables of Circe and Ulysses his companions, etc.

CHAP. VII.
What were the miracles expressed in the old Testament, and what are they in
the new testament: and that we are not now to look for any more miracles.

THe miracles expressed in the old Testament were many, but the end of them all
was one, Genesis 11.6. Genesis 21. Dan. 11.
though they were diverse and differing in shew^ as where the sacrifices of
Moses, Elias and Solomon, being abundantly wet were burnt with fire from
heaven, etc. The variety of tongues at the building of Babylon, Isaacs birth of
Sarah being by nature past children, the passage through the red sea, Daniels
foretelling of the four monarchies, in the fourth whereof he apparently
foresheweth the coming of the Lord. All these, and many other, which are
expressed in the old testament, were merciful instructions and notable*
miracles to strengthen the faith of Gods people in their Messiah. If you had
gone to Delphos, Apollo would have made you believe with his amphibological
answers, that he could have foretold you all these things. A sum of Christ's
miracles.


The miracles wrought by Christ were the raising up of the dead (which many
would impute to the woman of Endor, and also to our witches and conjurors) the
restoring of the lame to limbs, the blind to sight, the dumb to speech, and
finally the healing of all diseases, which many believe our witches can do;
yea, and as they themselves will take it upon them. As for casting out of
devils (which was another kind of miracles usual with Christ) witches and
conjurors are said to be as good thereat as ever he was: and yet, if you will
believe Christ's words, it cannot be so. For he says; Mat. 12 25.
Every kingdom divided against it self, shall be brought to naught, etc. If
Satan cast out Satan, he is divided, etc. and his kingdom shall not endure,
etc.

Peter's chains fell off in prison, so did Richard Gallisies fetters at
Windsor: marry the prison doors opened not to Richard, as they did to Peter.
Helias by special grace obtained rain, our witches can make it rain, when
they list, etc. Bu^ since Christ did these miracles, and many more, and all
to confirm his truth, and strengthen our faith, and finally for the conversion
of the people (as appears in John 6.7. and 12. insomuch as he vehemently
reproved such, Luke 10.13.
as upon the sight of them would not believe, saying* Woe be to thee Corazin, woe
be to thee Bethsaida. If the miracles had been done in Tire and Sidon, which
have been done in you, they had a great while ago repented, etc. Let us setle
and acquiet our faith in Christ, and believing all his wondrous works, let us
reject these old wives fables, as lying vanities: whereof you may find in the
golden legend, M. Mal. and specially in Bodin miraculous stuff, enough to
check all the miracles expressed in the old and new testament; which are of
more credit with many bewitched people, then the true miracles of Christ
himself. Insomuch as they stand in more awe of the menacies of a witch, then
of all the threatenings and curses pronounced by God, and expressed in his word.
And thus much touching the word Kasam.

The tenth Book.
CHAP. I.
The interpretation of this Hebrew word Onen, of the vanity of dreams, and
divinati^ns thereupon.

ONEN differs not much from Kasam, but that it is extended to the
interpretation of dreams. And as for dreams, whatsoever credit is attributed
unto them, proceeds of folly: and they are fools that trust in them, for
why? Ecclus. 24. Ierem. 27. Eccle. 5.
they have deceived many. In which respect the prophet gives us good warning,
not to follow nor harken to the expositors of dreams, for they come through
the m^^titude of business. And therefore those witches, that make men believe
they can prophecy upon dreams, as knowing the interpretation of them, and
either for money or glory abuse men and women thereby, are mere couseners, and
worthy of great punishment: as are such witchmongers, as believing them,
attribute unto them s^chdivine power (...) only belongs to God: Ierem.
23.25.26.27. Read the words.
as appears in Jeremy the prophet.

CHAP. II.
Of divine, natural, and casual dreams, with their differing causes and
effects.

MAcrobius recounteth five differences of images, or rather imaginations
exhibited unto them that sleep, which for the most part do figni^ie somewhat
in admonition. Peucer in divinat. ex somnijs.
There be also many subdivisions made hereof, which I think needless to
rehearse. In Jasper Pe^cer they are to be seen, with the cause^ and occasions
of dreams. There were wo^^ to be delivered from God himself o^ his angels,
certain dreams and visions unto the prophets and holy fathers: according to
the saying of Joel; I will pour my spirit upon all flesh, Joel 2. Matthew. 1.20.
Matthew. 2.13.
your young men shall dream dreams, and your old men shall see visions. These
kind of dreams (I say) were the admonishments and forewarnings of God to his
people: as that of Joseph, to abide with Mary his wife, after she was conceived
by the Holy Ghost, as also to convey our Savior Christ into Egypt, etc. the
interpretation whereof are the peculiar gifts of God, Genesis 39. and 40. and 41.
Dan. 2.
which Joseph the patriarch, and Daniel the prophet had most specially.

As for physical conjectures upon dreams, the scriptures improve them not: for
by them the physicians many times do understand the state of their patients
bodies. For some of them come by means of choler, phlegm, melancholy, or
blood; and some by love, surfeit, hunger, thirst, etc. Galen and Boethius were
said to deal with devils, because they told so justly their patients dreams,
or rather by their dreams their special diseases. Howbeit, physical dreams
are natural, and the cause of them dwells in the nature of man. For they are
the inward actions of the mind in the spirits of the brain, whilst the body
is occupied with sleep: for as touching the mind it self, it never sleeps.
These dreams vary, according to the difference of humors and vapors. There are
also casual dreams, Eccles. 5.
which (as Solomon says) come through the multitude of business. For as a
looking-glass shows the image or figure thereunto opposite: so in dreams,
the fantasy and imagination informs the understanding of such things as
haunt the outward sense. Whereupon the poet says.

Somnia ne cures, nam men's humana quod optat,
Dum vigil at sperans, Englished by Abraham Fleming.
per somnum cernit id ipsum.
Regard no dreams, for why? the mind
Of that in sleep a view does take,
Which it does wish and hope to find,
At such time as it is awake.
CHAP. III.
The opinion of diverse old writers touching dreams, and how they vary in
noting the causes thereof.

SYnesius, Themistius, Democritus, and others grounding themselves upon
examples that chance has sometimes verified, A dissonancie in opinions about
dreams.
persuade men, that nothing is dreamed in vain: affirming that the heavenly
influencies do b^ing forth diverse forms in corporal matters; and of the same
influencies, visions and dreams are printed in the fantastical power, which is
instrumental, with a celestial disposition meet to bring forth some effect,
especially in sleep, when the mind (being free from bodily cares) may more
liberally receive the heavenly influencies, whereby many things are known to
them sleeping in dreams, which they that wake cannot see. Plato attributes
them to the forms and engendered knowledges of the soul; Avicen to the last
intelligence that moves the moon, through the light that lighteneth the
fantasy in sleep; Aristotle to the fantastical sense; Averroes to the
imaginative; Albert to the influence of superior bodies.

CHAP. IV.
Against interpreters of dreams, of the ordinary cause of dreamer, Hemingius
his opinion of diabolical dreams, the interpretation of dreams ceased.

THere are books carried about concerning this matter, under the name of
Abraham, who (as Philo In lib. gigantum says) was the first inventor of the
exposition of dreams: and so likewise of Solomon and Daniel. But Cicero In
lib. de divinatione confuteth the vanity and folly of them that give credit to
dreams. And as for the interpreters of dreams, as they know not before the
dream, nor yet after any ceatainty; yet when any thing afterward happens,
then they apply the dream to that which has chanced.

Certainly men never lightly fa^le to dream by night, of that which they
meditate by day: and by day they see diverse and sundry things, and conceive
them severally in their minds. Then those mixed conceits being laid up in the
closet of the memory, strive together; which, because the fantasy cannot
discern nor discuss* some certain thing gathered of many conceits is bred
and contrived in one together. The pleasant art of the interpretation of
dreams. N. Hemin. in admonitionib. de superstitionib magicis vitandis.
And therefore in my opinion, it is time vainly employed, to study about the
interpretation of dreams. He that list to see the folly and vanity thereof,
may read a vain treatise, set out by Thomas Hill Londone^, 1568.

Lastly, there are diabolical dreams, which Nicholaus Hemingius devideth into
three sorts. The first is, when the devil immediately of himself (he means
corporally) offers any matter of dream. Secondly, when the devil shows
revelations to them that have made request unto him therefore. Thirdly, when
magicians by art bring to pass, that other men dream what they will.
Assuredly these, and so all the rest (as they may be used) are very magical
and devilish dreams. For although we may receive comfort of mind by those,
which are called divine dreams, and health of body through physical dreams:
yet if we take upon us to use the office of God in the revelation or rather the
interpretation of them; or if we attribute unto them miraculous effects (now
when we see the gifts of prophecy, The end and use of prophecy,
interpretation of dreams, operation of miracles, etc.
and of interpretation of dreams, and also the operation of miracles are
ceased, which were special and peculiar gifts of God, to confirm the truth of
the word, and to establish his people in the faith of the Messiah, who is now
exhibited unto us both in the testament, and also in the blood of our Savior
Jesus Christ) we are bewitched, and both abuse and offend the majesty of God,
and also seduce, delude and cosen all such as by our persuasion, and their own
light belief, give us credit.

CHAP. V.
That neither witches, nor any other, can either by words or hearb^, thrust
into the mind of a sleeping man, what cogitations or dreams they list; and
whence magical dreams come.

I Grant there may be herbs and stones found and known to the physicians,
which may procure dreams; Seek for such stuff in my book of Har^umim.
and other herbs and stones, etc. to make one bewraie all the secrets of his
mind, when his body sleeps, or at leastwise to procure speech in sleep. But
that witches or magicians have power by words, herbs, or imprecations to
thrust into the mind or conscience of man, what it shall please them, by virtue
of their charms, herbs, stones or familiars, etc. according to the opinion of
Hemingius, I deny: though therewithal I confess, that the devil both by day
and also by night, travelleth to seduce man, and to lead him from God; yea and
that no way more then this, where he places himself as God in the minds of
them that are so credulous, to attribute unto him, or unto witches that which
is only in the office, nature and power of God to accomplish.

Does not Daniel the prophet say, even in this case; It is the Lord only that
knows such secrets, Dan. 2.
as in the exposition of dreams is required? And does not Joseph repeat those
very words to Pharaohs officers, who consulted with him therein? Genesis 11.8.
Genesis 37. and 11. Isa. 11. Dan. 2.
Examples of divine dreams you may find a great number in the scripture, such
(I mean) as it pleased God to reveal his pleasure by. Of physical dreams we
may both read in Authors, and see in our own experience daily, or rather
nightly. Such dreams also as are casual, they are likewise usual, and come (as
has been said) through the maltitude of affairs and business. Those which in
these days are called magical or diabolical dreams, may rather be called
melancholical. For out of that black vapor in sleep^ through dreams appears
(as Aristotle says) some horrible thing; Aristot. de somnio.
and as it were the image of an ugly devil: sometimes also other terrible
visions, imagniations, counsels, and practices. As where we read of a certain
man, that dreamed there appeared one unto him that required him to throw
himself into a deep pit, and that he should reap great benefit thereby at Gods
hands. So as the miserable wretch giving credit thereunto, performed the matter
and killed himself. Now I confess, that the interpretation or execution of
that dream was indeed diabolical: but the dream was casual, derived from the
heavy and black humor of melancholy.

CHAP. VI.
How men have been bewitched, cousened or abused by dreams to dig and search
for money.

How many have been bewitched with dreams, and thereby made to consume
themselves with digging and searching for money, Such would be embarked in the
ship of fools.
etc. whereof they, or some other have dreamt? I my self could manifest, as
having known how wise men have been that way abused by very simple persons,
even where no dream has been met withal, but waking dreams. And this has
been used heretofore, as one of the finest cousening fea^s: in so much as there
is a very formal art thereof devised, with many excellent superstitions and
ceremonies thereunto belonging, which I will set down as briefly as may be.
Albeit that here in England; this proverb has been current; An English
proverb.
to wit, dreams prove contrary: according to the answer o^ the priests boy to
his master, who told his said boy that he dream^ he kissed his tail: yea
master (says he) but dreams prove contrary, you must kiss mine.

CHAP. VII.
The art and order to be used in digging for money, revealed by dreams: how to
procure pleasant dreams: of morning and midnight dreams.

Note this superstitious dotage.
THere must be made upon a hazel wand three crosses, and certain words both
blasphemous and impious must be said over it, and hereunto must be added
certain characters, and barbarous names. And whilst the Treasure is a digging,
there must be read the psalms, De profundi^, Missa, Misereatur nostri,
Requiem, Pater noster, Ave Maria, Et ne (...) inducas in tentationem, sed
libera nos a malo, Amen. A porta inferni cred^ videre bona, etc. Expectate
Dominum, Requiem aeternam. And then a certain prayer. And if the time of
digging be neglected, the devil will carry all the treasure away. See other
more absolute conjurations for this purpose, in the word Iidoni following.

I. Bap. Neap. in natural mag. lib. 2. cap. 26. fol. 83. and 84.
You shall find in Johannes, Baptista Neapolitanus, diverse receipts by herbs
and potions, to procure pleasant or fearful dreams; and perfumes also to that
effect: who affirms, that dreams in the dead of the night are commonly
preposterous and monstrous; and in the morning when the gross humors be spent,
there happen more pleasant and certain dreams, the blood being more pure then
at other times: the reason whereof is there expressed.

CHAP. VIII.
Sundry receipts and ointments, made and used for the transportation of
witches, and other miraculous effects: an instance thereof reported and
credited by some that are lea^ned.

IT shall not be amiss here in this place to repeat an oinment greatly to
this purpose, rehearsed by the aforesaid John Bapt. Neap. wherein although he
may be overtaken and cousened by an old witch, and made not only to believe,
but also to report a false tale; yet because it greatly overthrows the
opinion of M. Mal. Bodin, and such other, as write so absolutely in maintenance
of witches transportations. I will set down his words in this behalf. The
receipt is as follows.

The fat of young children, Confections or receipts for the miraculous
transportation of witches.
and sees it with water in a brazen vessel, reserving the thickest of that
which remains boiled in the bottom, which they lay up and keep, until
occasion serves to use it. They put hereunto Eleoselinum, Aconitum, Frondes
populeas, Mountain Persly, Wolfesbane, leaves of the poplar and Soote.

Another receipt to the same purpose.

Sium, acarum vulgar, pentaphyllon, yellow watercresses, common Acorus,
Cinquefoile, the blood of a flitter-mouse, solanum somniferum, and oleum.
Sleeping nightshade and oil. They stamp all these together, and then they rub
all parts of their bodies exceedingly, till they look red, and be very hot, so
as the pores may be opened, and their flesh soluble and loose. They join
herewithal either fat, or oil in stead thereof, that the force of the ointment
may the rather pierce inwardly, and so be more effectual. By this means (says
he) in a moone-light night they seem to be carried in the air, to feasting,
singing, dancing, kissing, ^ulling, and other acts of venery, with such youths
as they love and desire most: for the force (says he) of their imagination is
so vehement, that almost all that part of the brain, wherein the memory
consists, is full of such conceits. And whereas they are naturally prone to
believe any thing; so do they receive such impressions and steadfast
imaginations into their minds, as even their spirits are altered thereby; not
thinking upon any thing else, either by day or by night. And this helps them
forward in their imaginations, Vetulae, quas a strigis similitudine, striges
vocant, quaque noctu puerulorum sanguinem in cunis cubantium exsorbent.
that their usual food is none other commonly but beets, roots, nuts, beans,
pease, etc.

Now (says he) when I considered thoroughly hereof, remaining doubtful of the
matter, there fell into my hands a witch, who of her own accord did promise me
to fetch me an errand out of hand from far countries, and willed all them, whom
I had brought to witness the matter, to depart out of the chamber. And when
she had undressed her self, and f^oted her body with certain ointments (which
action we beheld through a chinke or little hole of the door) she fell down
through the force those soporiferous or sleepy ointments into a most sound and
heavy sleep: so as we did break open the door, and did beat her exceedingly;
but the force of her sleep was such, as it took away from her the sense of
feeling: and we departed for a time. Now when her strength and powers were
weary and decayed, she awoke of her own accord, and began to speak many vain
and doting words, affirming that she had passed over both seas and mountains;
delivering to us many untrue and false reports: we earnestly denied them, she
impudently affirmed them. This (says he) will not so come to pass with every
one, but only with old women that are melancholic, whose nature is extreme
cold, and their evaporation small; and they both perceive and remember what
they see in that case and taking of theirs.

CHAP. IX.
A confutation of the former follies, as well concerning ointments, dreams,
etc. as also of the assembly of witches, and of their consultations and bankets
at sundry places, and all in dreams.

BUt if it be true that S. Augustine says, and many other writers that witches
nightwalkings are but fantasies and dreams: then all the reports of their
bargain, transporting, and meetings with Diana, Minerva, etc. are but fables;
and then do they ly that maintain those actions to be done in deed and verity,
which in truth are done no way. It were marvel on the one side (if those things
happened in dreams, which nevertheless the witches affirm to be otherwise)
that when those witches awake, they neither consider nor remember that they
were in a dream. It were marvel that their ointments, by the physicians
opinions having no force at all to that effect, as they confess which are
inquisitors, should have such operation. It were marvel that their ointments
cannot be found any where, Barthol. Spinaeus, q. de strigib. c. 31.
saving only in the inquisitors books. It were marvel, that when a stranger
is anointed therewith, they have sometimes, and yet not always, the like
operation as with witches; which all the inquisitors confess.

But to this last, friar Bartholomaeus says, that the witches themselves,
before they anoint themselves, do hear in the night time a great noise of
minstrels, which fly over them, with the lady of the fairies, and then they
address themselves to their journey. Bar. Spin. qu. de strigib. c. 30
But then I marvel again, that no body else hearth nor sees this troop of
minstrels, especially riding in a moonlight night. It is marvel, that they
that think this to be but in a dream, can be persuaded that all the rest is
any other th^^ dreams. New matter and worthy to be marvelled at.
It is marvel that in dreams, witches of old acquaintance meet so just
together, and conclude upon murders, and receive ointments, roots, powders,
etc. (as witchmongers report they do, and as they make the witches confess)
and yet ly at home fast asleep. It is marvel that such preparation is made for
them (as Sprenger, Bartholomew, and Bodin report) as well in noble men's houses,
as in alehouses; and that they come in dreams, and eat up their meat: and
the al^wi^e specially is not wearied with them for non-payment of their score,
or false payment; to wit, with imaginary money, which they say is not
substantial, and that they talk not afterward about the reckoning, and so
discover the matter. And it is most marvel of all, that the hostess, etc. does
not sit among them, and take part of their good cheer. For so it is that if any
part of these their meetings and league be true, it is as true and as certainly
proved and confessed, that at some alehouse, or some time at some Gentleman's
house, Legend. aur. in vita S. Germani.
there is continual preparation made monthly for this assembly: as appears
in S. Germans story.

CHAP. X.
That most part of prophesies in the old Testament were revealed in dreams,
that we are not now to look for such revelations, of some who have dreamt of
that which has come to pass, that dreams prove contrary Nabuchadnezzers rule
to know a true Expositor of Dreams.

IT is held and maintained by diverse, and gathered out of the 12. of Numbers,
that all which was written or spoken by the prophets, among the children of
Israel (Moses excepted) was propounded to them by dreams. And indeed it is
manifest, that many things, which are thought by the unlearned to have been
really finished, have been only performed by dreams and visions. As where
Solomon required of God the gift of wisdom: 1 Ki. 3.5.15.
that was (I say) in a dream; and also where he received promise of the
continuance of the kingdom of Israel in his line. So was Esay's vision in the
6. of his prophecy: as also that of Ezechiel the 12. Finally, 1 Kings 9. Esaias
6. Ezechiel 12. Jeremy 13.
where Jeremie was commanded to hide his girdle in the clift of a rock at the
River Euphrates in Babylon; and that after certain days, it did there putrefy,
it must needs be in a dream; for Jeremy was never (or at least wise not then)
at Babylon. We that are christians must not now slumber and dream, but watch
and pray, and meditate upon our salvation in Christ both day and night. And if
we expect revelations in our dreams, now, when Christ is come, we shall deceive
our selves: for in him are fullfilled all dreams and prophesies. I. Bodin. lib.
de daem. 1. cap. 5.
Howbeit, Bodin holds that dreams and visions continue till this day, in as
miraculous manner as ever they did.

If you read Artemidorus, you shall read many stories of such as dreamt of
things that afterward came to pass. But he might have cited a thousand for
one that fell out contrary: for as for such dreamers among the Jews themselves,
as had not extraordinary visions miraculously exhibited unto them by God, they
were counted couseners, as may appear by these words of the prophet Zachary;
Surely the idols have spoken vanity, and the soothsayers have seen a ly,
Zachary 10.2.
and the dreamers have told a vainthing. According to Solomon's saying; Eccles.
5.6. Jeremy 23.
In the multitude of dreams and vanities are many words. It appears in
Jeremie 23. that the false prophets, whilst they illuded the people with lies,
counterfeiting the true prophets, used to cry out, Dreams, dreams; We have
dreamed a dream, etc. Finally, Nabuchadnezzer teaches all men to know a true
expositor of dreams; to wit, such a one as has his revelation from God. For
he can (as Daniel did) repeat your dream before you discover it: Daniel 21.
which thing if any expounder of dreams can do at this day, I will believe him.

The eleventh Book.
CHAP. I.
The Hebrew word Nahas expounded, of the art of augury, who invented it, how
slovenly a science it is: the multitude of sacrifices and sacrificers of the
heathen, and the causes thereof.

NAHAS, is to observe the flying of birds, and comprehends all such other
observations, where men do guess upon uncertain toies. It is found in Deuteronomy.
18. and in 2. Chron. 33. and elsewhere. Of this art of augury Tyresias the king
of the Thebans is said to be the first inventor: but Tages first published the
discipline thereof, The slovenly art of augury.
being but a little boy; as Cicero reports out of the books of the
Hetruscans themselves. Some points of this art are more high and profound than
some others, and yet are they more homely and slovenly then the rest; as
namely, the divination upon the entrails of beasts, which the Gentiles in their
sacrifices specially observed. Insomuch as Marcus Varro, seeing the absurdity
thereof, said that these gods were not only idle, but very slovens, that used
so to hide their secrets and councels in the guts and bowels of beasts.

How vainly, absurdly, and superstitiously the heathen used this kind of
divination in their sacrifices, is manifested by their actions and ceremonies
in that behalf practiced, as well in times past, as at this hour. The
Egyptians had 666. several sorts and kinds of sacrifices; the Romans had
almost as many; the Graecians had not so few as they; the Persians and the
Medes were not behind them; the Indians and other nations have at this instant
their sacrifices full of variety, and more full of barbarous impiety. For in
sundry places, these offer sacrifices to the devil, hoping thereby to move him
to lenity: yea these commonly sacrifice such of their enemies, as they have
taken in war: as we read that the Gentiles in ancient time did offer
sacrifice, to appease the wrath and indignation of their feigned gods.

CHAP. II.
Of the Jews sacrifice to Moloch, a discourse thereupon, and of Purgatory.

THe Jews used one kind of diabolical sacrifice, never taught them by Moses, 2
Reg. 23.10. 2 Chr. 33. Jerem. 7. Deuteronomy. 18.10. Lev. 18.21. Id. cap. 20.2.
namely, to offer their children to Moloch, making their sons and their
daughters to run through the fi^e; supposing such grace and efficacy to have
been in that action, as other witche^ affirm to be in charms and words. And
therefore among other points of witchcraft, this is specially and namely
forbidden by Moses We read of no more miracles wrought hereby, than by any
other kind of witchcraft in the old or new Testament expressed. It was no
ceremony appointed by God, no figure of Christ: An invincible argument against
purgatory.
perhaps it might be a sacrament or rather a figure of purgatory, the which
place was not remembered by Moses. Neither was there any sacrifice appointed by
the law for the relief of the Israelites souls that there should be
tormented. Which without all doubt should not have been omitted, if any such
place of purgatory had been then, as the Pope has lately devised for his
private and special lucre. This sacrificing to Moloch (as some affirm) was
usual among the Gentiles, from whence the Jews brought it into Israel: and
there (of likelihood) the Eutichists learned the obomination in that behalf.

CHAP. III.
The Canibals cruelty, of popish sacrifices exceeding in tyranny the Jews or
Gentiles.

THe incivility and cruel sacrifices of popish priests do yet exceed both the
Jew and the Gentile: Against the papists abominable and blasphemous sacrifice
of the mass.
for these take upon them to sacrifice Christ himself. And to make their
tyranny the more apparent, they are not contended to have killed him once, but
daily and hourly torment him with new deaths; yea they are not ashamed to
swear, that with their carnal hands they tear his humane substance, breaking
it into small gobbets; and with their external teeth chew his flesh and bones,
contrary to divine or humane nature; and contrary to the prophecy, which
says; There shall not a bone of him be broken. Finally, in the end of their
sacrifices (as they say) they eat him up raw, Psalm. 34.20.
and swallow down into their guts every member and parcel of him: and last of
all, that they convey him into the place where they bestow the residue of all
that which they have devoured that day. And this same barbarous impiety
exceeds the cruelty of all others: for all the Gentiles consumed their
sacrifices with fire, which they thought to be holy.

CHAP. IV.
The superstition of the heathen about the element of fire, and how it grew in
such reverence among them, of their corruptions, and that they had some inkling
of the godly fathers doings in that behalf.

AS touching the element of fire, and the superstition thereof about those
businesses, you shall understand, that many superstitious people of all nations
have received, and reverenced, as the most holy thing among their sacrifices:
insomuch (I say) as they have worshipped it among their gods, calling it
Orimasda (to wit) holy fire, and divine light. The Greeks called it (...), the
Romans Vesta, which is, The fire of the Lord. Surely they had heard of the fire
that came down from heaven, and consumed the oblations of the fathers; and
they understood it to be God himself. For there came to the heathen, the bare
names of things, from the doctrine of the godly fathers and patriarchs, and
those so obscured with fables, and corrupted with lies, so overwhelmed with
superstitions, and disguised with ceremonies, that it is hard to judge from
whence they came. Some cause thereof (I suppose) was partly the translations of
governments, whereby one nation learned folly of another; and partly blind
devotion, without knowledge of Gods word: but specially the want of Grace,
which they sought not for, according to Gods commandment and will. And that
the Gentiles had some inkling of the godly fathers doings, may diversely
appear. Do not the Muscovits, and Indian prophets at this day, The
Gymnosophists of In^ia their apish imatation of Esaias.
like apes, imitate Esaias? Because he went naked certain years, they forsooth
counterfeit madness, and drink potions for that purpose; thinking that
whatsoever they say in their madness, will certainly come to pass. But hereof
is more largely discoursed before in the word Kasam.

CHAP. V.
Of the Roman sacrifices: of the estimation they had of augury, of the law of
the twelve tables.

THe Romans, even after they were grown to great civility, and enjoyed a most
flourishing state and commonwealth; would sometimes sacrifice themselves,
sometimes their children, sometimes their friends, etc. consuming the same with
fire, which they thought holy. Such estimation (I say) was attributed to that
of divination upon the entrails of beasts, etc. At Rome, the chief princes
themselves exercised the same; namely, Romulus, Fabius Maximus, etc. insomuch
as there was a decree made there, by the whole senate, that ^ix of the chief
magistrates sons should from time to time be put forth, to learn the mystery
of these arts of augury and divination, at Hetruria, where the cunning and
knowledge thereof most abounded. When they came home well informed and
instructed in this art, their estimation and dignity was such, as they were
accounted, reputed, and taken to be the intrepretors of the gods, or rather
between the gods and them. No high priest, nor any other great officer was
elected, but these did either absolutely nominate them, or else did exhibit the
names of two, whereof the senate must choose the one.

In their ancient laws were written these words: Prodigia and portenta ad
Hetruscos aruspices (si senatus iusserit) deferunto, The law of the twelve
tables.
Hetruriaeque principes disciplinam discunto. Quibus divis decreverunto,
procuranto, isdem fulgura and ostenta pianto, auspicia servanto, auguri
parento: the effect of which words is this; Let all prodigious and portentous
matters be carried to the soothsayers of Hetruria, at the will and commandment
of the senate; and let the young princes be sent to Hetruria, there to learn
that discipline, or to be instructed in that art or knowledge. Let there be
always some solicitor, to learn with what gods they have decreed or
determined their matters; and let sacrifices be made unto them in times of
lightening, or at any strange or supernatural show. Let all such conjecturing
tokens be observed; whatsoever the soothsayer commands, let it be religiously
obeyed.

CHAP. VI.
Colleges of Augurors, their office, their number, the signification of
augury, that the practisers of that art were couseners, their profession, their
places of exercise, their apparel, their superstition.

ROmulus erected three Colleges or Centuries of those kinds of soothsayers,
which only (and none other) should have authority to expound the minds and
admonishment of the gods. Afterward that number was augmented to five, Magna
charta H. 3.36.7. Ed. 1.15. R. 2.5.
and after that to nine: for they must needs be odd. In the end they increased
so fast, that they were feign to make a decree for stay from the further
proceeding in those erections: like to our Statute of Mortmaine. Howbeit, Sylla
(contrary to all orders and constitutions before made) increased that number to
four and twenty.

And though Augurium be most properly that divination, which is gathered by
birds; yet because this word Nahas comprehends all other kinds of divination,
as Extispicium, aruspicium, etc. which is as well the guessing upon the
entrails of beasts, as diverse other ways: omitting physiognomy and palmestry,
and such like, for the tediousness and folly thereof; I will speak a little
of such arts, as were above measure regarded of our elders: neither mind I to
discover the whole circumstance, but to refute the vanity thereof, and
specially of the Professors of them, which are and always have been cousening
arts, and in them contained both special and several kinds of witchcrafts. For
the masters of these faculties have ever taken upon them to occupy the place
and name of God; blasphemously ascribing unto themselves his omnipotent power,
to foretell, etc. whereas, in truth, they could or can do nothing, but make a
show of that which is not.

One matter, A manifest discovery of augurors cousenage.
to bewray their cousening, is; that they could never work nor foreshew any
thing to the poor or inferior sort of people: for portentous shows (say they)
always concerned great estates. Such matters as touched the baser sort, were
inferior causes; which the superstition of the people themselves would not
neglect to learn. Howbeit, the professors of this art descended not so low, as
to communicate with them: for they were priests (which in all ages and nations
have been jolly fellows) whose office was, to tell what should come to pass,
either touching good luck or bad fortune; to expound the minds, admonitions,
warnings and threatenings of the Gods, to foreshew calamities, etc. which might
be (by their sacrifices and common contrition) removed and qualifyed. And
before their entrance into that action, they had many observations, which they
executed very superstitiously; pretending that every bird and beast, etc.
should be sent from the gods as foreshewers of somewhat. And therefore first
they used to choose a clear day, and fair weather to do their business in:
for the which their place was certainly assigned, as well in Rome as in
Hetruria, wherein they observed every quarter of the element, which way to
look, and which way to stand, etc. Their apparel was very priestlike, of
fashion altered from all others, specially at the time of their prayers,
wherein they might not omit a word no^ a syllable: in respect whereof one read
the service, and all the residue repeated it after him, in the manner of a
procession.

CHAP. VII.
The times and seasons to exercise augury, the manner and order thereof, of the
ceremonies thereunto belonging.

NO less regard was there had of the times of their practice in that
ministry: for they must begin at midnight, Note the superstitious ceremonies
of augurors.
and end at noon, no^ traveling therein in the decay of the day, but in the
increase of the same, neither in the sixth or seventh hour of the day, nor yet
after the month of August; because then young birds fly about, and are
diseased and unperfect, mounting their feathers, and flying out of the country:
so as no certain guess is to be made of the gods purposes by them at those
season^. But in their due times they standing with a bowed wand in their hand,
their face toward the east, etc. in the top of an high tower, the wether being
clear, watch for birds, noting from whence they came, and whither they fly, and
in what sort they wag their wings, etc.

CHAP. VIII.
Upon what signs and tokens augurors did prognosticate, observations touching
the inward and outward parts of beasts, with notes of beasts behavior in the
slaughterhouse.

THese kind of witches, whom we have now in hand, did also prognosticate good
or bad luck, according to the soundnes or imperfection of the entrails of
beasts; or according to the superfluities or infirmities of nature; or
according to the abundance of humors unnecessary, appearing in the inward
parts and bowels of the beasts sacrificed. For as touching the outward parts,
it was always provided and foreseen, that they should be without blemish.
Observations in the art augurificall.
And yet there were many tokens and notes to be taken of the external actions
of those beasts, at the time of sacrifice: as if they would not quietly be
brought to the place of execution, but must be forceably hailed; or if they
brake loose; or if by hap, cunning or strength they withstood the first blow,
or if after the butchers blow they leaped up, rored, stood fast; or being
fallen, kicked, or would not quietly die, or bled not well; or if any ill news
had bin heard, or any ill fight seen at the time of slaughter or sacrifice:
which were all significations of ill luck and unhappy success. On the other
side, if the slaughterman performed his office well, so as the beast had been
well chosen, not infected, but whole and sound, and in the end fair killed; all
had been safe: for then the gods smiled.

CHAP. IX.
A confutation of augury, Plato his reverend opinion thereof, of contrary
events, and false predictions.

BUt what credit is to be attributed to such toies and chances, which grow not
of nature, but are gathered by the superstition of the interpretors? As for
birds, who is so ignorant that conceives not, that one flies one way, another
another way, about their private necessities? And yet are the other divinations
more vain and foolish. Plato in Phaedro, in Timeo, in lib. de Republ.
Howbeit, Plato thinks a commonwealth cannot stand without this art, and
numbereth it among the liberal sciences. These fellows promised Pompeie,
Cassius, and Caesar, that none of them should die before they were old, and
that in their own houses, and in great honor; and yet they all died clean
contrarily. Howbeit doubtless, the heathen in this point were not so much to
be blamed, as the sacrificing papists: for they were directed hereunto without
the knowledge of God's promises; neither knew they the end why such ceremonies
and sacrifices were instituted; Wherein the papists are more blameworthy then
the heathen.
but only understood by an uncertain and slender report, that God was wont to
send good or ill success to the children of Israel, and to the old patriarchs
and fathers, upon his acceptance or disallowance of their sacrifices and
oblations. But men in all ages have been so desirous to know the effect of
their purposes, the sequel of things to come, and to see the end of their fear
and hope; that a seely witch, which has learned any thing in the art of
cousenage, may make a great many jolly fools.

CHAP. X.
The cousening art of sortilege or lotary, practiced especially by Egyptian
vagabonds, of allowed lots, of Pythagoras his lot, etc.

THe counterfeit Egyptians, which were indeed cousening vagabonds, practicing
the art called Sortilegium, had no small credit among the multitude: Soritlege
or lotfhare.
howbeit, their divinations were as was their fast and loose, and as the
witches cures and hurts, and as the soothsayers answers, and as the conjurors
raising up of spirits, and as Apollos or the Rood of graces oracles, and as the
jugglers knacks of legierdemaine, and as the papists exorcismes, and as the
witches charms, and as the counterfeit visions, and as the couseners
knaveries. Hereupon it was said; Non inveniatur inter vos menabas, that is,
Sortilegus, which were like to these Egyptian couseners. As for other lots,
they were used, and that lawfully, as appears by Jonas and others that were
holy men, and as may be seen among all commonwealths, for the deciding of
diverse controversies, etc. wherein thy neighbor is not misused, nor God any
way offended. But in truth I think, because of the cousenage that so easily may
be used herein, God forbad it in the commonwealth of the Jews, though in the
good use thereof it was allowed in matters of great weight; as appears both
in the old and new testament; and that as well in doubtful cases and
distributions, as in elections and inheritances, and pacification of variances.
I omit to speak any thing of the lots comprised in verses, Levit. 16. Number. 33.
and 36. Josu. 14. 1. Chron. 24. and 26. Prover. 18. Jonas 1. Acts 1. Of
Pythagoras lot.
concerning the luck ensuing, either of Virgil, Homer, or any other, wherein
fortune is gathered by the sudden turning unto them: because it is a childish
and ridiculous toie, and like unto childrens play at Primus, secundus, or the
game called the philosophers table: but herein I will refer you to the babble
it self, or else to Bodin, or to some such sober writer thereupon; of whom
there is no want.

There is a lot also called Pythagoras lot, which (some say) Aristotle
believed: and that is, where the characters of letters have certain proper
numbers; whereby they divine (through the proper names of men) so as the
numbers of each letters being gathered in a sum, and put together, give
victory to them whose sum is the greater; whether the question be of war,
life, matrimony, victory, etc. even as the unequal number of vowels in proper
names portendeth lack of sight, halting etc. which the godfathers and
godmothers might easily prevent, if the case stood so.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Cabilestical art, consisting of traditions and unwritten varities
learned without Book, and of the division thereof.

HEre is also place for the Cabalistical art, consisting of unwritten verities,
which the Jews do believe and brag that God himself gave to Moses in the
mount Sinai; and afterward was taught only with lively voice, by degrees of
succession, without writing, until the time of Esdras: even as the scholars of
Archippus did use wit and memory in stead of books. The art Cabalistical
divided.
They divide this in twain; the one expounds with philosophical reason the
secrets of the law and the bible, wherein (they say) that Solomon was very
cunning; because it is written in the Hebrew stories, that he disputed from the
Cedar of Libanus, even to the Hysope, and also of birds, beasts, etc. The other
is as it were a symbolical divinity of the highest contemplation, of the divine
and angelike virtues, of holy names and signs; wherein the letters, numbers,
figures, things and arms, the pricks over the letters, the lines, the points,
and ^he accents do all signify very profound things and great secrets. By
these arts the Atheists suppose Moses wrote all his miracles, and that hereby
they have power over angels and devils, as also to do miracles: yea and that
hereby all the miracles that either any of the prophets, or Christ himself
wrought, were accomplished.

C. Agrippa lib de vanir. sicent.
But C. Agrippa having searched to the bottom of this art, says, it is nothing
but superstition and folly. Otherwise you may be sure Christ would not have
hidden it from his Church. For this cause the Jews were so skilful in the
names of God. But there is none other name in heaven or earth, in which we
might be saved, but Jesus: neither is that meant by his bare name, but by his
virtue and goodness toward us. These Cabalists do further brag, that they are
able hereby, not only to find out and know the unspeakeable mysteries of God;
The blasphemy of the Cabalists.
but also the secrets which are above scripture; whereby also they take upon
them to prophecy, and to work miracles: yea hereby they can make what they
list to be scripture; as Valeria Proba did pick certain verses out of Virgile,
alluding them to Christ. And therefore these their revolutions are nothing but
allegorical games, which idle men busied in letters, points, and numbers
(which the Hebrew tongue easily suffers) devise, to delude and cosen the
simple and ignorant. And this they call Alphabetary or Arythmantical divinity,
which Christ showed to his Apostles only, and which Paul says he speaks but
among perfect men; and being high mysteries are not to be committed unto
writing and so made popular. There is no man that reads any thing of this
Cabalistical art, but must needs think upon the Popes cunning practices in this
behalf, who has in scrinio pectoris, In council. Trident.
not only the exposition of all laws, both divine and humane, but also
authority to add thereunto, or to draw back there from at his pleasure: and
this may he lawfully do even with the scriptures, either by addition or
substraction, after his own pontifical liking. As for example: he has added
the Apocrypha (whereunto he might as well have joined S. Augustines works, or
the course of the civil law, etc.) Again, he has diminished from the decalogue
or ten commandments, not one or two words, but a whole precept, namely the
second, which it has pleased him to dash out with his pen: and truly he might
as well by the same authority have raised out of the testament S. Marks gospel.

CHAP. XII.
When, how, and in What sort sacrifices were first ordained, and how they were
profaned, and how the Pop^ corrupts the sacraments of Christ.

AT the first God manifested to our father Adam, Genesis 2.17.
by the prohibition of the Apple, that he would have man live under a law, in
obedience and submission; and not to wander like a beast without order or
discipline. And after man had transgressed, and deserved thereby Gods heavy
displeasure, yet his mercy prevailed; and taking compassion upon man, he
promised the Messiah, who should be borne of a woman, and break the serpents
head: Genesis 3.6. Genesis 3.15.
(...) declaring by evident testimonies, that his pleasure was that man should
be restored to savor and grace, through Christ: and binding the minds of men
to this promise, and to be fixed upon their Messiah, established figures and
ceremonies wherewith to nourish their faith, and confirmed the same with
miracles, prohibiting and excluding all man's devises in that behalf. Levit.
12* 3. etc.
And upon his promise renewed, he enjoyed (I say) and erected a new form of
worship, whereby he would have his promises constantly beheld, faithfully
believed, and reverenly regarded. He ordained six sorts of divine sacrifices;
three propitiatory, not as meriting remission of sins, but as figures of
Christ's propitiation: the other three were of thanksgiving. These sacrifices
were full of ceremonies, they were powdered with consecrated salt, and kindled
with fire, which was preserved in the tabernacle of the Lord: which fire (some
think) was sent down from heaven. GOD himself commanded these rites and
ceremonies to our forefathers, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, etc. promising
therein both the amplification of their families, and also their Messiah. But
in tract of time (I say) wantonness, negligence, and contempt, through the
instigation of the devil, abolished this institution of GOD: so as in the end,
God himself was forgotten among them, and they became pagans and heathens,
devising their own ways, until every country had devised and erected both new
sacrifices, and also new gods particular unto themselves. Whose example the
Pope follows, in profaning of Christ's sacraments, disguising them with his
devises and superstitious ceremonies; contriving and comprehending therein the
folly of all nations: A gird at the Pope for his sauciness in Gods matters.
the which because little children do now perceive and scorn, I will pass
over; and return to the Gentiles, whom I cannot excuse of cousenage,
superstition, nor yet of vanity in this behalf: For if God suffered false
prophets among the children of Israel, being Gods peculiar people, and
hypocrites in the church of Christ; no marvel if there were such people amongst
the heathen, which neither professed nor knew him.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the objects whereupon the augurors used to prognosticate, with certain
cautions and notes.

THe Gentiles, which treat of this matter, repeat an innumerable multitude of
objects, whereupon they prognosticate good or bad luck. And a great matter is
made of neezing, wherein the number of neezings and the time thereof is greatly
noted; the tingling in the finger, the elbowe, the toe, the knee, etc. are
singular notes also to be observed in this art; though specially herein are
marked the flying of fowls, and meetings of beasts; with this general caution,
that the object or matter whereon men divine, must be sudden and unlooked for:
which regard, children and some old fools have to the gathering primroses,
true loves, and foure-leaved grass; Item the person unto whom such an object
offers it self unawares; Item the intention of the divinor, wherethe object
which is met, is referred to augurie; Item the hour in which the object is
without foreknowledge upon the sudden met withal: and so forth.

Plin. lib. natural. hist. 10. cap. 6.
Pliny reports that gryphes fly always to the place of slaughter, two or
three days before the battle is fought; which was seen and tried at the
battle of Troy: and in respect thereof, the griphe was allowed to be the chief
bird of augurie. Arist. in auguriis.
But among the innumerable number of the portentous beasts, fowls, serpents,
and other creatures, the toade is the most excellent object, whose ugly
deformity signifies sweet and amiable fortune: in respect whereof some
superstitious witches preserve toades for their familiars. And some one of good
credit (whom I could name) having convented the witches themselves, has
starved diverse of their devils, which they kept in boxes in the likeness of
toades.

Plutarch Chironaeus says, Plutarch doteth by his leave for all his learning.
that the place and fite of the signs that we receive by augury, are specially
to be noted: for if we receive them on the left side, good luck; if on the
right side, ill luck insueth: because terrene and mortal things are opposite
and contrary to divine and heavenlythings; for that which the gods deliver with
the right hand, falls to our left side; and so contrariwise.

CHAP XIV.
The division of augury, persons admittable into the colleges of augury, of
their superstition.

THe latter divinors in these mysteries, Aug. Niphus de a^guriis, lib. 1.
have divided their soothsayings into twelve superstitions: as Augustinus
Niphus terms them. The first is prosperity; the second, ill luck, as when
one goes out of his house, and sees an unluckybeast lying on the right side
of his way; the third is destiny; the fourth is fortune; the fifth is ill hap,
as when an unfortunate beast ^eedeth on the right side of your way; the sixth is
utility; the seventh is hurt; the eight is called a cautel, as when a beast
follows one, and staieth at any side, not passing beyond him, which is a
sign of good luck; the ninth is infelicity, and that is contrary to the
eight, as when the beast passes before one; the tenth is perfection, the
eleventh is imperfection; the twelfth is conclusion. Thus far he.

Among the Romans none could be received into the college of augurors that had
a bile, Who were not admitable into the college of augurors among the Romans.
or had been bitten with a dog, etc. and at the times of their exercise, even
at noone days, they lighted candles. From whence the papists convey unto their
church, those points of infidelity. Finally, their observations were so
infinite and ridiculous, that there flew not a sparkle out of the fire, but it
betokened somewhat.

CHAP. XV.
Of the common peoples fo^d and superstitious collections and observations.

AMongst us there be many women, and effemenate men (marry papists always, O
vain folly etc follish vanity?
as by their superstition may appear) that make great divinations upon the
shedding of salt, wine, etc. and for the observation of days and hours use as
great witchcraft as in any thing. For if one chance to take a fall from a
horse, either in a slippery ot stumbling way, he will note the day and hour,
and count that time unlucky for a journey. Otherwise, he that receives a
mischance, will consider whether he met not a cat, or a hare, when he went
first out of his doors in the morning; or stumbled not at the threshhold at
his going out; or put not on his shirt the wrong side outward; or his left
shoe on his right foot, which Augustus Caesar reputed for the worst luck that
might befall. But above all other nations (as Martinus de A^les witnesses) the
Spaniards are most superstitious herein, Martin de Arles in tract. de superst.
contra. malesicia. Appian de bello civili.
and of Spain, the people of the province of Lusitania is the most fond. For
one will say; I had a dream to night, or a crow crooked upon my house, or an
owl flew by me and screeched (which augury Lucius Sylla took of his death) or
a cock crew contrary to his hour. Another says; The moon is at the prime;
another, that the sun rose in a cloud and looked pale, or a star shot and
shined in the air, or a strange cat came into the house, or a hen fell from
the top of the house.

Augurifical toies.
Many will go to bed again, if they neeze before their shoes be on their feet;
some will hold fast their left thumb in their right hand when they hickot; or
else will hold their chinne with their right hand whiles a gospel is sung. It
is thought very ill luck of some, that a child, or any other living creature,
should pass between two friends as they walk together; for they say it
portendeth a division of friendship. Among the papists themselves, if any
hunters, as they were a hunting, chanced to meet a friar or a priest; they
thought it so ill luck, as they would couple up their hounds, and go home,
being in despair of any further sport that day. Marry if they had used venery
with a beggar, they should win all the money they played for that day at dice.
The like folly is to be imputed unto them, that observe (as true or probable)
old verses, wherein can be no reasonable cause of such effects; which are
brought to pass only by Gods power, and at his pleasure. Of this sort be
these that follow. Englished by Abraham Fleming.
Vincenti festo si sol radiet memor est^.
Remember on S. Vincents day,
If that the sun his beams display.
By Abraham Fleming.
Clara dies Pauli bona tempora denotat anni.
If Paul the apostles day be clear,
It does foreshew a lucky year.
Si sol splendescat Maria purificante,
Major erit glacies post festum quam fuil ante.
If Mary's purifying day, By Abraham Fleming.

Be clear and bright with sunny raie,
Then frost and cold shall be much more,
After the feast than was before.
Sero rubens coelum cras indicat esse serenum,
Si mane rubeseit. ventus vel pluvia crescit.
The sky being red at evening,
For eshewes a fair and clear morning; By Ab^ Fleming.

But if the morning rises red,
Of wind or rain we shall be sped.
Some stick a needle or a buckle into a certain tree, near to the cathedral
church of S. Christopher, or of some other saint; hoping thereby to be
delivered that year from the headache. Item maids forsooth hang some of their
hair before the image of S. Urbane, because they would have the rest of their
hair grow long and be yellow. Item, women with child run to church, and tie
their girdles or shoe-lachets about a bell, and strike upon the same thrice,
thinking that the sound thereof hastes their good delivery. Seek more hereof
in the word Habar.
But sithence these things begin to touch the vanities and superstitions of
incantations, I will refer you thither, where you shall see of that stuff
abundance; beginning at the word Habar.

CHAP. XVI.
How old writers vary about the matter, the manner, and the means, whereby
things augurificall are moved.

THeophrastus and Themistius affirm, that whatsoever happens unto man
suddenly and by chance, comes from the providence of God. So as Themistius
gathers, that men in that respect prophecy, when they speak what comes in
their brain, upon the sudden; though not knowing or understanding what they
say. Averroes. 12. metaphysic.
And that seeing God has a care for us, it agrees with reason (as
Theophrastus says) that he show us by some mean whatsoever shall happen. For
with Pythogoras he concludes, that all foreshewes and auguries are the voices
and words of God, by the which he foretells man the good or evil that shall
betide.

Trimsmegistus affirms, that all augurificaal things are moved by devils;
Porphyrie says by gods, or rather good angels: according to the opinion of
Plotinus and lamblichus. Some other affirm they are moved by the moon
wandering through the twelve signs of the Zodiake: because the moon has
dominion in all sudden matters. The Egyptian astronomers hold, that the moon
orders not those portentous matters, but Stella errans, a wandering star,
etc.

CHAP. XVI.
How ridiculous an art augury it, how Cato mocked it, Aristotle's reason against
it, fond collections of augurors, who allowed, and who disallowed it.

VErily all these observtaions being neither grounded on Gods word, nor
physical or philosophical reason, The fond art of augury convinced. Acts 1.7.
are vanities, superstitions, lies, and meerwitchcraft; as whereby the world
has long time been, and is still abused and cousened. It is written; Non est
vestrum scire tempora and ^^menta, etc. It is not for you to know the times and
seasons, which the father has put in his own power. The most godly men and
the wisest philosophers have given no credit hereunto. S. Augustine says; Qui
bis divinationibus credit, sciat se fidem christianam and baptismum
praevaricasse, and paganum Deique inimicum esse. He that gives credit to these
divinations, let him know that he has abused the Christian faith and his
baptism, and is a Pagan, and enemy to God. One told Cato, that a rat had
carried away and eaten his hose, which the party said was a wonderful sign.
Nay (said Cato) I think not so; but if the hose had eaten the rat, that had
been a wonderful token indeed. When Nonius told Cicero that they should have
good success in battle, because seven eagles were taken in Pompeies camp, he
answered thus; No doubt it will be even so, if that we chance to sight with
pies. In the like case also he answered Labienus, who prophesied like success
by such divinations, saying, that through the hope of such toies, Pompeie lost
all his pavillions not long before.

What wiseman would think, that God would commit his council to ^ daw, an owl,
a swine, or a toade, or that he would hide his secret purposes in the dung and
bowels of beasts? Arist. de some.
Aristotle thus reasons; A^gury or divinations are neither the causes nor
effects of things to come; Ergo, they do not thereby foretell things truly, but
by chance. As if I dream that my friend will come to my house, and he comes
indeed: yet neither dream nor imagination is more the cause of my friends
coming than the chattering of a pie.

When Hannibal overthrew Marcus Marcellus, the beast sacrificed wanted a piece
of his heart; therefore forsooth Marius, when he sacrificed a^ Utica, and the
beast lacked his ^iver, he must needs have the like success. These are their
collections, and as vain as if they said, that the building of Tenderden
steeple was the cause of Goodwine sands, August. lib de doct. chri. 2. cap. 3.
Psalm. 4.2. Plin. lib. natural. hist. 28. cap. 2. Tho.
or the decay of Sandwitch haven. S. Augustine says, that these observations
are most superstitious. But we read in the fourth psalm, a sentence which
might dissuade any christian from this folly and impiety; O ye sons of men,
how long will you turn my glory into shame, loving vanity, and seeing lies?
The like is read in many other places of scripture.

Of such as allow this folly, I can commend Pliny best, who says, that the
operation of these auguries is as we take them. For if we take then in good
part, they are signs of good luck; if we take them in ill part, ill lo^^
follows; Aquin. lib. de sorrib.
if we neglect them, and way them not, they do neither good nor harm. Thomas
of Aquine reasons in this wise; The stars, whose course is certain, have
greater affinity and community with man's actions, than auguries; and yet our
doings are neither directed nor proceed from the stars. Which thing also
Ptolomey witnesses, saying; Sapiens dominabitur astrit, A wiseman overruseth
the stars.

CHAP. XVIII.
Fond distinctions of the heathen writers, concerning augury.

THe heathen made a distinction between divine, C. Epidius. Homer. Iliad. 19.
natural, and casual auguries. Divine auguries were such, as men were made
believe were done miraculously, as when dogs spoke; as at the expulsion of
Tarnquinius out of his kingdom; or when trees spoke, as before the death of
Caesar; or when horses spoke, as did a horse whose name was Zanthus. Many
learned christians confess, that such things as may indeed have divine cause,
may be called divine auguries; or rather forewarnings of God, and tokens either
of his blessings or discontentation; as the star was a token of a safe
passage to the magicians that sought Christ; so was the cockcrowing an augury
to Peter for his conversion. And many such other divinations or auguries (if it
be lawful so to term them) are the in scriptures to be found.

CHAP. XIX.
Of natural and casual augury, the one allowed, and the other disallowed.

NAtural augury is a physical or philosophical observation; because humane and
natural reason may be yielded for such events: as if one hear the cock crow
many times together, a man may guess that rain will follow shortly, as by the
crying of rookes, and by their extraordinary using of their wings in their
flight, because through a natural instinct, provoked by the impression of the
heavenly bodies, they are moved to know the times, according to the disposition
of the weather, as it is necessary for their natures. And therefore Jeremy
says; Milv^s in coelo cognovit tempus suum. The phisician may argue a strength
toward in his patient, when he hears him neeze twice, which is a natural
cause to judge by, and conjecture upon. But sure it is mere casual, and also
very foolish and incredible, that by two neezings, a man should be sure of good
luck or success in his business; or by meeting of a toade, a man should
escape a danger, or atchieve an enterprise, etc.

CHAP. XX.
A confutation of casual augury which is mere witchcraft, and upon what
uncertainty those divinations are grounded.

WHat imagination works in man or woman, many leaves would not comprehend;
for as the qualities thereof are strange, and almost incredible, so would the
discourse thereof be long and tedious, whereof I had occasion to speak
elsewhere. But the power of our imagination extends not to beasts, nor
reaches to birds, and therefore pertains nor hereunto. Neither can the
chance for the right or left side be good or bad luck in it self. Why should
any occurrent or augury be good? Because it comes out of that part of the
heavens, where the good or beneficial stars are placed. By that reason, all
things should be good and happy that live on that side; but we see the contrary
experience, and as commonly as that.

The like absurdity and error is in them that credit those divinations* because
the stars over the ninth house have dominion at the time of augury. The
vanity of casual augury.
If it should betoken good luck, joy or gladness, to hear a noise in the
house, when the moon is in Aries: and contrariwise, if it be^signe of ill
luck, sorrow, or grief for a beast to come into the house, the moon being in
the same sign: here might be found a foul error and contrariety. And
for so much as both may happen at once, the rule must needs be false and
ridiculous. And if there were any certain rules or notes to be gathered in
these divinatious; the abuse therein is such, as the word of God must needs be
verified therein; Isai. 44.25.
to wit, I will destroy the tokens of soothsayers, and make them that
conjecture, sooles.

CHAP. XXI.
The figure-casters are witches, the uncertainty of their art, and of their
contradictions, Cornelius Agrippa's sentence against judicial astrology.

THese casters of figures may be numbered among the cousening witches, whose
practice is above their reach, their purpose to gain their kgowledge stolen
from poets, their a^t uncertain and full of vanity, more plainly derided in
the scriptures, than any other folly. And thereupon many other trifling
vanities are rooted and grounded; The vain and trifling tricks of fgure-casters.
as physiognomy, palmestry, interpreting of dreams, monsters, auguries, etc.
the professors whereof confess this to be the necessary key to open the
knowledge of all their secrets. For these fellows erect a figure of the
heavens, by the exposition whereof (together with the conjectures of
similitudes and signs) they seek to find out the meaning of the
significa^tors, attributing to them the ends of all things, contrary to truth,
reason, and divinity: their rules being so inconstant, that few writers agree
in the very principles thereof. For the Rabbis, the old and new writers, and
the very best philosophers dissent in the cheese grounds thereof, differing in
the propriety of the houses, whereout they wring the foretelling of things to
come, contending even about the number of spheres, being not yet resolved how
to erect the beginnings and ends of the houses: for Ptolomy make^h them after
one sort, Campanus after another, etc.

And as Alpetragus thinks, that there be in the heavens diverse movings as yet
to men unknown, so do others affirm (not without probability) that there may
be stars and bodies, to whom these movings may accord, which cannot be seen,
either through their exceeding highness, or that hitherto are not tried with
any observation of the art. The true motion of Mars is not yet perceived,
neither is it possible to find out the true entering of the Sun into the
equinoctial points. Johan. Montiregius in epist. ad Blanchim: and Gulielmus de
sancio Clodoald. Rabbi Levi. C. Agrip. in lib. de vanit. scient. Archelaus.
Cassand. Eudoxus, etc.
It is not denied, that the astronomers themselves have received their light,
and their very art (...) poets, without whose fables the twelve signs, and the
northerly southerly figures had nev^r ascended into heaven. And yet (as C.
Agrippa says) astrologers do live, cosen men, and gain by these fables;
whiles the poets, which are the inventors of them, do live in beggary.

The very skillfullest mathematicians confess, that it is unpossible to find
out any certain thing concerning the knowledge of judgments, as weal for the
innumerable causes which work together with the heavens, being altogether,
and one with the other to be considered: as also because influencies do not
constrain but incline. For many ordinary and extraordinary occasions do
interrupt them; as education, custom, place, honesty, birth, blood, sickness,
health, strength, weakness, meat, drink, liberty of mind, learning, etc. And
they that have written the rules of judgment, and agree nearest therein, being
of equal authority and learning, publish so contrary opinions upon one thing,
that it is impossible for an astrologian to pronounce a certainty upon so
variable opinions; and otherwise, upon so uncertain reports no man is able to
judge herein. So as (according to Ptolomy) the foreknowledge of things to come
by the stars, depende^h as well upon the affections of the mind, (...) upon
the obsevation of the planets, proceeding rather from chance than art, as
whereby they deceive others, and are deceived themselves ^lso.

CHAP. XXII.
The subtilty of astrologers to maintain the credit of their art, why they
remain in credit, certain impieties contained in astrologers assertions.

IF you mark the cunning ones, you shall see them speak darkly of things to
come, Astrologers prognostications are like the answers of oracles.
devising by artificial subtilty, doubtful prognostications, ea^^ly to be
applied to every thing, time, prince, and nation: and if any thing come to
pass according to their divina^ions, they fortify their old ^^ognostiations
with new reasons. Nevertheless, in the multitu^de and variety of stars, yea
even in the very midst of them, they (...) out some places in a good aspect,
and some in an ill; and take occasion hereupon to say what they list, promising
unto some men honor, long (...), wealth, victory, children, marriage, friends,
offices; and finally everlasting felicity. But if with any they be discontent,
they say the starre^ be not favorable to them, and threaten them with hanging,
drowning beggary, sickness, misfortune, etc. And if one of these
prognostications fall out right, then they triumph above measure. If the
prognosticators be found to forge and ly always (without such fortune as the
bl^^^man had in killing the crow) they will excuse the matter, saying, that
S^piens dominatur astris, whereas (according to Agrippas words) neither the
wiseman rules the stars, nor the stars the wiseman, but God rule them
both. Corn. Tacitus says, that they are a people disloiall to prince deceiving
them that believe them. And Varro says, that the vanity all superstitions
flows out of the bosom of astrology. And if our (...) and fortune depend
not on the stars, then it is to be granted, that the astrologers seek where
nothing is to be found. But we are so fond, (...) trustful and credulous, that
we fear more the fables of Robin good fellow* astrologers, and witches, and
believe more the things that are not, tha^ the things that are. And the more
unpossible a thing is, the more (...) stand in fear thereof; and the less
likely to be true, the more we believed it. And if we were not such, I think
with Cornelius Agrippa, that these divinors, astrologers, conjurors, and
cosenors would die for hunger.

And our foolish light belief, forgetting things past, neglecting things
present, and very hasty to know things to come, does so comfort and maintain
these coseners; that whereas in other men, for making one (...) the faith of
him that speaks is so much mistrusted, that all the (...) being true is not
regarded. Contrariwise, in these cosenages among (...) divinors, one truth
spoken by hap gives such credit to all their lies, (...) ever after we believe
whatsoever they say: how incredible, impossible (...) false soever it be. Sir
Thomas Moore says, they know not who are in their own chambers, S Thomas Moors
frump at judicial astrologers.
neither who makes themselves cuckoldes, that take upon them all this cunning,
knowledge, and great foresight. But to (...) their credit, or rather to
manifest their impudency, they say the gift of prophecy, the force of
religion, the secrets of conscience, the power of ^vils, the virtue of
miracles, the efficacy of prayers, the state of the life (...) come, etc. does
only depend upon the stars, and is given and know by them alone. For they
say, that when the sign of Gemini is ascend and Saturn and Mercury be joined
in Aquary, in the nineth house of the heavens, Astrologicall blasphemies.
there is a prophet borne: and therefore that Christ had so (...) virtues,
because he had in that place Saturn and Gemini. Yea, these ^^strologers do not
stick to say, that the stars distribute all sorts of religions: wherein
Jupiter is the especial patron, who being joined (...) Saturn, makes the
religion of the Jews; with Mercury, of the Chr^stians, with the Moon, of
Antichristianity. Yea they affirm that the (...) of every man may be known to
them as well as to God. And that Christ himself did use the election of hours
in his miracles; so as the Jews could not hurt him whilst he went to
Jerusalem; and therefore that he said to (...) disciples that forbad him to go;
John 11.8. ^ 9.
are there not twelve hours in the day?

CHAP. XXIII.
Who have power to drive away devils with their only presence, who shall
receive of God whatsoever they ask in prayer, who shall obtain everlasting
life by means of constellations, as nativity-casters affirm.

THey say also, that he which has Mars happily placed in the nineth house of
the heavens, shall have power to drive away devils with his only presence
from them that be possessed. And he that shall pray to God when he finds the
Moon and Jupiter joined with the Dragons head in the midst of the heavens,
shall obtain whatsoever he asks* and that Jupiter and Saturn do give
blessedness of the life to come. The folly of our genethliaks or
nativity-casters.
But if any in his nativity shall have Saturn happily placed in Leone, his
soul shall have everlasting life. And hereunto subscribe Peter de Appona, Roger
Bacon, Guido Bonatus, Arnold de villa nova, and the Cardinal of Alia.
Furthermore, the providence of God is denied, and the miracles of Christ are
diminished, when these powers of the heavens and their influencies are in such
sort advanced. Moses, Esaias, Job and Jeremy seem to dislike and reject it: and
at Rome in times past it was banished, and by Justinian condemned under pain of
death. Senec. lib. de quae. natura. 4.
Finally, Seneca derideth these soothsaying witches in this sort; Amongst the
Cleones (says he) there was a custom, that the (...) (which were gazers in
the air, watching when a storm of hail should fall) when they saw by any cloud
that the shower was imminent and at hand; the use was (I say) because of the
hurt which it might do to their vines etc. diligently to warn the people
thereof; who used not to provide clokes or any such defense aginst it, but
provided sacrifices; the rich, cocks and white lambs; the poor would spoil
themselves by cutting their thombes; as though (says he) that little blood
could ascend up to the clouds, and do any good for their relief in this matter.

And here by the way, Hilarious Pirkmair in art apodemica.
I will impart unto you a Venetian superstition, of great antiquity, and at
this day (for ought I can read to the contrary) in use. It is written, that
every year ordinarily upon Ascension day, the Duke of Venice, accompanied with
the States, goes with great solemnity unto the sea, and after certain
ceremonies ended, casts thereinto a gold ring of great value and estimation
for a pacificatory oblation: wherewithal their predecessors supposed that the
wrath of the Sea was assuaged. Ioannes Garropius in Venet. and Hyperb. Zac.
10.1. v. 2.
By this action, as a late writer says, they do D^sponsare sibimare, that is,
espouse the sea unto themselves, etc.

Let us therefore, according to the prophets advise, ask rain of the Lord in
the hours of the latter time, and he shall send white clouds, and give us
rain etc: for surely, the idols (as the same prophet says (have spoken
vanity, the soothsaiers have seen a ly, and the dreamers have told a vain
thing. They comfort in vain, and therefore they went away like sheep, etc. If
any sheepbiter or witchmonger will follow them, they shall go alone for me.

The Twlfeth Book.
CHAP. I.
The Hebrew word Habar expounded, where also the supposed secret force of
charms and enchantments is showed, and the efficacy of words is diverse ways
declared.

THis Hebrew word Habar, being in Greek Epathin, and in Latin Incantare, is
in English, To inchant, or (if you had rather have it so) to bewitch. In these
enchantments, certain words, verses, or charms, etc. are secretly uttered,
wherein there is thought to be miraculous efficacy. There is great variety
hereof: but whether it be by charms, voices, images, characters, stones,
plans, metals, herbs, etc there must herewithall a special form of words be
always used, either divine, diabolical, insensible, or papistical, whereupon
all the virtue of the work is supposed to depend. This word is specially used
in the 58. Psalm, Psalm 58.
which place though it be taken up for mine adversaries strongest argument
against me; yet me thinks it makes so with me, as they can never be able to
answer it. For there it plainly appears, that the adder hears not the voice
of the charmer, Psalm 58.4, 5.
charm he never so cunningly: contrary to the poets fabling, Virgil. in Damone.
Frigidus in pratis cantando rumpitur anguis.
By Ab. Flem.
The coldish snake in meadows green,
With charms is burst in pieces clean.


But here of more shall be said hereafter in due place.

I grant that words sometimes have singular virtue and efficacy, either in
perwasion or disswasion, as also diverse other ways; so as thereby some are
converted from the way of perdition, Proverbs 18. Chron. 30 Psalm 10. Psalm
51. Psalm 139. Jeremy 32. Isaiah 6. Isaiah 50. Exodus 7.89. Proverbs 16.
to the estate of salvation: and so contrariwise, according to the saying of
Solomon; Death and life are in the instrument of the tongue: but even therein
God works all in all, as well in framing the heart of the one, as in
directing the tongue of the other: as appears in many places of the holy
scriptures.

CHAP. II.
What is forbidden in Scriptures concerning witchcraft, of the operation of
words, the superstition of the Cabalists and Papists, who creates substances,
to imitate God in some cases is presumption, words of sanctification.

THat which is forbidden in the Scriptures touching enchantment or witch craft,
is not the wonderful working with words. For where words have had miraculous
operation, there has been always the special providence, power and grace of
God uttered to the strengthening of the faith of Gods people, Acts 5.
and to the furtherance of the gospel: as when the apostle with a word slew
Ananias and Saphira. But the profanation of Gods name, the seducing, abusing,
and cosening of the people and man's presumption is hereby prohibited, as
whereby many take upon them after the recital of such names, as God in the
scripture seems to appropriate to himself, to foreshew things to come, to
work miracles, to detect fellonies, etc. as the Cabalists in times past took
upon them, by the ten names of God, and his angels, expressed in the
scriptures, to work wonders: and as the papists at this day by the like names,
by crosses, by gospels hanged about their necks, by masses, by exorcismes, by
holy water, and a thousand consecrated or rather execrated things, promise unto
themselves and others, both health of body and soul.

But as herein we are not to imitate the papists, so in such things, as are the
peculiar actions of God, Jonas 1.
we ought not to take upon us to counterfeit or resemble him, which with his
word created all things. For we, neither all the conjurors, Cabalists, papists,
soothsayers, inchanters, witches, nor charmers in the world, neither any other
humane or yet diabolical cunning can add any such strength to Gods
workmanship, as to make any thing anew, or else to exchange one thing into
another. New qualities may be added by humane art, but no new substance can be
made or created by man. And seeing that art fails herein, doubtless neither
the illusions of devils, nor the cunning of witches, can bring any such thing
truly to pass. For by the sound of the words nothing comes, nothing goes,
otherwise than God in nature has ordained to be done by ordinary speech, Words
of sanctification, and wherein they consist.
or else by his special ordinance. Indeed words of sanctification are
necessary and commendable, according to S. Paul's rule; Let your meat be
sanctified with the word of God, and by prayer. But sanctification does not
here signify either change of substance of the meat, or the adding of any new
strength thereunto: but it is sanctified, in that it is received with
thanksgiving and prayer; that our bodies may be refreshed, and our souls
thereby made the apter to glorify God.

CHAP. III.
What effect and offense witches charms bring, how unapt witches are and how
unlikely to work those things which they are thought to do, what would follow
if the those things were true which are lald to their charge.

THe words and other the illusions of witches, charmers, and conjurors, though
they be not such in operation and effect, as they are commonly taken to be: yet
they are offensive to the majesty and name of God, obscuring the truth of
divinity, and also of philophie. For if God only give life and being to all
creatures, who can put any such virtue or lively feeling into a body of gold,
silver, bread, or wax, as is imagined? If either priests, devils, or witches
could so do, the divine power should be checked and outfaced by magical
cunning, and Gods creatures made servile to a witches pleasure. What is not to
be brought to pass by these incantations, An ample description of women
commonly called witches.
if that be true which is attributted to witches? and yet they are women that
never went to school in their lives, nor had any teachers: and therefore
without art or learning; poor, and therefore not able to make any provision of
metals or stones, etc. whereby to bring to pass strange matters, by natural
magic; old and stiff, and therefore not nimble-handed to deceive your eye
with legierdemaine; heavy, and commonly lame, and therefore unapt to fly in
the air; or to dance with the fairies; sad, melancholic, sullen, and
miserable, and therefore it should be unto them ( Invita Minerva) to bancket or
dance with Minerva; or yet with Herodias, as the common opinion of all writers
herein is. On the other side, we see they are so malicious and spiteful, that
if they by themselves, or by their devils, could trouble the elements, we
should never have fair weather. If they could kill men, children, or cattle,
they would spare none; but would destroy and kill whole countries and
households. If they could transfer corn (as is affirmed) from their
neighbors field into their own, none of them would be poor, none other
should be rich. If they could transform themselves and others (as it is most
constantly affirmed) oh what a number of apes and owls should there be of us!
If Incubus could beget Merlins among us, we should have a jolly many of cold
prophets.

CHAP. IV.
Why God forbad the practice of witchcraft, the absurdity of the law of the
twelve tables, whereupon their estimation in miraculous actions is grounded, of
their wondrous works.

A Common and universal error.
THough it be apparent, that the Holy Ghost forbids this art, because of the
abuse of the name of God, and the cosenage comprehended therein: yet I
confess, the customs and laws almost of all nations do declare, that all
these miraculous works before by me cited, and many other things more
wonderful, were attributed to the power of witches. The which laws, with the
executions and judicials thereupon, and the witches confessions, have beguiled
almost the whole world. What absurdities concerning witchcraft, are written in
the law of the twelve tables, which was the highest and most ancient law of the
Romans? Whereupon the strongest argument of witches omnipotent power is framed;
as that the wisdom of such lawgivers could not be abused. Whereof (me thinks)
might be made a more strong argument on our side; to wit, if the chief and
principal laws of the world be in this case ridiculous, vain, false,
incredible, yea and contrary to Gods law; the residue of the laws and arguments
to that effect, are to be suspected. If that argument should hold, it might
prove all the popish laws against protestants, and the heathenish princes
laws against christians, to be good and in soree: for it is like they would
not have made them, except they had been good. Were it not (think you) a
strange proclamation, that no man (upon pain of death) should pull the moon
out of heaven? And yet very many of the most learned witchmongers make their
arguments upon weaker grounds; I. Bodinus. Danaeus. Hyperius. Hemingius. Bar
Spineus. Mal Malef.
as namely in this form and manner; We find in poets, that witches wrought
such and such miracles; Ergo they can accomplish and do this or that wonder.
The words of the law are these; Qui fruges incantasset poenas dato, Neve
alienam segetem pellexeris excantando, neque incantando, Ne agrum defruganto:
the sense whereof in English is this; Let him be executed that bewitcheth
corn, Transfer not other men's corn into thy ground by enchantment, Take
heed thou inchant not at all neither make thy neighbors field barren: he that
does these things shall dye, etc.

CHAP. V.
An instance of one arraigned upon the law of the twelve Tables, wher-the said
law is proved ridiculous, of two witches that could do wonders.

ALthough among us, we think them bewitched that wax suddenly poor, and not
them that grow hastily rich; yet at Rome you shall understand, that (as Pliny
reports) upon these articles one C. Furius Cressus was convented before
Spurius Albinus; for that he being but a little while free, A notable purgation
of C.F.C. convented for a witch.
and delivered from bondage, occupying only tillage; grew rich on the sudden,
as having good crops: so as it was suspected that he transferred his neighbors
corn into his fields. None intercession, no delay, none excuse, no denial
would serve,' neither in jest nor derision, nor yet through ^sober or honest
means: but he was assigned a peremptory day, to answer for life. And therefore
fearing the sentence of condemnation, which was to be given there, by the voice
and verdict of three men (as we here are tried by twelve) made his appearance
at the day assigned, and brought with him his ploughes and harrowes, spades and
shovels, and other instruments of husbandry, his oxen, horses and working
bullocks, his servants, and also his daughter, which was a sturdy wench and a
good houswife, and also (as Piso reports) well trimmed up in apparel, and
said to the whole bench in this wise; Lo here my Lords here I make my
appearance, according to my promise and your pleasures, presenting unto you my
charms and witchcrafts, which have so enriched me. As for the labor, sweat,
watching, care, and diligence, which I have used in this behalf, I cannot show
you them at this time. And by this means he was dismissed by the consent of
the ^ourt, who otherwise (as it was thought) should hardly have escaped the
sentence of condemnation, and punishment of death.

It is constantly affirmed in M. Mal. that Stafus used always to hide himself
in a monshoall, Mal. Melef. par. 2. qua. 11 cap. 5.
and had a disciple called Hoppo, who made Stadlin a master witch, and could
all when they list, in^isibly transfer the third part of their neighbors dung,
hay, corn, etc. into their own ground, make hail, tempests and floods, with
thunder and lightening; and kill children, cattle, etc. reveal things hidden,
and many other tricks, when and where they list. But these two shifted not so
well with the inquisitors, as the other with the Roman and heathen judges.
Howbeit, Sraf^^ was too hard for them all: for none of all the Lawyers nor
inquisitors could bring him to appear before them, if it be true that
witchmongers write in these matters.

CHAP. VI.
Laws provided for the punishment of such witches as work miracles, whereof
some are mentioned, and of certain popish laws published against them.

THere are other laws of other nations made to this incredible effects Lex
Salicarum provideth punishment for them that fly in the air from place to
place, Punishment of impossibilities.
and meet at their nightly assemblies, and brave bankets carrying wi^h them
plate, and such stuff* etc. even as we should make a (...) to hang him that
should take a church in his hand at Dover, and throw it to Callice. And because
in this case als^ popish laws shall be seen be to as foolish and lewd as any
other whatsoever, and specially as tyrannous as that which is most cruel: you
shall hear what trim new laws the church of Rome has lately devised. These
are therefore the words of pope Innocent the eight to the inquisitors of
Almanie, A wise law of pope Innocent and and July, were it not that they wanted
wit when they made it.
and of pope Julius the second sent to the inquisitors of Bergomen. It is come
to our ears, that many lewd persons, of both kinds, as well male as female,
using the company of the devils Incubus and Succubus, wi^h incantations,
charms, conjutations, etc. do destroy, etc. the births of women with child,
the young of all cattle, the corn of the field, the grapes of the vines, the
fruit of the trees: Item, men, women, and all kind of cattle and beasts of the
field: and with their said enchantments, etc. do utterly extinguish, suffocate,
and spoil all vineyards, orchards, meadows, pastures, grass, green corn,
and ripe corn, and all other podware: yea men and women themselves are by
their imprecations so afflicted with external and inward pains and diseases,
that men cannot beget, nor women bring forth any children, nor yet accomplish
the duty of wedlock, denying the faith which they in baptism prosessed, to the
destruction of their own souls, etc. Our pleasu^^ therefore is, that all
impediments that may hinder the inquisitors office be utterly removed from
among the people, lest this blot of heresy proceed to poison, and defile them
that be yet Innocent, And therefore we do ordain, by virtue of the apostolical
authority, that our inquisitors of high Almanie, may execute the office of
inquisition by all tortures and afflictions, in all places, and upon all
persons, what and wheresoever, as well in every place and diocese, as upon any
person; and that as freely, as though they were named, expressed, or cited in
this our commission.

CHAP. VII.
^oeticall authorities commonly alleged by witchmongers, for the proof of
witches miraculous actions, and for confirmation of their supernatural power.

HEre have I a place and opportunity, to discover the whole art of witchcraft;
even all their charms, periapts, characters, amulets, ^rayers, blessings,
cursings, hurtings, helpings, knaveries, cosenages, etc. But first I will show
what authorities are produced to defend and maintain the same, and that in
serious sort, by Bodin, Spinaeus, Hemingins, Vari^^s, Danaeus, Hyperius, M.
Mal. and the rest.

Carmina vel caelpossunt de ducere lunam, Virg. eclog. 8.

Carminibus Circe socios mutavit Vlyssis,
Frigidus in pratis cantando rumpitur anguis.
Enchantments pluck out of the sky,
The moon, though she be placed one high:
Dame Circes with her charms so fine,
Ulysses mates did turn to swine:
The snake with charms is burst in twain,
In meadows, where she does remain.
Again out of the same poet they cite further matter.

Has berbas, atque haec Ponto mihi lecta venena,
Ipsa dedit Maeris: Virg. eclog. 8.
nascuntur plurima Ponto.
His ego saepe lupam fieri, and se condere sylvis,
Maerim saepe animas imis exirc sepulchris,
Atquesatas alio vidi traducere messes.
These herbs did Meris give to me,
And poisons plucked at Pontus,
For there they grow and multiply,
And do not so amongst us.
With these she made herself become,
A wolf, and hid her in the wood,
She fetched up souls out of their tomb,
Removing corn from where it stood.
Furthermore out of Ovid they allege these following. Ovid. fast. 6.


Nocte volant, puerosque petunt nutricis egentes,
Et vitiant cunis corpora capta suis:
Carpere dicuntur lactentia viscera rostris,
Et plenum potu sanguine guttur habent:
To children they do fly by night,
And catch them while their nursses sleep,
And spoil their little bodies quite,
And home they bear them in their beak.
Again out of Virgil in form following.

Virg. Aene. 4.
Hinc mihi Massylae gentis monstrata sacerdos,
Hesperidum templi custos, epulasque draconi
Quae dabat, and sacros servabat in arbore ramos,
Spargens humida mella, soporiferumque papaver.
Haec se carminibus promittit solvere mentes,
Quas velit, ast aliis duras immittere curas,
Sistere aquam fluviis, and vertere sidera retro,
Nocturnosque ciet manes, mugire videbis
Sub pedibus terram, and descendere montibus ornos:
Tho. Phaiers translation of the former words of Virg.
From thence a virgin Priest is come,
From out Massyla land,
Sometimes the Temple there she kept;
And from her heavenly hand
The dragon meat did take: she kept
Also the fruit divine,
With herbs and liquors sweet that still
To sleep did men incline.
The minds of men (she says) from love
With charms she can unbind,
In whom she list: but others can
She cast to cares unkind.
The running streams do stand, and from
Their course the stars do wreath,
And souls she conjure can: thou shall
See sister underneath
The ground with roaring gape, and trees
And mountains turn upright, etc.
Moreover out of Ovid they allege as follows.

Ovid. metamo. 7.
Cum volui ripis ipsis mirantibus amnes
In fontes rediere suos, concussaque sisto,
Stantia concu^io, cantu freta nubila pesto,
Nubilaque induco, ventos abigoque vocoque,
Vipereas rumpo verbis and carmine fauces,
Vivaque saxa, sua convulsaque robora terra,
Et sylvas inoveo, jubeoque tremescere montes,
Et mugire solum, manesque exire sepulchris,
Teque luna traho, etc.
The rivers I can make retire,
Into the Fountains whence they flow,
(Whereat the bank, themselves admire)
I can make standing waters go,
With charms I drive both sea and cloud,
I make it calm and blow aloud.
The vipers jaws, the rocky stone,
With words and charms I break in twain
The force of earth congealed in one,
I move and shake both woods and plain;
I make the souls of men arise,
I pull the moon out of the skies.
Also out of the same poet.

Verbaque ter dixit placidos facientia somnos, Ovid. de Midea.

Quae mare turbatum, quae flumina concita sistant:
And thrice she spoke the words that caused
Sweet sleep and quiet rest,
She staid the raging of the sea,
And mighty floods suppressed.
Et miserum tenues in jecur urget acus, Ovid. de Medea, epistola. 4.

She sticks also needles fine
In livers, whereby men do pine.
Also out of other poets.

Carmine laesa Ceres, 3. Amo. eclo. 6.
sterilem vanescit in berbam,
Deficiunt laesi carmine fontis aquae,
Illicibus glandes, cantantaqne vitibus uva
Decidit, and nullo poma movente fluunt:
With charms the corn is spoiled so,
As that it vades to barren grass,
With charms the Springs are dried low,
That none can see where watet was,
The grapes from vines, the mast from oaks,
And beats down fruit with charming strokes.
Horac. epod. 4.
Quae sider a excantata voce Thessala
Lunamque coelo diripit.
She plucks down moon and stars from sky,
With chaunting voice of Thessaly.
Tibul. de fascinatrice, lib. 1. eleg 2.
Hanc ego de coelo ducentem sidera vidi,
Fluminis ac rapidi carmine vertititer,
Haec cantu findi^que solum, manesque sepulcbris
Elicit, and tepido devorat ossa rego:
Cum lubet haec tristi depellit lumina coelo,
Cum lubet aestivo convocat orb nives.
She plucks each star out of his throne,
And turns back the raging waves,
With charms she makes the earth to cone,
And raises souls out of their graves:
She burns men's bones as with a fire,
And pulls down the lights from heaven,
And makes it snow at her desire
Even in the midst of summer-season.
Lucan. lib. de bello. civili. 6.
Men's bausti nulla sanie polluta veneni,
Incantata perit.
A man enchanted runs mad,
That never any poison had.
Cessavere vices rerum, dilataque longa
Idem. Ibid.
Haesit nocte dies, legi non paruit ae^ber,
Torpuit and praeceps audito carmine mundus.
The course of nature ceased quite,
The air obeyed not his law,
The day delayed by length of night,
Which made both day and night to yawe;
And all was through that charming gear,
Which caused the world to quake for fear.
Idem. ibid.
Carmine Thessalidum dura in praecordia fluxit,
Non fatis adductus amor, flaminisque severi
Illicitis arsere ignes.
With Thessall charms, and not by fate
Hot love is forced for to flow,
Even where before has been debate,
They cause affection for to grow.
Idem. ibid.
Gens invisa diis maculandi callida coeli,
Quos genuit terra, mali qui sidera mundi
Iuraque fixarum possunt perver^ere rerum:
Nam nunc stare polos, and flumina mittere norunt,
Aethera sub terras adigunt, montesque revellunt.
These witches hateful unto God,
And cunning to defile the air,
Which can disorder with a nod*
The course of nature every where,
Do cause the wandering stars to stay,
And drive the winds below the ground.
They send the streams another way,
And throw down hills where they abound.
-- linguis dixere volucrum,
Consultare fibras, C. Manilius astronom. ^^ae lib. 1.
and rumpere vocibus angues,
Solicitare umbras, ipsumque Acheront a movere,
In noctemque dies, in lucem vertere noctes,
Omnia conando docilis solertia vincit.
They talked with the tongues of birds,
Consulting with the salt sea coasts,
They burst the snakes with witching words,
Soliciting the spiritual ghosts,
They turn the night into the day,
And also drive the light away:
And what' its that cannot be made
By them that do apply this trade?
CHAP. VIII.
Poetry and popery compared is enchantments, popish witchmongers have more
advantage herein than protestants.

YOu see in these verses, the poets (whether in earnest or in jest I know not)
ascribe unto witches and to their charms, more than is to be found in humane
or diabolical power. I doubt not but the most part of the readers hereof will
admit them to be fabulous; although the most learned of mine adversaries (for
lack of scripture) are ^aine to produce these poetries for proofs, Ovid.
Metamorph. lib. 3. fa b. 2. Ovid. Metamorph. 14* fab. 5, 6.
and for lack of judgment I am sure do think, that Actaeons transformation was
true. And why not? As well as the metamorphosis or transubstantiation of
Ulysses his companions into swine: which S. Augustine, and so many great
clerks credit and report.

Nevertheless, popish writers (I con^esse) have advantage herein of our
protestants: for (besides these poetical proofs) they have (for advantage)
the word and authority of the pope himself, and others of that holy crew,
whose charms, conjurations, blessings, cursings. etc. I mean in part (for a
taste) to set down; giving you to understand, that poets are not altogether so
impudent as papists herein, neither seem they so ignorant, profane, or
impious. And therefore I will show you how loud also they lie, The authors
transition to his purpose scope.
and what they on the other side ascribe to their charms and conjurations; and
together will set down with them all manner of witches charms, as conveniently
as I may.

CHAP. IX.
Popish periapts, amulets and charms, agnus Dei, a wastecote of proof, a
charm for the falling evil, a writing brought to S. Leo from heaven by an
angel, the virtues of S. Saviors epistle, a charm against thieves, a writing
found in Christ's wounds, of the cross, etc.

THese virtues under these verses (written by pope Urbane the fifth to the
emperor of the Grecians) are contained in a periapt or tablet, be continnally
worn about one, called Agnus Dei, which is a little cake, having the picture
of a lamb carrying of a flag on the one side; and Christ's head on the other
side, and is hollow: so as the gospel of and John, written in fine paper, is
placed in the concavitie thereof: and it is thus compounded or made, even as
they themselves report.

Balsamus and munda cera, cum chrismatis unda
Conficiunt agnum, quod munus do tibi magnum,
Font velut natum, per mystica sanctificatum:
Fulgura de sur sum depellit and omne malignum,
Peccatum frangit, ut Christi sanguis, and angit,
Praegnans servatur, simul and partus li^eratur,
Dona refert dignis, virtutem destruit ignis,
Porta^us munde de fluctibus eripit undae:
Englished by Abraham Fleming. Look in the Beehive of the Romish church. Lib.
4. cap. 1. fol. 243.
Balm, vigine wax, and holy water,
An Agnus Dei make:
A gift than which none can be greater,
I send thee for to take.
From fountain clear the same has issue,
In secret sanctified:
Against lightning it has sovereign virtue,
And thunder crackes beside.
Each heinous sin it wears and wastes,
Even as Christ's precious blood,
And women, whiles their travel lasts,
It saves, it is so good.
It does bestow great gifts and graces,
On such as well deserve:
And borne about in noisome places,
From peril does preserve.
The force of fire, whose heat destroys,
It breaks and brings down:
And he or she that this enjoys,
No water shall them drown.
A Charm against shot, or a wastecote of proof.
BEfore the coming up of these Agnus Dei's, a holy garment called a wastecote
for necessity was much used of our forefathers, as a holy relic, etc. as
given by the pope, or some such arch-conjuror, who promised thereby all manner
of immunity to the wearer thereof; insomuch as he could not be hurt with any
shot or other violence. And otherwise, that woman that would wear it, should
have quick deliverance the composition thereof was in this order following.

On Christmas day at night, a thread must be spunne of flax, by a little
virgin girl, The manner of making a wastecot of proof.
in the name of the devil: and it must be by her woven, and also wrought with
the needle. In the breast or forepart thereof must be made with needle-worke
two heads; on the head at the right side must be a hat, and a long beard; the
left head must have on a crown, and it must be so horrible, that it may
resemble Beelzebub, and on each side of the wastecote must be made a cross.

Against the falling evil.
MOreover, this ensuing is another counterfeit charm of theirs, whereby the
falling evil is presently remedied.

Gaspar fert myrrham, thus Melchior, Balthazar aurum,
Haec tria qui secum portabit nomina regum,
Solvitur a morbo Christi pietate caduco.
Gasper with his mirth began
These presents to unfold,
Then Melchior brought in frankincense,
And Balthazar brought in gold.
Now he that of these holy kings
The names about shall bear,
The falling ill by grace of Christ
Shall never need to fear.
THis is as true a copy of the holy writing, that was brought down from heaven
by an angel to S. Leo pope of Rome; and he* did bid him take it to king
Charles, The effects are too good to be true in such a patched piece of popery.
when he went to the battle at Ronceval. And the angel said, that what man or
woman bears this writing about them with good devotion, and says every day
three Pater nosters, three Aves, and one Creed, shall not that day be overcome
of his enemies, either bodily or ghostly; neither shall be robbed or slain of
thieves, pestilence, thunder, or lightning, neither shall be hurt with fire or
water, not combred with spirits, neither shall have displeasure of lords or
ladies: he shall not be condemned with false witness, nor taken with fairies,
or any manner of axes, nor yet with the falling evil. Also, if a woman be in
travel, lay this writing upon her belly, she shall have easy deliverance, and
the child right shape and christendom, and the mother purification of holy
church, and all through virtue of these holy names of Jesus Christ following.

Jesus Christus Messiah Soter Emmanuel Sabbath Adonai Vnigenitus Majestas
Paracleius Salva^or noster Agiros iskiros Agios Adona^os Gasper Melchior and
Balthazar Matthaeus Marcus Lucas Johannes.

The epistle of S. Savior, which pope Leo sent to King Charles, saying, that
whosoever carries the same about him, or in what day soever he shall read it,
or shall see it, he shall not be killed with any iron tool; nor be burned with
fire, nor be drowned with water, neither any evil man or other creature may
hurt him. The cross of Christ is a wonderful defense the cross of Christ be
always with me the cross is it which I do always worship the cross of
Christ is true health the cross of Christ does lose the bands of death the
cross of Christ is the truth and the way I take my journey upon the cross of
the Lord the cross of Christ beats down every evil the cross of Christ
gives all good things the cross of Christ takes away pains everlasting the
cross of Christ save me O cross of Christ be upon me, before me, and behind
me because the ancient enemy cannot abide the sight of thee the cross of
Christ save me, keep me, govern me, and direct me Thomas bearing this note of
thy divine majesty Alpha Omega first and last midst and end beginning and
first begotten wisdom virtue.

A popish periapt or charm, which must never be said, but carried about one,
against thieves.
This were a good preservative for a traveling papist.
I Do go, and I do come unto you with the love of God, with the humility of
Christ, with the holiness of our blessed lady, with the faith of Abraham, with
the justice of Isaac, with the virtue of David, with the might of Peter, with
the constancy of Paul, with the word of God, with the authority of Gregory,
with the prayer of Clement, with the flood of Jordan, p p p c g e g a q q est p
t 1 k a b g l k 2 a x t g t b a m g 2 4 2 1 que p x c g k q a 9 9 p o q q r. Oh
only Father oh only lord And Jesus passing through the midst of them went
In the name of the father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost.

Another amulet.
JOseph of A^imathea did find this writing upon the wounds of the side of Jesus
Christ, written with Gods finger, when the body was taken away from the cross.
Whosoever shall carry this writing about him, shall not dye any evil death, if
he believe in Christ, and in all perplexities he shall soon be delivered,
neither let him fear any danger at all. Fons alpha and omega figa figalis
Sabbath Emmanuel Adonai o Neray Elay ^he Rentone Neger Sahe Pangeton Commen a
g l a Mattheus Marcus Lucas Johannes titulus triumphalis Jesus Nasareuus rex
Iudaeorum ecce dominicae crucis signnm fugite parts adversae, vicit leo de
tribu Iudae, radix, David, aleluijah, Kyrie eleeson, Christ eleeson, pater
noster, ave Maria, and ne nos, and veniat super nos salutare tuum. Oremus, etc.

I find in a Primer entitled The hours of our Lady, after the use of the
church of York, printed anno 1516. a charm with this titling in red letters;
To all them that before this image of pity devoutly shall say five Pater
nosters, five Aves, and one Credo, pitiously beholding these arms of Christ's
passion, If the party fail in the number, he may go whistle for a pardon.
are granted thirty two thousand seven hundred fifty five years of pardon. It
is to be thought that this pardon was granted in the time of pope Boniface the
nineth; for Platina says that the pardons were sold so cheap, that the
apostolical authority grew into contempt.

A papistical charm.
SIgnum sanctae crucis defendat me a malis praesentibus, praeteritis, and
futuris, interioribus and exterioribus: That is, The sign of the cross defend
me from evils present, past, and to come, inward and outward.

A charm found in the canon of the mass.
ALso this charge is found in the canon of the mass, Haec sacrosancta
commixtio corporis and sanguinis domini nostri Jesus Christi fiat mihi,
omnibusque sumentibus salus mentis and corporis, and ad vitam promerendam, and
capessendam, praeparatio salutaris: that is, Let this holy mixture of the body
and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, be unto me, and unto all receivers thereof,
health of mind and body, and to the deserving and receiving of life an
healthful preparative.

Other papisticall charms.
Aqua benedicta, sit mihi salus and vita.
Let holy water be, By Ab. Fle.
both health and life to me.
Adque nomen Martini omnis haereticus fugiat palladus,
When Martins name is sung or said,
Let heretics fly as men dismayed.
But the papists have a harder charm than that; to wit, Fire and ^agot Fire
and faggot.

A charm of the holy cross.
Nulla salus est in domo,
Nisi cruce munit homo
Superliminaria.
Neque sentit gladium,
Nec amisit filium,
Quisquis egit talia:
No health within the house does dwell,
Except a man do cross him well,
At every door or frame,
He never feels the swords point,
Nor of his son shall lose a joint,
That does perform the same.
Furthermore as follows.
Sancta (...) aquipar atur salutifero Christo O blasphemiam inenarrabilem!
Ista suos fortiores
Semper facit, and victores,
Morbos sanat and languores,
Reprimit daemonia.
Dat captivis libertatem,
Vitae confert novitatem,
Ad antiquam dignitarem,
Crux reduxit omnia.
O Crux lignum triumphale,
Mundi vera salus vale,
Inter ligna nullum tale,
Frande, flore, germine.
Medicina Christiana,
Salva sanos, aegros sana,
Quod non valet vis humana,
Fit in tuo nomine, etc.
It makes her soldiers excellent.
And crowne^h them with victory,
Englished by Abraham Fleming* Lok in the Boehive of the Romish church lib 4.
cap. 3 fol. 251.252.
Restores the lame and impotent,
and heals every malady.
The devils of hell it conquereth,
releaseth from imprisonment,
Newness of life it offers,
It has all at commandment.
O cross of wood incomparable,
To all the world most wholesome:
No wood is half so honorable.
In branch, in bud or blossom.
O medicine which Christ did ordain,
The sound save every hour,
The sick and sore make whole again,
By virtue of thy power.
And that which man's unablenesse,
Has never comprehended,
Grant by thy name of holiness,
It may be fully ended, etc.
A charm taken out of the Primer.
THis charm following is taken out of the Primer aforesaid. Omnipotens Dominus
Christus Messiah with 34. names more, and as many crosses, and then proceeds in
this wife; Ista nomina me protegant ab omni adversitate, plaga, and infirmitate
corporis and animae, plene liberent, and assistent in auxilium ista nomina
regum, Gasper, etc. and 12. Apostoli (videlicet) Petrus, etc. and 4.
Evangelistae (vedelicet) Matthaeus, etc. mibi assistent in omnibus
necessitatibus meis, ac me defendant and liberent ab omnibus periculis and
corporis and animae, and omnibus malis praeteritis, praesentibus, and futuris,
etc.

CHAP. X.
How to make holy water, and the virtues thereof, St. Rufins charm, of the
wearing and bearing of the name of Jesus, that the sacrament of confession and
the eucharist is of as much efficacy as other charms and magnified by L. Vairus.

IF I did well, I should show you the confection of all their stuff, and how
they prepare it; but it would be too long. And therefore you shall only have in
this place a few notes for the composition of certain receipts, which instead
of an Apothecary if you deliver to any morrowm^sse priest, he will make them as
well as the pope himself. Mary now they wax every Parliament deerer and
deerer, although therewithal, they utter many stale drugs of their own.

If you look in the popish pontifical, In ecclesiae dedicatione.
you shall see how they make their holy water; to wit, in this sort: I conjure
thee thou creature of water in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost, that thou drive the devil out of every corner and hole of this
church, and altar; so as he remain not within our precincts that are just and
righteous. And water thus used (as Durandus says) has power of his own nature
to drive away devils. In rationali divinorum officiorum.
If you will learn to make any more of this popish stuff, you may go to the
very masse-book, and find many good receipts: marry if you search Durandus,
etc. you shall find abundance.

I know that all these charms, and all these paltery confections (though they
were far more impious and foolish) will be maintained and defended by
massemongers, even as the residue will be by witchmongers: and therefore I will
in this place insert a charm, the authority whereof is equal with the rest,
desiring to have their opinions herein I find in a book called Pomoerium
sermonum quadragefimalium, Pom sermon 32.
that S. Francis seeing Rufinus provoked of the devil to think himself damned,
charged Rufinus to say this charm, when he next met with the devil; Aperios,
and ibi (...) nam stercus, which is as much to say in English as, Open thy
mouth, and I will pu^ in a plum: a very ruffinly charm.

Leonard Vairus writes, De veris, piis, ac sanctis amuletis fascinum ^^que
omnia veneficia destruent ibus; L. Vairus. lib. de fascin 3. ca. 10.
wherein he specially commends the name of Jesus to be worn. But the
sacrament of confession he extolleth above all things, saying, that whereas
Christ with his power did be^throw devils out of men's bodies, Idem, ibid.
the priest drives the devil out of man soul by confession. For (says he)
these words of the priest, when he says, Ep te absolvo, are as effectual to
drive away the princes of darkness, throo^ the mighty power of that saying, as
was the voice of God to drive away the darkness of the world, Idem, Ibid.
when at the beginning he said Fiat lux. He commends also as wholesome things
to drive away devils, the sacrament of the eucharist, and solitariness, and
silence. Finally he says, tha^ if there be added hereunto an Agnus Dei, and
the same be worn about on^ neck by one void of sin, nothing is wanting that is
good and wholesome for this purpose. But he concludes, that you must wear and
make (...) in your forehead, with crossing your self when you put on your
shoe* and at every other action, etc. and that is also a present remedy to
din^ away devils, for they cannot abide it.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Noble balm used by Moses, apishly counterfeited in the ch^rc^ of Rome.

THe noble balm that Moses made, having indeed many excellent v^^^tues,
besides the pleasant and comfortable savor thereof; when withal Moses in his
politic laws enjoined Kings, Queens, and Prince to be anointed in their true
and lawful elections and coronations, (...) the everlasting King had put on man
upon him, is apishly counterfeit in the Romish Church, with diverse terrible
conjurations, three bre^^^ings, crossewise, (able to make a quezie stomach
spue) nine mumbli^^ and three curtsies, saying thereunto, Ave sanctum oleum,
ter ave sancta balsamum. And so the devil is thrust out, and the Holy Ghost let
(...) to his place. But as for Moses his balm, it is not now to be found either
(...) Rome or elsewhere that I can learn. And according to this papisti^^
order, witches and other superstitious people follow on, with charm^ and
conjurations made in form; which many bad Physicians also practi^^^ when their
learning fails, as may appear by example in the sequel.

CHAP. XII.
The opin^on of Ferrarins touching charms, periapis, appensions, amulets, etc.
Of Homericall medicines, of constant opinion, and the effects thereof.

ARgerius Ferrarius, a physician in these days of great account, does say,
that for so much as by no diet nor physic any disease can be so taken away or
extinguished, Arg. Fer. lib. de medenai methodo. 2. cap. 11. De Homerica
medicatione.
but that certain dregs and relics will remain: therefore physicians use
physical alligations, appensions, peraipts, amulets, charms, characters. etc.
which he supposes may do good; but harm he is sure they can do none: urging
that it is necessary and ex^pedient for a physician to leave nothing undone
that may be devised for his patients recovery; and that by such means many
great cures are done. He cites a great number of experiments out of Alexander
Trallianus, Aetius, Octavianus, Marcellus, Philodotus, Archigines,
Philostratus, Pliny, etc Dioscorides; and would make men believe that Galen
(who in truth despised and derided all those vanities) recanted in his latter
days his former opinion, This would be examined, to see if Galen be not
standered.
and all his invectives tending against these magical cures: writing also a
book entitled De Homerica medicatione, which no man could ever see, but one
Alexander Trallianus, who says he saw it: and further affirms, that it is an
honest man's part to cure the sick, by hook or by crook, or by any means
whatsoever. Yea he says that Galen (who indeed wrote and taught that
Incantamenta sunt muliercularum figmenta, and be the only clokes of bad
physicians) affirms, that there is virtue and great force in incantations. As
for example (says Trallian) Galen, being now reconciled to this opinion,
holds and writes, that the bones which stick in ones throat, are avoided
and cast out with the violence of charms and enchanting words; yea and that
thereby the stone, the chollick, the falling sickness, and all fevers, gowts,
fluxes, fistula's, issues of blood, and finally whatsoever cure (even beyond
the skill of himself or any other foolish physician) is cured and perfectly
healed by words of enchantment. Marry M. Ferrarius (although he allowed and
practiced this kind of physic) yet he protests that he thinks it none
otherwise effectual, than by the way of constant opinion: so as he affirms
that neither the character, nor the charm, nor the witch, nor the devil
accomplish the cure; as (says he) the experiment of the toothach will
manifestly declare, wherein the cure is wrought by the confidence or diffidence
as well of the patient, as of the agent; according to the poets saying. Nos
habitat non tartara, sed nec sider coeli,
Spiritus in nobis qui viget illa facit. a
Not hellish furies dwell in us,
Nor stars with influence heavenly; Englished by Abraham Fleming.

The spirit that lives and rules in us,
Does every thing ingeniously,
This (says he) comes to the unlearned, through the opinion which they
conceive of the characters and holy words: but the learned that know the force
of the mind and imagination, work miracles by miracles by means thereof; so as
the unlearned must have external helps, to do that which the learned can do
with a word only. He says that this is called Homerica medicatio, because
Homer discovered the blood of the word suppressed, and the infections healed by
or in mysteries.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the effects of amulets, the drift of Argerius Ferrarius in the commendation
of charms, etc. four sorts of Homericall medicines, and the choice thereof;
of imagination.

AS touching mine opinion of these amulets, characters, and such other bables,
I have sufficiently uttered it elsewhere: and I will bewray the vanity of
these superstitious trifles more largely hereafter. And therefore at this time
I only say, that those amulets, which are to be hanged or carried about one,
if they consist of herbs, roots, stones, or some other metal, they may have
diverse medicinable operations; and by the virtue given to them by God in their
creation, may work strange effects and cures: and to impute this virtue to any
other matter is witchcraft. And whereas A. Ferrarius commends certain
amulets, that have no show of physical operation; as a nail takes from a
cross, holy water, and the very sign of the cross, with such like popish
stuff: I think he labors thereby rather to draw men to popery, than to
teach or persuade them in the truth of physic or philosophy. And I think thus
the rather, for that he himself sees the fraud hereof; confessing that where
these magical physicians apply three seeds of three-leaved grass to a tertian
ague, and four to a quartaine, that the number is not material.

Four sorts of Homerical medicines, and which is the principal.
But to these Homerical medicines he says there are four sorts, whereof
amulets, characters, and charms, are three: howbeit he commends and
prefers the fourth above the rest; and that he says consists in
illusions, which he more properly calls stratagems. Of which sort of
illusions he alleges for example, how Philodotus did put a cap of lead upon
ones head, who imagined he was headless, whereby the party was delivered from
his disease or conceit. Item another cured a woman that imagined, that a
serpent or snake did continually gnaw and tear her entrails; and that was
done only by giving her a vomit, and by foisting into the matter vomited a
little serpent or snake, like unto that which she imagined was in her belly.
The force of fixed fansie-opinion, or strong conceit.


Item, another imagined that he always burned in the fire, under whose bed a
fire was privily conveyed, which being raken out before his face, his fancy
was satisfied, and his heat allayed. Hereunto pertains, that the hickot is
cured with sudden fear or strange news: yea by that means agues and many
other strange and extreme diseases have been healed. And some that have lien
so sick and sore of the gowt, that they could not remove a joint, through
sudden fear of fire, or ruin of houses, have forgotten their infirmities and
greefs, and have run away. But in my tract upon melancholy, and the effects of
imagination, and in the discourse of natural magic, you shall see these
matters largely touched.

CHAP. XIV.
Choice of Charms against the falling evil, the biting of a mad dog, the
stinging of a Scorpion, the toothache, for a woman in travel, for the kings
evil, to get a thorn out of any member, or a bone out of ones throat, charms
to be said fasting, or at the gathering of herbs, for sore eyes, to open
locks, against spirits, for the bots in a horse, and specially for the Duke of
Alba's horse, for sower Wines, etc.

THere be innumerable charms of conjurers, bad physicians, lewd Chirurgians,
melancholic witches, and couseners, for all diseases and griefs; specially for
such as bad Physicians and Chirurgians know not how to cure, and in truth are
good stuff to shadow their ignorance, whereof I will repeat some.

For the falling evil.
TAke the sick man by the hand, and whisper these words softly in his ear, I
conjure thee by the sun and moon, and by the gospel of this day delivered by
God to Hubert, Giles, Cornelius and John, that thou rise and fall no more.
Otherwise: Drink in the night at a spring water out of a skull of one that has
been slain. Otherwise: Eat a pig killed with a knife that flew a man.
Otherwise as follows.

Ananizapta ferit mortem, dum laedere quaerit,
Est mala mors capta, dum dicitur Ananizapta,
Ananizapta Dei nunc miserere mei.
Ananizapta smites death,
Whiles harm intends he, Englished by Abraham Fleming.

This word Ananizapta say,
And death shall captive be,
Ananizapta O of God,
Have mercy now on me.
Against the biting of a mad dog.
PUt a silver ring on the finger, I. Bodinus lib. de damon 3. cap. 5.
within the which these words are graven Habay habar hebar and say to the
person bitten with a mad dog, I am thy savior, lose not thy life: and then
prick him in the nose thrice, that at each time he bleed. Otherwise: take
pills made of the skull of one that is hanged. Otherwise: write upon a piece
of bread, Irioni, khiriora, esser, khuder, fer^s; and let it be eaten by the
party bitten. Otherwise: O Rex gloriae Jesus Christ, veni cum pace (...) nomine
patris max, in nomine filii max, in nomine spiritus sancti prax ^ Gasper,
Melchior, Balthazar prax max Deus I max

But in troth this is very dangerous; insomuch as if it be not speedily and
cunningly prevented, either death or frenzy insueth, through infection of the
humor left in the wound bitten by a mad dog: which because bad Chirurgians
cannot cure, they have therefore used foolish co^sening charms. But Dodonaeus
in his hearball says, that the herb Alysson cures it: which experiment, I
doubt not, will prove more true then all the charms in the world. But where he
says, that the same hanged at a man's gate or entry, preserves him and his
cattle from enchantment, or bewitching, he is overtaken with folly.

Against the biting of a Scorpion.
SAy to an ass secretly, and as it were whispering in his ear; I am bitten
with a Scorpion.

Against the toothach.
SCarifie the gums in the grief, with the tooth of one that has been slain.
Otherwise: Galbes galbat, galdes galdat. Otherwise, A ^^hur hus, etc.
Otherwise: At saccaring of mass hold your teeth together and say That is, you
shall not break or diminish a bone of him.
Os non comminuetis ex eo. Otherwise: Strigiles falcesque de^t^tae, dentium
dolorem persanate; O horse-combs and sickles that have so many teeth, come heal
of my toothach.

A charm to release a woman in travel.
Throw over the top of the house, where a woman in travel lies, ^ stone, or
any other thing that has killed three living creatures, namely, a man, a wild
bore, and a she-bear.

To heal the Kings or Queens evil, or any other soreness in the throat.
REmedies to cure the Kings or Queens evil, is first to touch the place with
the hand of one that died an untimely death. Otherwise: Let a virgin fasting
lay her hand on the sore, and say; Apollo denies that the heat of the plague
can increase, where a naked virgin quenches it: and spet three times upon it.

A charm read in the Romish church, upon Saint Blazes day, that will fetch a
thorn out of any place of ones body, a bone out of the throat, etc. Lect. 3.
FOr the fetching of a thorn out of any place of ones body, or a bone out of
the throat, you shall read a charm in the Romish church upon St. Blazes day;
to wit, call upon God* and remember St. Blaze. This St. Blaze could also heal
all wild beasts, that were sick or lame, with laying on of his hands: as
appears in the lesson read on his day, where you shall see the matter at
large.

A Charm for the headache.
TIe a halter about your head, wherewith one has been hanged.

A charm to be said each morning by a witch fasting, or at least before she go
abroad.
THe fire bites, the fire bites, the fire bites; Hogs turd over it, hogs turd
over it, hogs turd over it; The father with thee, the son with me, the holy
ghost between us both to be: ter. Then spit over one shoulder, and then over
the other, and then three times right forward.

Another charm that witches use at the gathering of their medicinable herbs.
Hail be thou holy herb
Growing on the ground,
All in the mount Though neither the herb nor the witch never came there*
Calvarie
First were thou found,
Thou art good for many a sore,
And healest many a wound,
In the name of sweet Jesus
I take thee from the ground.
An old woman's charm, wherewith she did much good in the country, and grew
famous thereby.
AN old woman that healed all diseases of cattle (for the which she never took
any reward but a penny and a loaf) being seriously examined by what words she
brought these things to pass, confessed that after she had touched the sick
creature, she always departed immediately; saying: My loase in my lap,
My penny in my purse;
Thou art never the better,
And I am never the worse.


Another like charm.
A Gentlewoman having sore eyes, made her moan to one, that promised her help,
if she would follow his advise: which was only to wear about her neck a
scroll sealed up, whereinto she might not look. and she conceaving hope of
cure thereby, received it under the condition, and left her weeping and tears,
wherewith she was wont to bewail the miserable darkness, Note the force of
constant opinion, or fixed fancy.
which she doubted to endure: whereby in short time her eyes were well amended:
But alas! she lost soon after that precious, jewel, and thereby returned to
her wonted weeping, and by consequence to her sore eyes. Howbeit, her jewel or
scroll being sound again, was looked into by her deer friends, and this only
posie was contained therein.

The devil pull out both thine eyes,
And Spell the word backward, and you shall soon see this stevenly charm or
appension. Thievish charms.
etish in the holes likewise.
Whereby partly you may see what constant opinion can do, according to the
saying of Plato; if a man's fancy or mind give him assurance th^^ a hurtful
thing shall do him good, it may do so, etc.

A charm to open locks.
AS the herbs called Aethiopides will open all locks (if all be true that
inchanters say) with the help of certain words: so be there charms also and
periap^s, which without any herbs can do as much: ^ for example. Take a piece
of wax crossed in baptism, and do but pri^^ certain flowers therein, and tie
them in the hinder fl^irt of your shirt and when you would undo the lock, blow
thrice therein, saying; Arato (...) partiko ho^ maratarykin. I open this door
in thy name that I am forced to break, as thou brakest hell-gates, In nomine
patris, and filii, and spi^i^^ sancti, Amen.

This is called and counted the Paracelsian charm. Psalm. 150. Luke 16. Psalm.
64.
A charm to drive away spirits that haunt any house.
HAng in every of the four corners of your house this sentence written upon
virgin parchment, Omnis spiritus l^udet Dominum: M^se^ habent and prophetas:
Exurgat Deus, and dissipan^ur inimici ejus.

A pretty charm or conclusion for one possessed.
THe possessed body must go upon his or her knees to the church, ho^ far so
ever it be off from their lodging; and so must creep without going out of the
way, being the common high way, in that sort, (...) soul and dirty soever the
same be; or whatsoever lie in the way, (...) shunning any thing whatsoever*
until he come to the church, where (...) must hear mass devoutly, Memorandum
that hearing of mass be in no case omitted, quoth Nota.
and then follows recovery.

Another for the same purpose.
THere must be commended to some poor beggar the saying of (...) Pater
nosters, and five Aves; the first so be said in the name of the party
possessed, or bewitched: for that Christ was led into the garden* secondly, for
that Christ did sweat both water and blood; thirdly, for that Christ was
condemned; fourthly, for that he was crucified gui^^lesse; and fifthly, for that
he suffered to take away our sins. Then (...) the sick body hear mass eight
days together, standing in the (...) where the gospel is said, and must
mingle holy water with his meat (...) his drink, and holy sal^ also must be a
portion of the mixture.

Another to the same effect.
Johannes Anglicus ex Constantino* Gu^ltero, Bernardo, Giberto, etc.
THe sick man must fast three days, and then he with his parents (...) come to
church, upon an embering friday; and must hear the (...) for that day
appointed, and so likewise the saturday and sunday following And the priest
must read upon the sick-mans head that gospel, which is (...) in September, and
in grap-hearvest, after the feast of holy cross. In (...) quatuor temporum, in
ember-daies: then let him write and carry it abo^^ his neck, and he shall be
cured.

Another charm or witchcraft for the same.
THis office or conjuration following was first authorized and printed at Rome,
and afterward at Avenion, Anno 1515. And lest that the devil should lie hid
in some secret part of the body, every part thereof is named; Obsecro te Jesus
Christ, etc. that is: I beseech thee O Lord Jesus Christ, that thou pull out
of every member of this man all infirmities, from his head, from his hair,
from his brain, from his forehead, from his eyes, from his nose, from his
ears, from his mouth, from his tongue, from his teeth, from his jaws, from
his throat, from his neck, from his back, from his breast, from his paps, from
his heart, from his stomach, from his sides, from his flesh, from his blood,
from his bones, from his legs, from his feet, from his fingers, from the soles
of his feet, from his marrow, from his sinews, from his skin, and from every
joint of his members, etc.

Doubtless Jesus Christ could have no starting hole, but was hereby every way
prevented and pursued; so as he was forced to do the cure: for it appears
hereby, that it had been insufficient for him to have said; Depart out of this
man thou unclean spirit, and that when he so said he did not perform it. I do
not think that there will be found among all the heathens superstitious fables,
or among the witches, conjurors, poets; knaves, coseners, fools, etc. that
ever wrote, so impudent and impious a lie or charm as is read in Barnardine de
bustis; Barnard. de bustis in Rosar. sermon. 15.
where, to cure a sick man, Christ's body, to wit: a wafer-cake, was outwardly
applied to his side, and entered into his heart, in the sight of all the
standers by. Now, if grave authors report such lies, what credit in these cases
shall we attribute unto the old wives ales, that Sprenger, Institor, Bodin, and
others write? Even as much as to Ovids Metamorphosis, Aesops fables, Moors
Utopia, and diverse other ^ansies; which have as much truth in them, as a blind
man has sight in his eye.

A charm for the bots in a horse.
You must both say and do thus upon the diseased horse three days together,
before the sun rising: In nomine patris and filii and spiritus sancti;
Exorcizo te ve^mem per Deum patrem, and silium and spiritum sanctum: that is,
In the name of God the father, the son, and the Holy Ghost, I conjure thee O
worm by God the Father, the son, and the Holy Ghost; that thou neither eat nor
drink the flesh, blood or bones of this horse; and that thou hereby may be
made as patient as Job, and as good as S. John Baptist, when he baptized Christ
in Jordan, In nomine pa ^ris and filii et spiritus sancti. And then say three
Pater nosters, and three Aves, in the right ear of the horse, to the glory of
the holy trinity. Dominus filius spiritus Maria.

There are also diverse books imprinted, as it should appear with the
authority of the church of Rome, wherein are contained many medicinal prayers,
not only against all diseases of horses, but also for every impediment and
fault in a horse: insomuch as if a shoe fall off in the midst of his journey,
there is a prayer to warrant your horses hoof, The Smithes will can them small
thanks for this prayer.
so as it shall no ^ break, how far so ever he be from the Smithes forge.

Item, The Duke of Alba his horse was consecrated, or canonized in the
Low Countries, at the solemn mass; wherein the Popes bull, and also his charm
was published (which I will hereafter recite) he in the mean time sitting as
Viceroy with ^his consecrated standart in his hand, till mass was done.

A charm against vinegar.
O notable blasphemy!
THat wine wax not eager, write on the vessel, Gustate and videte, qu^^ am
suavis est Dominus.

CHAP. XV.
The enchanting of serpents and snakes, objections answered concerning the
same; fond reasons why charms take effect the rein, M^homets pigeon, miracles
wrought by an ass at Memphis in Egypt, popish charms against serpents, of
miracleworkers, the taming, (...) snakes, Bodins lie of snakes.

COncerning the charming of Serpents and snakes, mine adversaries ((...) I have
said) think they have great advantage by the words of David is the fifty eight
psalm; and by Jeremy; chap. eight; expounding the one prophet by Virgil, the
other by Ovid. For the words of David are these Their poison is like the poison
of a Serpent, Psalm 58.
and like a deaf Adder, the Stops his ear, and hears not the voice of
the charmer, charm (...) never so cunningly. The words of Virgil are these;
Frigidus, in (...) cantando rumpitur anguis. Virg. eclog. 8.
As he might say, David thou lie; for the cold-natured snake is by the charms
of the inchanters broken all to piece in the field where he lies. Then comes
Ovid, and he takes his countreymans part, Ovid metamorp. 7. Jeremy 8.17.
saying in the name and person of a witch; Vipereas (...) verbis and carmine
fauces; that is, I with my words and charms can bre^^ in sunder the vipers
jaws. Matry Jeremy on the other side encountereth this poetical witch, and he
not only defends, but expounds his fellow prophets words, and that not in
his own name but in the na^^ of Almighty God; saying; I will send serpents and
cockatrices among you, which cannot be charmed.

Now let any indifferent man (christian or heathen) judge, when th^^ the words
and minds of the prophets do not directly oppugn these po^^ words (I will not
say minds) for that I am sure they did therein but jest (...) trifle, according
to the common fabling of lying poets. And certainly, I (...) encounter them two
with other two poets, namely Propertius and Horace the one merrily deriding,
the other seriously impugning their fantastic^ poetries, concerning the power
and omnipotency of witches. For when Virgil, Ovid, etc. write that witches with
their charms fetch down the Moon and stars from heaven, etc. Propertius
mocketh them in the words following: At vos deductae quibus est fallacia Lunae,
Et labor in magicis sacra piare focis,
En agedum dominae mentem convertite nostrae,
Et facite illa meo palle at ore magis,
Tunc ego crediderim vobis and sidera and amnes
Posse Circeis ducere carminibus.
But you that have the subtle slight, Englished by Abraham Fleming.

Of fetching down the moon from skies;
And with enchanting fire bright,
Attempt to purge your sacrifice:
Lo now, go too, turn (if you can)
Our madams mind and sturdy heart,
And make her face more pale and wan,
Than mine: which if by magic art
You do, then will I soon believe,
That by your witching charms you can
From skies aloft the stars remeeve,
And rivers turn from whence they ran.


And that you may see more certainly, that these poets did but jest and deride
the credulous and timorous sort of people, I thought good to show you what Ovid
says against himself, and such as have written so incredibly and ridiculously
of witches omnipotency: Nec mediae magicis finduntur cantibus angues,
Nec redit in fonies unda supina suos.
Snakes in the middle are not riven
With charms of witches cunning, Englished by Ab. Fleming.

Nor waters to their Fountains driven
By force of backward-running.


As for Horace his verses I omit them, because I have cited them in another
place. And concerning this matter Card anus says, that at every eclipse they
were wont to think, Card. lib. 15. de var^er. cap. 80.
that witches pulled down the sun and moon from heaven. And doubtless, hence
came the opinion of that matter, which spread so far, and continued so long in
the common peoples mouths, that in the end learned men grew to believe it, and
to affirm it in writing.

But here it will be objected, An objection answered.
that because it is said (in the places by me alleged) that snakes or ^ipers
cannot be charmed; Ergo other things may: To answer this argument, I would ask
the witchmonger this question, to wit, Whether it be expedient, that to satisfy
his folly, the Holy Ghost must of necessity make mention of every particular
thing that he imagines may be bewitched? I would also ask of him, whatt
privilege a snake has more then other creatures, that he only may no, and all
other creatures may be bewitched; I hope they will not say, that either their
faith or infidelity is the cause thereof; Dan. in. dailog. cap. 3.
neither do I admit the answer of such divines as say, that he cannot be
bewitched: for that he seduced Eve; by means whereof God himself cursed him;
and thereby he is so privileged, as that no witches charm can take hold of
him. But more shall be said hereof in the sequel.

Danaeus says, that witches charms take soonest hold upon snakes and adders;
because of their conference and familiarity with the devil, whereby the rather
mankind through them was seduced. Let us seek then an answer for this cavil;
although in truth it needs not: for the phrase of speech is absolute, and
imports not a special quality proper to the nature of a viper any more, than
when I say: A cony cannot fly: you should gather and conclude thereupon, that
I meant that all other beasts could fly. But you shall understand, that the
cause why these vipers can rather withstand the voice and practice of
inchanters and sorcerers, than other c^eatures, is, for that they being in body
and nature venomous cannot so soon or properly receive their destruction by
venom, whereby the witches in other creatures bring their mischievous
practices more easily to pass, according to Virgile saying; Vir. geo. 4.
Englished by Abraham Fleming.
Corrup^ que lacius, infecit pabula tabo.
She did infect with poison strong
Both ponds and pastures all along.


And thereupon the prophet alludeth unto their corrupt and inflexible nature,
with that comparison; and not (as Tremelius is f^in to shift it) with stopping
one ear with his tale, and laying the other close to the ground; because he
would not hear the charmers voice. For the snake has neither such reason, nor
the words such effect: otherwise the snake must know our thoughts. It is also
to be considered, how untame by nature these vipers (for the most part) are,
insomuch as they be not by man's industry or cunning to be made familiar, or
trained to do any thing, whereby admiration may be procured: as Bomelio Feats
his dog could do; or Mahomets pigeon, which would resort unto him, being in the
midst of his camp, and pick a pease out of his ear* in such sort that many
of the people thought that the holy ghost came and told him a tale in his ear:
Feats his dog, and Mahomets pigeon.
the same pigeon also brought him a scroll, wherein was written, Re^e esto, and
laid the same in his neck. And because I have spoken of the docility of a dog
and a pigeon, though I could cite an infinite number of like tales, I will be
bold to trouble you but with one more.

At Memphis in Egypt, among other juggling knacks, which were there usually
showed, there was one that took such pains with an ass, that he had taught
him all these qualities following. A story declaring the great docility of an
ass.
And for gain he caused a stage to be made, and an assembly of people to meet;
which being done, in the manner of a play, he came in with his ass, and said;
The Sultane has great need of asses to help to carry stones and other stuff,
toward his great building which he has in hand. The ass immediately fell
down to the ground, and by all signs showed himself to be sick, and at
length to give up the ghost: so as the juggler begged of the assembly money
toward his loss. And having gotten all that he could, he said; Now my
masters, you shall see mine ass is yet alive, and does but counterfeit;
because he would have some money to buy him provender, knowing that I was poor,
and in some need of releef. Hereupon he would needs lay a wager, that his ass
was alive, who to every man's seeming was stark dead. And when one had laid
money with him thereabout, he commanded the ass to rise, but he lay still as
though he were dead: then did he beat him with a cudgel, but that would not
serve the turn, until he addressed his speech to the ass, saying (as before)
in open audience; The Sultan has commanded, that all the people shall ride out
to morrow, and see the triumph, and that the fair ladies will then ride upon
the fairest asses, and will give notable provender unto them, and every ass
shall drink of the sweet water of Nilus: and then lo the ass did presently
start up, and advance himself exceedingly. Lo (quoth his master) now I have
won: but in troth the Major has borrowed mine ass, for the use of the old
ill-favored witch his wife: and thereupon immediately he hung down his ears,
and halted down right, as though he had been stark lame. Then said his master;
I perceive you love young pretty wenches: at which words he looked up, as it
were with joyful cheer. And then his master did bid him go choose one that
should ride upon him; and he ran to a very handsome woman, and touched her with
his head, I. Bod. lib de daem. 2. cap. 6.
etc. A snake will never be brought to such familiarity, etc. Bodin says, that
this was a man in the likeness of an ass: but I may rather think that he is
an ass in the likeness of a man. Well, to return to our serpents, I will
tell you a story concerning the charming of them, and the event of the same.

In the city of Salisborough there was an inchanter, that before all the people
took upon him to conjure all the serpents and snakes within one mile compass
into a great pit or dike, Mal. Malef. part. 2. qu. 2. cap 9. Johan. Bodinus.
and there to kill them. When all the serpents were gathered together, as he
stood upon the brinke of the pit, there came at the last a great and horrible
serpent, which would not be gotten down with all the force of his
incantations: so as (all the rest being dead) he flew upon the inchanter, and
clasped him in the midst, and drew him down into the said dike, and there
killed him. You must think that this was a devil in a serpents likeness, which
for the love he bare to the poor snakes, killed the sorcerer; to reach all
other witches to beware of the like wicked practice. And surely, if this be not
true, there be a great number of lies contained in M. Mal. and I. Bodin. And if
this be well weighed, and conceived, it beats down to the ground all those
witchmongers arguments, that contend to wring witching miracles out of this
place. For they disagree notably, some denying and some affirming that serpents
may be bewitched. Nevertheless, because in every point you shall see how
popery agrees with paganism, I will recite certain charms against vipers,
allowed for the most part in and by the church of Rome: as follows.

I conjure thee O serpent in this house, by the five holy wounds of our Lord,
Exorcismes or conjurations against serpents.
that thou remove not out of this place, but here stay, as certainly as God was
borne of a pure virgin. Otherwise I conjure thee serpent In nomine patris, and
filii, and spiritus sancti: I command thee serpent by our lady S. Mary, that
thou obey me, as wax obeys the fire, and as fire obeys water; that thou
neither hurt me, nor any other christian, as certainly as God was borne of an
immaculate virgin, in which respect I take thee up, In nomine patris, and
filii, and spiritus sancti: Ely lash eiter, ely lash eiter, ely lash eiter.
Otherwise: O vermin, thou must come as God came unto the Jews. L. Vair. lib
de fascinat. cap. 4.
Otherwise L. Vairus says, that Serpens quernis frondibus contacta, that a
serpent touched with oake-leaves dies, and stays even in the beginning of
his going, if a feather of the bird Ibis be cast or thrown upon him: and that a
viper smitten or hot with a reed is astonished, and touched with a beechen branch
is presently numme and stiff.

Here is to be remembered, that many use to boast that they are of S. Paul's
race and kindred, showing upon their bodies the prints of serpent^ which (as
the papists affirm) was incident to all them of S. Paul's stock. Usurpers of
kindred with blessed Paul and S. Katharine.
Marry they say herewithall, that all his kinsfolks can handle serpents, or any
poison without danger. Others likewise have (as they brag) a Katharine-wheele
upon their bodies, and they say they are kin to S. Katharine, and that they
can carry burning coals in their bare hands, and dip their said hands in hot
skalding liquor, and also go into hot ovens. Whereof though the last be but a
bare jest, and to be done by any that will prove (as a bad fellow in London had
used to do, making no tarrianc^e at all therein:) yet there is a show made of
the other, as though it were certain and undoubted; I. Bondin. lib. de daem.
1. cap. 3.
by anointing the hands with the juice of mallows, mercury, urine, etc. which
for a little time are defensatives against these scalding liquors, and
scorching fires.

But they that take upon them to work these mysteries and miracles, do indeed
(after rehearsal of these and such like words and charms) take up even in
their bare hands, those snakes and vipers, and sometimes p^^ them about their
necks, without receiving any hurt thereby, to the terror and astonishment of
the beholders, which naturally both fear and abhor all serpents. But these
charmers (upon my word) dare not trust to their charms, but use such an
enchantment, as every man may lawfully use, and in the lawful use thereof may
bring to pass that they shall be in security, and take no harm, how much
soever they handle them: marry with a woollen rag they pull out their teeth
before hand, as some men say; but as truth is, they weary them, and that is of
certainty. And surely this is a kind of witchcraft, which I term private
confederacy. Bodin says, that all the snakes in one country were by charms
and verses driven into another region: perhaps he means Ireland, where S.
Patrik is said to have done it with his holiness, etc.

James Sprenger and Henry Institor affirm, that serpents and snakes, and their
skins exceed all other creatures for witchcraft: insomuch as witches do use to
bury them under men's thresholds, either of the house or stalles, whereby
barrenness is procured both to woman and beast: yea and that the very earth
and ashes of them continue to have force of fascination. In respect whereof
they wish all men now and then to dig away the earth under their thresholds,
and to sprinkle holy water in the place, and also to hang boughs (hallowed on
midsummer day) at the stall door where the cattle stand: and produce examples
thereupon, of witches lies, or else their own, which I omit, because I see my
book grows to be greater than I meant it should be.

CHAP. XVI.
Charms to carry water in a sive, to know what is spoken of us behind our
backs, for bleere eyes, to make seeds to grow well, of images made of wax, to
be rid of a witch, to hang her up, notable authorities against waxen images, a
story bewraying the knavery of waxen images.

LEonardus Vairus says, L. Vairus lib. fascin. 1. cap. 5. Oration Tusca
vestalis.
that there was a prayer extant, whereby might be carried in a sive, water, or
other liquor: I think it was clam clay; which a crow taught a maid, that was
promised a cake of so great quantity, as might be kneaded of so much flower, as
she could wet with the water that she brought in a sive, and by that means she
clamd it with clay, and brought in so much water, as whereby she had a great
cake, and so beguiled her sisters, etc. And this tale I heard among my grandams
maids, whereby I can decipher this witchcraft. Item, by the tingling of the
ear, men heretofore could tell what was spoken of them. If any see a scorpion,
and say this word (Bud) he shall not be stung or bitten therewith. These two
Greek letters P and A written in a paper, Of the word ( Bud) and the Greek
letters. P and A
and hung about ones neck, preserve the party from bleereyednesse. Cummin or
hempseed sown with cursing and opprobrious words grow the faster and the
better. Berosus Anianus makes witchcraft of great antiquity: for he says,
that Cham touching his fathers naked member uttered a charm, whereby his
father became emasculated or deprived of the powers generative.

A charm teaching how to hurt whom you list with images of wax, etc.
MAke an image in his name, whom you would hurt or kill, of new virgin wax;
under the right arme-poke whereof place a swallows heart, and the liver under
the left; then hang about the neck thereof a new thread in a new needle pricked
into the member which you would have hurt, with the rehearsal of certain
words: which for the avoiding of foolish superstition and credulity in this
behalf is to be omitted. And if they were inserted, I dare undertake* they
would do no harm, were it not to make fools, and catch gudgins. Otherwise;
Sometimes these images are made of brass, and then the hand is placed where
the foot should be, and the foot where the hand, and the face downward.
Otherwise; For a greater mischief, the like image is made in the form of a
man or woman, upon whose head is written the certain name of the party; and on
his or her ribs these words, Ailif, casyl, zaze, hit, mel meltat; The practiser
of these chams must have skill in the planetary motions, or else he may go sho
the goose.
then the same must be buried. Otherwise; In the dominion of Mars, two images
must be prepared, one of wax, the other of the earth of a dead man; each image
must have in his hand a sword wherewith a man has been slain, and that he must
be slain may have his head thrust through with a foin. In both must be written
certain peculiar characters, and then must they be hid in a certain place.
Otherwise; To obtain a woman's love, an image must be made in the hour of Venus,
of virgin wax, in the name of the beloved, whereupon a character is written,
and is warmed at a fire, and in doing thereof the name of some Angel must be
mentioned. To be utterly rid of the witch, and to hang her up by the hair, you
must prepare an image of the earth of a dead (...) to be baptized in another
man's name, whereon the name, with a character, must be written: then must it be
perfumed with a rotten bone, and then these psalms read backward; Domine
Dominus noster, Dominus illuminatio mea, Domine exaudi orationem meam, Deus
laudem meam (...) tacueris; and then bury it, first in one place, and
afterward in another. Howbit, it is written in the 21. article of the
determination of Paris, th^^ to affirm that images of brass, lead, gold, of
white or red wax, or of any other stuff, conjured, baptized, consecrated, or
rather execrated through these magical arts at certain days, have wonderful
vertue^, or such as are avowed in their books or assertions, is error in
faith, (...) philosophy, and true astronomy; yea it is concluded in the 22.
article of that council, that it is as great an error to believe those things,
as to do them.

But concerning these images, it is certain that they are much feare^ among the
people, and much used among cousening witches, as party appears in this
discourse of mine elsewhere, and as partly you may see by the contents of this
story following. Not long sithence, a young maiden (dwelling at New Romny here
in Kent) being the daughter of one ^. L. Stuppeny (late Jurat of the same town
but dead before the execution hereof) and afterward the wife of Thom. Eps (who
is at this instant Ma^or of Romny) was visited with sickness, A proved story
concerning the premises.
whose mother and father in (...) being abused with credulity concerning
witches supernatural power, repaired to a famous witch called mother Baker,
dwelling not far from thence at a place called Stonstreet, who, according to
witches couse^ing custom, asked whether they mistrusted not some bad
neighbor, (...) whom they answered that indeed they doubted a woman near unto
them (and yet the same was of the honester and wiser sort of her neighbor,
reputed a good creature.) Nevertheless the witch told them that these was
great cause of their suspicion: for the same, said she, is the very part^ that
wrought the maidens destruction, by making a heart of wax, and pri^^ing the
same with pins and needles; affirming also that the same neighbor of hers had
bestowed the same in some secret corner of the house. This being believed, the
house was searched by credible persons, but nothing could be found. The witch
or wise woman being certified hereof, continued her assertion, and would needs
go to the house where she herself (as she affirmed) would certainly find it.
When she came thither, she used her cunning, as it chanced, to her own
confusion, or at leastwise to her detection: for herein she did, as some of the
wiser sort mistrusted that she would do, laying down privily such an image, as
she had before described, in a corner, which by others had been most diligently
searched and looked into, and by that means her cousenage was notably
bewrayed. And I would wish that all witchmongers might pay for their lewd
repair to inchanters, and consultation with witches, and such as have familiar
spirits, as some of these did, and that by the order of the high Commissioners,
which partly for respect of neighborhood, and partly for other considerations,
I leave unspoken of.

CHAP. XVII.
Sundry sorts of charms tending to diverse purposes, and first, certain charms
to make taciturnity in tortures.

IMparibus meritis tria This charm seems to allude to Christ crucified
between the two thieves.

Pendont corpora ramis,
Dismas and Gestas,
In medio est divina potestas,
Dismas damnatur,
Gestas ad astra levatur:
Three bodies on a bough do hang, Englished by Ab. Fleming.

For merits of inequality,
Dismas and Gestas, in the midst
The power of the divinity.
Dismas is damned, but Gestas lifted up above the stars on high.
Also this: Psalm 44. Luke 4. John 19.
Eructavit cor meum verbum bonum: veritatem nun quam di^am regi. Otherwise: As
the milk of our lady was lussious to our Lord Jesus Christ; so let this torture
or rope be pleasant to mine arms and members. Otherwise; Jesus autem transiens
per medium illorum ibat. Otherwise; You shall not break a bone of him.

Counter-charms against these and all other witchcrafts, in the saying also
whereof witches are vexed, etc.
ERuctavit cor meum verbum bonum, Psalm 44. Scripture properly applied.
dicam cuncta opera mea regi. Otherwise: Domine labia mea aperies, and os meum
annunciabit veritatem. Otherwise: Contere brachia iniqui rei, and lingua
maligna subvertet ur.

A charm for the choine cough.
TAke three sips of a chalice, when the priest has said mass, and swallow it
down with good devotion, etc.

For corporal or spiritual rest.
In nomine patris, up and down,
Et filii and spiritus sancti upon my crown,
Crux Christi upon my breast,
Sweet lady send me eternal rest.
Charms to find out a thief.
O most wonderful virtue hidden in the letters of S. Helens holy name!
THe means how to find out a thief, is thus: Turn your face to the east, and
make a cross upon crystal with oil alive, and under the cross write these
two words (Saint Helen.) Then a child that is innocent, and a chaste virgin
borne in true wedlock, and not base begotten, of the age of ten years, must
take the crystal in his hand, and behind his back, kneeling on thy knees,
thou must devoutly and reverently say over this prayer thrice: I beseech thee
my lady S. Helen, mother of king Constantine, which did find the cross
whereupon Christ died: by that thy holy devotion, and invention of the cross,
and by the same cross, and by the joy which thou conceivedst at the finding
thereof, and by the love which thou bear to thy son Constantine, and by
the great goodness which thou do always use, that thou show me in this
crystal, whatsoever I ask or desire to know; Amen. And when the child sees
the angel in the crystal, demand what you will, and the angel will make answer
thereunto. Memorandum, that this be done just at the sunne-rising, when the
weather is fair and clear.

Cardanus derideth these and such like fables; and sets down his judgment
therein accordingly, Card. lib. 16. de var. rer. cap. 93.
in the sixteenth book De rerum ver. These conjurors and coseners forsooth
will show you in a glass the thief that has stolen any thing from you, and
this is their order. They take a glasse-viall full of holy water, and set it
upon a linen cloth, which has been purified, not only by washing, but by
sacrifice, etc. On the mouth of the vial or urinall, two olive-leaves must be
laid acrosse, with a little conjuration said over it, by a child; to wit thus:
Angele bone, angele candide, per tuam sanctitatem, meamque virginite^em,
ostende mihi furem: with ^hree Pater noste^s, three Aves, and betwixt either of
them a For if the cross be forgotten all is not worth a pudding.
cross made with the nail of the thombe upon the mouth of the vial; and then
shall be seen angels ascending and descending as it were motes in the
sunne-beames. The thief all this while shall suffer great torments, and his
face shall be seen plainly, even as plainly I believe as the man in the moon.
For in truth, there are toies artificially conveyed into glass, which will
make the water bubble, and devises to make images appear in the bubbles, as
also there be artificial glasses, which will show unto you that shall look
thereinto, many images of diverse forms, and some so small and curious, as they
shall in favor resemble whomsoever you think upon. Look in John Bap. Neap*
for the confection of such glasses. The subtilties hereof are so de^ected, and
the mysteries of the glasses so common now, and their cosenage so well known,
etc. that I need not stand upon the particular confutation hereof. Cardanus in
the place before cited reports, how he tried with children these and diverse
circumstances the whole illusion, and found it to be plain knavery and
cosenage.

Another way to find out a thief that ahht stolen any thing from you.
GO to the seaside, and gather as many pebles as you suspect persons for that
matter; carry them home, and throw them into the fire, and bury them under the
threshold, where the parties are like to come over. There let them lie three
days, and then before sun rising take them away. Then set a porrenger full of
water in a circle, wherein must be made crosses every way, as many as can stand
in it; upon the which must be written; Christ overcomes, Christ reigns,
Christ commands. The porrenger also must be signed with a cross, and a form
of conjuration must be pronounced. Then each stone must be thrown into the
water, in the name of the suspected. And when you put in the stone of him that
is guilty, the stone will make the water boil, as though glowing iron were put
thereinto. Which is a mere knack of legierdemaine, and to be accomplished
diverse ways.

To put out the thieves eye.
Read the seven psalms with the Letany, and then must be said a horrible
prayer to Christ, and God the father, with a curse against the thief. Then in
the midst of the step of your foot, on the ground where you stand, make a
circle like an eye, and write thereabout certain barbarous names, and drive
with a coopers hammer, or adds into the midst thereof a brazen nail
consecrated, saying: Iustus es Domine, et justa judicia tua. Then the thief
shall be bewraied by his crying out.

Another way to find out a thief.
STick a pair of sheeres in the rind of a sive, and let two persons set the
top of each of their forefingers upon the upper part of the sheeres, holding it
with the sive up from the ground steddily, These be mere toies to mock apes,
and have in them no commendable devise.
and ask Peter and Paul whether A. B. or C. has stolen the thing lost, and at
the nomination of the guilty person, the sive will turn round. This is a great
practice in all countries, and indeed a very babble. For with the beating of the
pulse some cause of that motion arises, some other cause by slight of the
fingers, some other by the wind gathered in the ^ive to be staid, etc. at the
pleasure of the holders. Some cause may be the imagination, which upon conceit
at the naming of the party alters the common course of the pulse. As may well
be conceived by a ring held steddily by a thread betwixt the finger and the
thombe, over or rather in a goblet or glass; which within short space will
strike against the side thereof so many strokes as the holder thinks it a
clock, and then will stay: the which who so proves shall find true.

A Charm to find out or spoil a thief.
OF th^s matter, concerning the apprehension of thieves by w^^ds, I will ci^e
one charm, called S. Adelberts curse; being both for length of words
sufficient to weary the reader, and for substantial stuff comprehending all
that appertains unto blasphemous speech or cursing, allowed in the church of
Rome, as an excommunication and enchantment.

Saint Adelberts curse or charm against thieves.
BY the authority of the omnipotent Father, the Son, and the holy ghost, and
by the holy virgin Mary mother of our Lord Jesu Christ, and the holy angels
and archangels, and S. Michael, and S. John Baptist, and in the behalf of S.
Peter the apostle, and the risidue of the apostles, and of S. Stephen, and of
all the martyrs, of S. Sylvester, and of S. Adelbert, and all the confessors,
and S. Alegand, and all the holy virgins, and of all the saints in heaven and
earth, unto whom there is given power to bind and loose: we do excommunicate,
damn, curse, and bind with the knots and bands of excommunication, and we do
segregate from the bounds and lists of our holy mother the church, all those
thieves, sacrilegious persons, ravenous catchers, doers, counselors,
coadjutors, male or female, that have committed this theft or mischief, or
have usurped any part thereof to their own use. Let their share be with Dathan
and Abiran, This is not to do good to our enemies, nor to pray for them that
hurt and hate us; as Christ exhorts.
whom the earth swallowed up for their such and pride, and let them have part
with Judas that betrayed Christ, Amen* and with Pontius Pilat, and with them
that said to the Lord, Depart from us, we will not understand thy ways; let
their children be made orphans. Cursed be they in the field, in the grove, in
the woods, in their houses, barnes, chambers, and beds, and cursed be they in
the court, in the way, in the town, in the castle, in the water, in the
church, in the churchyard, in the tribunal place, in battle, in their abode,
in the market place, in their talk, in silence, in eating, in watching, in
sleeping, in drinking, in feeling, in sitting, in kneeling, in standing, in
lying, in idleness, in all their work, in their body and soul, in their five
wits, and in every place. Cursed be the fruit of their womb^, and cursed be the
fruit of their lands, and cursed be all that they have. Cursed be their heads,
their mouths, their nostrels, their noses, their lips, their jaws, their
teeth, their eyes and eyelids, their brains, the roof of their mouths,
their tongues, their throats, their breast, their hearts, their bellies, their
livers, all their bowels, and their stomach.

Cursed be their navels, their spleenes, their bladder. Cursed be their
thighs, their legs, their feet, their toes, their necks, their shoulders.
Cursed be their backs, cursed be their arms, cursed be their elbowes, cursed
be their hands, and their fingers, cursed be both the nails of their hands and
feet; cursed be their ribbs and their genitals, and their knees, cursed be
their flesh, cursed be their bones, cursed be their blood, cursed be the skin
of their bodies, cursed be the marrows in their bones, cursed be they from the
crown of the head, to the sole of the foot: and whatsoever is betwixt the same,
be it accursed', that is to say, their five senses; to wit, their seeing, their
hearing, their smelling, their tasting and their feeling. Cursed be they in the
holy cross, in the passion of Christ, with his five wounds, with the effusion
of his blood, and by the milk of the Virgin Mary. I conjure thee Lucifer, with
all thy Soldiers, by the Thus they make the holy trinity to bear a part in
their exorcism or else it is no bargain.
Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, with the humanity and nativity of Christ,
with the virtue of all Saints, that thou rest not day nor night, till thou
bring them to destruction, either by drowning or hanging, or that they be
devoured by wild beasts, or burnt, or slain by their enemies, or hated of all
men living. And as our Lord has given authority to Peter the Apostle, and his
successors, (whose place we occupy, and to us (though unworthy) that whatsoever
we bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever we loose on earth,
shall be loose in heaven, so we accordingly, if they will not amend, do shut
from them the gates of heaven, and deny unto them Christian burial, so as they
shall be buried in asses leaze. Furthermore, curssed be the ground wherein they
are buried, let them be confounded in the last day of Judgment, let them have
no conversation among Christians, nor be houseled at the hour of death, let
them be made as dust before the face of the wind: and as Lucifer was expelled
out of heaven, and Adam and Eve out of paradise; so let them be expelled from
the daylight. Matthew 15.
Also let them be joined with those, to whom the Lord says at the Judgment,
Go ye curssed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his
angels, where the worm shall not die, nor the fire be quenched. And as the
candle, which is thrown out of my hand here, is put out: so let their works
and their soul be quenched in the stench of hell fire, except they restore that
which they have stolen, by such a day: and let every one say, Amen. After this
must be sung That is, In the midst of life we are in death, etc.
In media vita in morte sumus, etc.

This terrible curse with bell, book, and candle added thereunto, must needs
work wonders: howbeit among thieves it is not much weighed, among wise and true
men it is not well liked, to them that are robbed it brings small releef: the
priests stomach may well be eased, but the goods stolen will never the sooner
be restored. Hereby is bewrayed both the malice and folly of popish doctrine,
whose uncha^itable impiety is so impudently published, and in such order
uttered, as every sentence (if opportunity served) might be proved both
heretical and diabolical. But I will answer this cruel curse with another curse
far more mild and civil, performed by as honest a man (I dare say) as he that
made the other, whereof mention was lately made.

So it was, that a certain Sir John, with some of his company, once went abroad
a jetting, and in a moonlight evening robbed a millers weire and stole all his
eeles. The poor miller made his moan to Sir John himself, who willed him to be
quiet; for he would so curse the thief, and all his confederates, with bell,
book and candel, that they should have small joy of their fish. And therefore
the next sunday, Sir John got him to the pulpit, with his surplisse on his
back, and his stole about his neck, A curse for theft.
and pronounced these words following in the audience of the people.

All you that have stolen the millers eeles,
Laudate Dominum de coelis,
And all they that have consented thereto,
Benedicamus Domino.
Lo (says he) there is savoe for your eeles my masters.
Another enchantment.
Certain priests use the hundred and eight psalm as an enchantment or charm,
or at the leastwise saying, that against whomsoever they pronounce it, they
cannot live one whole year at the uttermost.

CHAP. XVIII.
A charm or experiment to find out a witch.

IN die dominico sotularia juvenum axungia seu pinguedine porci, ut moris est,
pro restauratione fieri perungunt: and when she is once come into the church,
the witch can never get out, until the searchers for her give her express
leave to depart.

But now it is necessary to show you how to prevent and cure all mischiefs
wrought by these charms and witchcrafts, according to the opinion of M. Mal.
and others. Preservatives from witchcraft according to M. Mal. L. Vairus and
others.
One principal way is to nail a horse-shoe at the inside of the outmost
threshhold of your house, and so you shall be sure no witch shall have power to
enter thereinto. And if you mark it, you shall find that rule observed in many
countrey-houses. Otherwise: Item the triumphant title to be written crossewise,
in every corner of the house, thus: Jesus Nazarenus rex Iudaeorum Memorandum:
you may join herewithal, the name of the virgin Mary, or of the four
Evangelists, or Verbum caro factum est. Otherwise: Item in some countries they
nail a wolves head on the door. Otherwise: Item they hang Scilla, (which is
either a root, or rather in this place garlike) in the roof of the house, for
to keep away witches and spirits: and so they do Alicium also. Otherwise: Item
perfume made of the gall of a black dog and his blood besmeered on the posts
and walls of the house, drives out of the doors both devils and witches.
Otherwise: The house where Herba betonica is sown, is free from all mischiefs:
Otherwise: It is not unknown that the Romish church allowed and used the smoke
of Sulphur, to drive spirits out of their houses; as they did frankincense and
water hallowed. Otherwise: Apuleius says, that Mercury gave to Ulysses, when
he came near to the inchantresse Circe, an herb called Verbascum, which in
English is called Mullein, or Tapsus barbatus, or Longwoort; and that preserved
him from the enchantments. Otherwise. Item Pliny and Homer bo do say, that the
herb called Moly is an excellent herb against enchantments, and say all, that
thereby Ulysses escaped Circes her sorceries, and enchantments. Otherwise also
diverse ways they went to work in this case, and some used this defensive,
some that preservative against incantations.

And herein you shall see, not only how the religion of papists, and infidels
agree; but also how their ceremonies and their opinions are all one concerning
witches and spirits.

For thus writes Ovid touching that matter.

Ovid. de Med.
Terque senem flamma, ter aqua, ter sulphur lustrat:
Englished by Abraham Fleming.
She purifies with fire thrice
Old ho^y-headed Aeson,
With water thrice, and sulphur thrice,
As she thought meet in reason.
Again, the same Ovid comes in as before: Advenient, quae lustret anus,
lectumque locumque,
Deferat and tremula sulphur and ova manu.
Let some old woman hither come,
And purge both bed and place, By. Ab Flem.

And bring in trembling hand new-egs
And sulphur in like case.


And Virgill also harpeth upon the like string: -- baccare frontem Virg. in
Bucolicts. Englished by Abraham Fleming.

Cingiteine vati noceat mala ligua future:
Of berry-bearing baccar bowze
A wreath or garland knit,
And round about his head and browze
See decently it sit;
That of an ill talking tongue
Our future poet be not stung.


Furthermore, was it not in times of tempests the papists use, or superstition,
to ring their bells against devils; trusting rather to the tonging of their
bells, than to their own cry unto God with fasting and prayer, assigned by him
in all adversities and dangers: according to the order of the Thracian priests,
which would rore and cry, with all the noise they could make, Olaus Goth. lib.
de gentib. sep^entriona. lib. 3. cap. 8.
in those tempests. Olaus Gothus, says that his countrymen would shoot in
the air, to assist their gods, whom they thought to be then together by the
ears with others* and had consecrated arrows, called Sagittae Ioviales, even
as our papists had. Also in stead of bells, they had great hammers, called
Mallei Ioviales, to make a noise in* time of thunder. In some countries they
run out of the doors in time of tempest, blessing themselves with a cheese,
whereupon there was a cross made with a ropes end upon ascension day. Also
three hailestones to be thrown into the fire in a tempest, and thereupon to be
said three Pater nosters, and three Aves, S. John's gospel, and In fine fugiat
tempestas, is a present remedy. Item, to hang an eg laid on ascension day in
the roof of the house, preserves the same from all hurts. A witches
conjuration to make hail cease and be dissolved.
Item, I conjure you hail and wind by the five wounds of Christ, by the three
miles which pierced his hands and his feet, and by the four evangelists,
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, that thou come down dissolved into water. Item,
it has been an usual matter, to carry out in tempests the sacraments and
relics, etc. Item, against storms, and many dumme creature^, the popish
church uses excommunication as a principal charm. And now to be delivered
from witches themselves, they hang in their entries an herb called
pentaphyllon, cinquefoile, also an oliveb-ranch, also ^rankincense, myrrh,
valerian, verven, palm, antirchmon, etc. also hay-^horne, otherwise
white-thorne gathered on May Day: also the smoke of ^ lappoints feathers
drives spirits away. There be innumerable popish exorcismes, and conjurations
for herbs and other things, to be thereby made wholsense both for the bodies
and souls of men and beasts, and also or contagion of weather. L. Vair. lib. de
facin. 2. cap. 11.

Mal. Malef. par. 2. quae. 1. cap. 15. Note that you read never of any spirit
that walked by day, quoth Nota


Memorandum, that at the gathering of these magical herbs, the Credo is
necessary to be said, as Vairus affirms; and also the Pater noster, for that
is not superstitious. Also Sprenger says, that to throw up a black chicken in
the air, will make all tempests to cease: so it be done with the hand of a
witch. If a soul wander in the likeness of a man or woman by night, molesting
men, with bewailing their torments in purgatory, by reason of tithes forgotten,
etc. and neither masses nor conjurations can help; the exorcist in his
ceremonial apparel must go to the tomb of that body, and spurn thereat, with
his soot, saying: Vade ad gehennam, Get thee packing to hell: and by and by the
soul goes thither, and there remains for ever. Otherwise: If there be no
masses of purpose for this matter, to unbewitch the bewitched. Otherwise: You
must spet into the pisse-pot, where you have made watter. Otherwise: Spet into
the shoe of your right foot, before you put it on: and that Vairus says is
good and wholseme to do, before you go into any dangerous place. Otherwise:
that neither hunters nor their dogs may be bewitched, they cleave an oaken
branch, and both they and their dogs pass over it. Aug. de civit. Dei lib 7.
cap. 12.
Otherwise: S. Agustine says, that to pacify the God Liber, whereby women
might have fruit of the seeds they sow, and that their gardens and fields
should not be bewitched; some chief (...) matrone used to put a crown upon
his genital member, and that must be publicly done.

To spoil a thief, a witch, or any other enemy, and to be delivered from the
evil.
Upon the sabbath day before sunrising, cut a hazel-wand, saying* I cut thee O
bough of this summers growth, in the name of him whom I mean to beat or
maime. Then cover the table, and say In nomine patris and filii and spiritus
sancti ter. And striking the^^ on say as follows (english it he that can)
Drochs myroch, esenaroth ^etu baroch ass maaroth: and then say; Holy trinity
punish him that has wrought this mischief, and take it away by thy great
justice, Eson elion emaris, ales, age; and strike the carpet with your wand. A
notable charm or medicine to pull out an arrow-head, or any such thing that
sticks in the flesh or bones, The Hebrew knight was canonized a saint, to
wit, S. Longinus
and cannot otherwise be had o^^.

Say three several times kneeling; Oremus, praeceptis salutaribus moniti,
Pater noster, ave Maria. Then make a cross saying: The Hebrew knight struck
our Lord Jesu Christ, and I beseech thee, O Lord Jesu Christ by the same iron,
spear, blood and water, to pull out this iron* is nomine patris and filii and
spiritus sancti

Coarmes against a qu tidian ague.
CUt an apple in three pieces, and write upon the one; The father is uncreated:
upon the other; The father is incomprehensible: upon the third; The father is
eternal. Otherwise: Write upon a masse-cake cut in three pieces; O ague to be
worshipped: on the second; O sickness to be ascribed to health and joys; on
the third; Pax max fax and let it be eaten fasting. Otherwise; Paint upon three
like pieces of a masse-cake, Pater pax Adonai^ilius vita sabbath spiritus
sanctus Tetragrammaton and eat it, as is aforesaid.

For all manner of agues intermittent.
Join two little sticks together in the midst, A crossed appension with other
appensions.
being of one length, and hang it about your neck in the form of a cross.
Otherwise: For this disease the Turks put within their doublet a ball of wood,
with another piece of wood, and strike the same, speaking certain frivolous
words. Otherwise: Certain monks hanged scrolles about the necks of such as
were sick, willing them to say certain prayers at each fit, and at the 3d. fit
to hope well: and made them believe that they should thereby receive cure.

Periapts, characters, etc. for agues, and to cure all diseases, and to deliver
from all evil.
THe first Chapter of St. John's Gospel in small letters consecrated at a
mass, For body and soul.
and hanged about ones neck, is an incomparable amulet or tablet, which
delivers from all witchcrafts and devilish practices. But me thinks, if one
should hang a whole testament, or rather a bible, he might beguil the devil
terribly. For indeed so would S. Barnard have don, whom the devil told, that he
could show him seven verses in the psalter, which being daily repeated, would
of themselves bring any man to heaven, and preserve him from hell. But when St.
Barnard desired the devil to tell him which they were, he refused, saying, he
might then think him a fool so to prejudice himself. Well (quoth St. Barnard) I
will do well enough for that, S. Barnard overmatcheth the devil for all his
subtilty.
for I will daily say over the whole psalter. The devil hea^ing him say so,
told him which were the verses, lest in reading over the whole psalter daily,
he should merit too much for others. But if the hanging of St. John's Gospel
about the neck be so beneficial; how if one should eat up the same?

More charms for agues.
TAke the party by the hand and say; Aeque facilis sit tibi haec febris, atque
Mariae virgini Christi partus. Otherwise: Wash with the party, and privily say
this Psalm, Exaltabo te Deus meus, rex, etc. Otherwise: Wear about your neck a
piece of a nail taken from a cross, and wrapped in wool. Otherwise drink
wine, wherein a sword has been drowned that has cut off ones head. Otherwise:
take three consecrated mass cakes; and write upon the first, Qualis est pater
talis est vita: on the second; Qualis est filius, talis est sanctus: on the
third; Qualis est spiritus, Precious restorities.
tale est remedium. Then give them to the sick man, enjoining him to eat none
other thing that day wherein he eats any of them, nor yet drink; and let him
say fifteen Pater nosters, and as many Aves, in the honor and praise of the
Trinity. Otherwise: Lead the sick man on a Friday before sunrising toward the
east, and let him hold up his hands toward the sun, and say: This is the day,
wherein the Lord God came to the cross. But as the cross shall never more
come to him; so let never the hot or cold fit of this ague come any more unto
this man, In nomine patris and filii, and spiritus sancti. Then say seven and
twenty Pater nosters, and as many Aves, and use this three days together.
Otherwise: Fecana, cage ti, daphnes, gebare, gedaco, This is too mystical to be
englished; quoth Nota.

Gebali stant, sed non stant phebas, hecas, and hedas.


Every one of these words must be written upon a piece of bread, and be given
in order one day after another to the sick body, and so must he be cured. This
says Nicholas Hemingius he chanced to read in the schools in jest; so as one
noting the words, practiced the medicine in earnest; and was not only cured
himself, but also cured many others thereby. And therefore he concludes, that
this is a kind of miraculous cure* wrought by the illusion of the devil:
whereas in truth, it will fall on most commonly, that a tertian ague will not
hold any man longer then so, though no medicine be given, or any words spoken.
Otherwise: This word, Fernelius.
Abra cadabra written on a paper, with a certain figure joined therewith, and
hanged about ones neck helps the ague. Otherwise* let the urine of the sick
body made early in the morning be softly heated nine days together
continually, until all be consumed into vapor. Otherwise: A cross made of
two little twigs joined together, wherewith when the party is touched, he will
he whole; specially if he wear it about his neck. Otherwise: Take a like
quantity of water out of three ponds of equal bigness, and taste thereof in a
new earthen vessel, and drink of it when the fit comes.

Notable follies of the Spaniards and Italians.
In the year of our Lord 1568. the Spaniards and Italians received from the
pope, this incantation following; whereby they were promised both remission of
sins, and good success in their wars in the Lo^^ Countries. Which whether it
be not as profane and impious, as my witches charm, I report me to the
indifferent Reader. Crucem pro (...) subiit and stans in illa sitiit Jesus
sacratis manibus; clavis ferreis, (...) bus perfossis, Jesus, Jesus, Jesus:
Domine libera nos ab hoc malo, and (...) peste: then three Pater nosters, and
three Ave Mary's. Also the same year their ensigns were by the authority
aforesaid conjured with certain ceremonies, and consecrated against their
Enemies. And if you read the histories of these wars, you may see what
victory they gained hereby. Item, they baptized their chief standard, and gave
it to name and Margaret, who overthrew the devil. And because you shall
understand the mystery hereof, I have the rather set it down elsewhere, being
indeed worth the reading.

For a bloody flux, or rather an issue of blood.
TAke a cup of cold water, and let fall thereinto three drops of the same
blood, and between each drop say a Pater noster, and an Art, then drink to the
patient, and say; who shall help you? The patience must answer St. Mary. Then
say you, St. Mary stop the issue of blo^d. Otherwise: He must answer by none
other, for the perhaps has the curing thereof by patent.
Write upon the patients forehead with the same blood; C^^ summatum est.
Otherwise: say to the patient; Sanguis mane in te, (...) fecit Christus in se;
Sanguie mane in tua vena, ficut Christus in sua (...) Sanguis mane fixus, sicut
Christus quando fuit crucifixus; ter. Otherwise, as follows.

In the blood of Adam death was taken
In the blood of Christ it was all to shaken
And by the same blood I do thee charge,
That thou do run no longer at large. Otherwise
Christ was borne at Bethelem, and suffered at Jerusalem, where his blood was
troubled. I command thee by the virtue of God, and through the help of all
Saints, to stay even as Jordan did, when John baptized Christ Jesus; In nomine
patris and filii and spiritus sancti Otherwise Put thy namelesse finger in the
wound, and make therewith three crosses upon the wound, and say five Pater
nosters, five Aves, and one Credo, in the honor of the five wounds. See I.
Wier cap. 11. conf.
Otherwise: Touch that part and say, De latere ejus exivit sanguis and aqua.
Otherwise; In nomine patris and filii and spiritus sancti etc. Chimrat; chara,
sarite, confirma, consona, ^^^ohalite. Otherwise; Sepa sepaga sepagoga sta
sanguis in nomine patris podendi and filii podera and spiritus sancti pandorica
pax tecum, Amen.

Cures commenced and finished by witchcraft.
THere was a jolly fellow that took upon him to be a notable Chirurgian, in the
duchy of Mentz, 1567. to whom there resorted a Gentleman that had been vexed
with sickness, named Elibert, having a kerchiefe on his head, according to the
guise of sick folk. But the Chirurgian made him pull off his kerchiefe, and
willed him to drink with him freely. The sick man said he durst not; for he was
forbidden by physic so to do. Tush (said this cunning man) they know not your
disease; be ruled by me, and take in your drink lustily. For he thought that
when he was well tippled, he might the more easily beguile him in his bargain,
and make his reward the greater* which he was to receive in part aforehand.
When they had well drunk, he called the sick man aside, and told him the
greatness and danger of his disease, and how that it grew by means of
withcraft, and that it would he universally spread in his house, and among all
his cattle, if it were not prevented: and impudently persuaded the sick man to
receive c^re of him. The Chirurgian here most impudently sets his knavery
abroch.
And after bargain made, he demanded of the sick man, whether he had not any at
home, whom he might assuredly trust. The sick man answered, that he had a
daughter and a servant. The cousener asked how old his daughter was? The
patient said twenty. Well (said the cousener) that is fit for our turn. Then he
made the mother and father to kneel on their knees to their daughter, and to
desire her in all things to obey the physician, and that she would do in every
thing as he commanded her; otherwise her father could not be restored to his
health. In which respect her parents humbly besought her on their knees so to
do. Then he assigned her to bring him into his lodging her fathers hair, and
her mothers, and of all those which he kept in his house, as well of men and
woman, as also of his cattle. When she came therewith unto him, according to
the match made, and her parents commandment, he lead her down into a low
parlour, where having made a long speech, he opened a book that lay on the
board, and lays thereon two knives acrosse, with much circumstance of words.
A pretended conjuration.
Then conjureth he, and makes strange characters, and at length he makes a
circle on the ground, wherein he causes her to stick one of those conjured
knives; and after many more strange words, he makes her stick the other knife
beside it. Then fell down the maid in a swoon for fear; so as he was fain to
frote her and put a sop into her mouth, after the receipt whereof she was sore
troubled and amazed. Then he made her breasts to be uncovered, so as when they
were bare, he dallied with them, diversely and long together. Then he made her
lie right upward all uncovered and bare below her pappes. Wherein the maid
being loath to obey him, resisted, and in shame forbad that villainy. Then said
the knave; Your fathers destruction is at hand: for except you will be ruled,
he and all his family shall sustain greater grief and inconvenience, then is
yet happened unto him. And no remedy, except you will seek his utter
overthrow, I must have carnal copulation with you, and therewithal sell into
her, bosom, and overthrew her and her virginity. So did he the second day, Ad
vada ^ot vadi^ urna, quod ipsa cadit.
and attempted the like on the third day. But he failed then of his purpose, as
the wench confessed afterward. In the mean time he ministered so cruel
medicines to the sick man, that through the torments thereof he feared present
death, and was feign to keep his bed, whereas he walked about before very well
and lustily. The patient in his torments calls unto him for remedy, who being
slack and negligent in that behalf, made room for the daughter to accompany
her father, who asked her what she thought of the cure, and what hope she had
of his recovery? Who with tears remained silent, as being oppressed with
grief; till at the last in abundance of sorrow she uttered the whole matter to
her father. This does Johannes Wierus report, saying, that it came unto him by
the lamentable relation of the father himself. And this is here at this time
for none other purpose rehearsed, but that men may hereby learn to take heed
of such cosening merchants, and know what they be that take upon them to be so
cunning in witchcraft; le^t they be bewitched; as master Elibert and his
daughter were.

Another witchraft or knavery, practiced by the same Chirurgian.
THis Chirurgian ministered to a noble man, that lay sick of an ague, offering
unto him three pieces of a root to be eaten at three morsels, saying to the
first; Three morsels, the first charmed with christ's birth, the second with his
passion, the third with his resurrection.
I would Christ had not been borne; unto the second. I would he had not
suffered; unto the third; I would he had not risen again. And then putting
them about the sick man's neck, said; Be of good cheer. And if he lost them,
whosoever took them up, should therewithal take away his ague. Otherwise;
Jesus Christ which was Born, deliver thee from this infirmity Jesus Christ
which died deliver thee from this infirmity Jesus Christ which rose again
deliver thee from this infirmity. Then daily must be said five Pater nosters
and five Aves.

Another experiment for one bewitched.
A cosening physician, and a foolish patient.
ANother such cosening physician persuaded one which had a timpany that it was
one old viper, and two young maintained in his belly by witchcraft. But being
watched, so as he could not convey vipers into his ordure or excrements, after
his purgations; at length he told the party, that he should suffer the pains
of childbirth, if it were not prevented; and therefore he must put his hand
into his breech, and rake out those worms there. But the mother of the sick
party having warning hereof said she could do that her self. So the cosener
was prevented, and the party died only of a timpany, and the knave ran away
out of the country.

Otherwise.
John. Bodin.
MOnsieur Bodin tells of a witch, who undertaking to cure a woman bewitched,
caused a mass to be sung at midnight in our ladies chapel. And when she had
overlaien the sick party, and breathed certain words upon her, Kacozelia.
she was healed. Wherein Bodin says, she followed the example of Elisha the
prophet, who raised the Shunamits son. And this story must needs be true; for
goodman Hardivin Blesensis his host at the sign of the lion told him the story.

A knack to know whether you be bewitched, or no, etc.
IT is also expedient to learn how to know whether a sick man be bewitched or
no; Mal. malef. pa 1 quae. 17. Barth. Spin. in novo Mal Malef.
this is the practice hereof. You must hold molten lead over the sick body, and
pour it into a porrenger full of water; and then if there appear upon the
lead, any image, you may then known the party is bewitched.

CHAP. XIX.
That one witchcraft may lawfully meet with another.

SCotus, Hostiensis, Gofridus, and all the old canonists agree, that it is
lawful to take away witchcraft by witchcraft, Scotus in 4. distinct. 34. de
imperio.
Et vana vanis conlundere. And Scotus says, It were folly to forbear to
encounter withcraft by witchcraft, for (says he) there can be none
inconvenience therein, because the overthrower of witchcraft assenteth not to
the works of the devil. And therefore he says further, that it is meritorious
so to extinguish and overthrow the devils works. As though he should say; It
makes no matter, though S. Paul say; Non facies malum, ut inde veniat bonum,
Thou shall not do evil, that good may come thereof. Lombertus says, Did. 4.
that witchcraft may be taken away by that meanswhereby it was brought. But
Gofridus inveyeth sore against the oppugners thereof. Gofrid in summa sua.
Pope Nicholas the fifth gave indulgence and leave to bishop Miraties (who was
so bewitched in his privities, that he could not use the gift of venery) to
seek remedy at witches hands. And this was the clause of his dispensation, Vt
ex duobus malis fugiatur majus, that of two evils, the greater should be
avoided. And so a witch, by taking his doublet cured him, and killed the other
witch; as the story says, which is to be seen in M. Mal. and diverse other
writers.

CHAP. XX.
Who are privileged from witches, what bodies are aptest to be bewitched, or
to be witches, why women are rather witches than men, and what they are.

NOw if you will know who and what persons are privileged from witches, Mal.
Malef. par. 2. quae. 1. cap. 1.
you must understand, that they be even such as cannot be bewitched. In the
number of whom first be the inquisitors, and such as exercise public justice
upon them. Howbeit, Whereof look more in a little book set forth in print.
a Justice in Essex, whom for diverse respects I have left unnamed, not long
since thought he was bewitched, in the very instant whiles he examined the
witch, so as his leg was broken thereby, etc. which either was false, or else
this rule untrue, or both rather injurious unto Gods providence. Secondly, such
as observe duly the rites and ceremonies of the holy church, and worship them
with reverence, through the sprinkling of holy water, and receiving consecrated
salt, by the lawful use of candle hallowed on Candlemas day, and green leaves
consecrated on palm sunday (which things they say the church uses for the
qualifying of the devils power) are preserved from witchcraft. Thirdly, some
are preserved by their good angels, which attend and wait upon them.

But I may not omit here the reasons, which they bring, to prove what bodies
are the more apt and effectual to execute the art of fascination. And that is,
first they say the force of celestial bodies, which indifferently communicated
their virtues unto men, beasts, trees, stones, etc. But this gift and natural
influence of fascination may be increased in man, L. Vair. lib. de fascin. 1.
c. 12.
according to his affections and perturbations; as through anger, fear, love,
hate etc. For by hate (says Vairus) enters a fiery inflammation into the eye
of man, which being violently sent out by beams and streams, etc. infect and
bewitch those bodies against whom they are opposed. And therefore he says (in
the favor of women) that is the cause that women are oftener found to be
witches than men. For (says he) they have such an unbridled force of fury and
concupiscence naturally, that by no means it is possible for them to temper or
moderate the same. So as upon every trifling occasion, they (like brute beasts)
fix there furious eyes upon the party whom they bewitch. Hereby it comes to
pass, Much like the eyebiting witches, of whom we have elsewhere spoken.
that whereas women having a mavelous fickle nature, what grief soever
happens unto them, immediately all peaceablenesse of mind departs; and
they are so troubled with evil humors, that out go their venomous exhalatinos,
engendered thorough their ill-favored diet; and increased by means of their
pernicious excrements, which they expel. Women are also (says he) monthly
filled full of superfluous humors, and with them the melancholic blood
boileth; whereof spring vapors, and are carried up, and conveyed through the
nostrels and mouth, etc. to the bewitching of whatsoever it meets. For they
belch up a certain breath, wherewith they bewitch whomsoever they li^t. And of
all other women, Who are most likely to bewitch, and to be bewitched.
lean, hollow-eyed, old, beetlebrowed women (says he) are the most
infectious. Marry he says, that hot, subtle, and thin bodies are most
subject to be bewitched, if they be moist, and all they generally, whose
veins, pipes, and passages of their bodies are open. And finally he says,
that all beautiful things wha^soever, are soo^ subject to be bewitched; as
namely goodly young men, fair women, such as are naturally borne to be rich,
goodly beasts, fair horses, rank corn, beautiful trees, etc. Yea a friend of
his told him, that he saw one with his eye break a precious stone in pieces.
And all this he tells as soberly, as though it were true. And if it were
true, honest women may be witches, in despite of all inquisitors: neither can
any avoid being a witch, except she lock her self up in a chamber.

CHAP. XXI.
What miracles withmongers report to have been done by witches words, etc.
contradictions of witchmongers among themselves, how beasts are cured hereby,
of bewitched butter, a charm against witches, and a counter-charme, the effect
of charms and words proved by L. Vairus to be wonderful.

IF I should go about to recite all charms, I should take an infinite work in
hand. For the witching writers hold opinion, that any thing almost may be
thereby brought to pass; and that whether the words of the charm be
understandable or not, it skilleth not: so the charmer gave a steady intention
to bring Lis desire about. And then what is it that cannot be done by words? L
Vair. lib. de fascin 1. cap. 5.
For L. Vairus says, that old women have infeebled and killed children with
words, and have made women with child miscarry; they have made men pine away to
death, they have killed horses, deprived sheep of their milk, According to
Ovids saying of Proteus and Medea, which he indeed alleges therefore, Nunc
aqua, nunc ales, modo bos, modo cervus abibat.
transformed men into beasts, flown in the air, tamed and stayed wild beasts,
driven all noisome cattle and vermin from corn, vines and herbs, stayed
serpents, etc. and all with words. Insomuch as he says, that with certain
words spoken in a bulls ear by a witch, the bull has fallen down to the
ground as dead. Yea some by virtue of words have gone upon a sharp sword, and
walked upon hot glowing coals, without hurt; with words (says he) very heavy
weights and burdens have been lifted up; and with words wild horses and wild
bulls have been tamed, and also mad dogs; with words they have killed worms
and other vermin, and stayed all manner of bleedings and fluxes: with words
all the diseases in man's body are healed, and wounds cured; arrows are with
wonderful strangeness and cunning plucked out of men's bones. Yea (says he)
there be many that can heal all bitings of dogs, or stingings of Serpents, or
any other poison: and all with nothing but words spoken. And that which is most
strange, he says, that they can remedy any stranger, and him that is absent,
with that very sword wherewith they are wounded. Yea and that which is beyond
all admiration, if they stroke the sword upwords with their fingers, the party
shall feel no pain: whereas if they draw their finger downwards thereupon, the
party wounded shall feel intolerable pain. With a number of other cures, done
altogether by the virtue and force of words uttered and spoken.

Where, M. mal. par. 2. quae. 2. cap. 7. Nider in prae^ ceptorio, praece. 1. c.
11. Nider in fornicario. Mal. malef. pa. 2 cap. 8.
by the way, I may not omit this special note given by M. Mal. to wit, that
holy water may not be sprinkled upon bewitched beasts, but must be powered into
their mouths. And yet he, and also Nider say, that It is lawful to bless and
sanctify beasts, as well as men; both by charms written, and also by holy
words spoken. For (says Nider) if your cow be bewitched, three crosses, three
Pater nosters, and three Aves will certainly cure her; and likewise all other
ceremonies ecclesiastical. And this is a sure Maxim, that they which are
delivered from witchcraft by shrift, are ever after in the night much molested
(I believe by their ghostly fathers.) Also they lose their money out of their
purses and caskets; as M. Mal. says he knows by experience. Also one general
rule is given by M Mal. to all butter-wives, A good devise to starve up poor
women. Mal. malef. par. 2. quae. 2. cap. 7.
anh dairy-maides, that they neither give nor lend any butter, milk, or cheese,
to any witches, which always use to beg thereof, when they mean to work
mischief to their kine or white-meats. Whereas indeed there are in milk three
substances commixed; to wit, butter, cheese and whaie; if the same be kept too
long or in an evil place, or be sluttishly used, so as it be stale and sower,
which happens sometimes in the winter, but oftener in the summer, when it is set
over the fire, the cheese and butter runs together, and congealeth, so as it
will rope like birdlime, that you may wind it about a stick, and in short space
it will be so dry, as you may beat it to powder. Which alteration being
strange, is wondered at and imputed to witches. And herehence sometimes
proceeds the cause, why butter comes not, which when the country people
see that it comes not, then get they out of the suspected witches house, a
little butter, whereof must be made three balls, in the name of the holy
Trinity; and so if they be put into the chern, the butter will presently come,
and the witchcraft will cease; Sic ars deluditur art. But if, you put a little
sugar or soap into the cherne, among the cream, the butter will never come;
which is plain witchcraft, if it be closely, cleanly, and privily handled.
There be twenty several ways to make your butter come, which for a brevity I
omit* as to bind your chern with a rope, to thrust thereinto a red hot spit,
(...) but your best remedy and surest way is, to look well to your dairy-maid
or wise, that she neither eat up the cream, nor sell away your butter.

A charm to find her that bewitched your kine.
A ridiculous charm.
PUt a pair of breeches upon the cowes head, and beat her out of the pasture
with a good cudgel upon a friday, and she will run right to the witches door,
and strike thereat with her horns.

Another, for all that have bewitched any kind of cattle.
WHen any of your cattle are killed with witchcraft, have you to the place
where the carcass lies, and traile the bowels of the beast unto your house,
and draw them not in at the door, but under the thresthold of the house into
the kitchen; and there make a fire, and set over the same a grediron, and
thereupon lay the inwards or bowels; and as they wax hot, so shall the witches
entrails be molested with extreme heat and pain. But then must you make fast
your doors, lest the witch come and fetch away a cole of your fire: for then
cease her torments. And we have known says M. Mal. when the witch could not
come in, that the whole house has been so darkened, and the air round about
the same so troubled, with such horrible noise and earthquakes; that except the
door had been opened, we had thought the house would have fallen on our heads.
Thomas Aquinas, a principal treater herein, allows conjurations against the
changelings, and in diverse other cases: whereoft will say more in the word
lidoni.

A special charm to preserve all cattle from witchcrafs.
In any case observe the festival time, or else you mar all.
AT Easter you must take certain drops, that ly uppermost of the holy paschal
candle, and make a little wax-candle thereof: and upon some sunday morning
rath, light it, and hold it, so as it may drop upon and between the horns and
ears of the beast, saying: In nomine patri^* and filii, and duplexss. etc burn
the beast a little between the horns on the ears with the same wax, and that
which is left thereof, stick it in crossewise about the stable or stall, or upon
the threshhold, or over the door, where the cattle use to go in in and out, and
for all that year your cattle shall never be bewitched. Otherwise: Jacobus de
Chusa Carthusianus shows how bread, water and salt is conjured, and says,
that if either man or beast receive holy bread and holy water nine days
together, with three Paster nosters, and three Aves, in the honor of the
Trinity, and of S. Hubert, it preserves that man or beast from all diseases,
and defends them against all assaults of witchcraft, of Satan, or of a mad
dog, etc.

Lo this is their stuff, maintained to be at the least effectual, if not
wholesome, by all papists and witchmongers, and specially of the last and
proudest writers. But to prove these things to be effectual, God knows their
seasons are base and absurd. For they write so, as they take the matter in
question as granted, and by that means go away therewith. For L. Vairus says
in the beginning of his book, L Vair. lib. de fascin. 1. cap 1.
that there is no doubt of this supernatural matter, because a number of
writers agree herein, and a number of stories confirm it, and many poets
handle the same argument, and in the twelve tables there is a law against it,
and because the consent of the common people is fully with it, and because
immoderate praise is to be approved a kind of witchcraft, and because old women
have such charms and superstitious means as preserve themselves from it, and
because they are mocked that take away the credit of such miracles, and because
Solomon says; Fascinatio malignitatis obscurat bona, and because the apostle
says; O insensati Galatae, quis vos facinavit? And because it is written, Qui
timent te, videbunt me. And finally he says, lest you should seem to distrust
and detract any thing from the credit of so many grave men, Sapi. 4. Gal. 3.
Psalm 119.
from histories, and common opinion of all men: he means in no wise to prove
that there is miraculous working by witchcraft and fascination; and proceeds
so, according to his promise.

CHAP. XXII.
Lawful charms, or rather medicinable cures for diseased cattle. The charm
of charms, and the power thereof.

BUt if you desire to learn true and lawful charms, to cure diseased cattle,
Direct and lawful means of curing cattle, etc.
even such as seem to have extraordinary sickness, or to be bewitched, or (as
they say) strangely taken; look in B Googe his third book, treating of cattle,
and happily you shall find some good medicine or cure for them: or if you list
to see more ancient stuff, read Vegetius his four books thereupon: or, if
you be unlearned, seek some cunning bullocke-leech. If all this will not serve,
then set Jobs patience before your eyes. And never think that a poor old woman
can alter supernaturally the notable course, which God has appointed among his
creatures. If it had been Gods pleasure to have permitted such a course, he
would no doubt have both given notice in his word, that he had given such power
unto them, and also would have taught remedies to have prevented them.

Furthermore, if you will know assured means, and infallible charms, yielding
indeed undoubted remedies, and preventing all manner of witchcrafts, and also
the assaults of wicked spirits; then despise first all cosening knavery of
priests, witches, and coseners; and with true faith read the sixth chapter of
S. Paul to the Epesians, and follow his counsel, which is ministered unto you
in the words following, deserving worthily to be called, by the name ensuing:

The charm of charms:
Finally my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. A
charm of charms taken out of the sixth chapter of S. Paul to the Ephesians.
Put on the whole armor of God, that you may stand against the assaults of the
devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, (...) against principalities
and powers, and against wordly governo^^^ the princes of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickedness, which are in the high places. For this
cause take unto you the armor of God, that you may be able to resist in the
evil day; and having finished all things, stand fast. Stand therefore, and
your loins gi^ded about with verity, and having on the brestplate of
righteousness, etc. ^ follows in that chapter, verses 15, 16, 17, 18. 1
These 5. 1 Pet. 5. verse 8. Ephesians. 1. and elsew-here in the holy scripture.

Otherwise.
JF you be unlearned, and want the comfort of friends, repair to (...)
learned, godly, and discreet preacher. If otherwise need require ^^ to a
learned physician, who by learning and experience knows and (...) discern
the difference, signs, and causes of such diseases, as (...) less men and
unskilful physicians impute to witchcraft.

CHAP. XXIII.
A confutation of the force and virtue falsely ascribed to charms and amulets,
by the authorities of ancient writers, both Divines and Physicians.

MY meaning is not, that these words, in the bare letter, can do any thing
toward your ease or comfort in this behalf; or that it were wholesome for your
body or soul to wear them about your neck: for then would I wish you to wear
the whole Bible, which must needs be more effectual than any one parcel
thereof. But I find not that the Apostles or any of them in the primitive
Church, either carried S. John's Gospel, or any Agnus Dei about them, to the
end they might be preserved from bugs; neither that they looked into the four
corners of the house, or else in the roof, or under the threshold, to find
matter of witchcraft, and so to burn it, to be freed from the same; according
to the popish rules. Neither did they by such and such verses or prayers made
unto Saints, at such or such hours, seek to obtain grace: neither spoke they
of any old women that used such trades. Mal. malef. part. 2. qu. 2. cap. 6.
Neither did Christ at any time use or command holy water, or crosses, etc. to
be used as terrors against the Devil, who was not afraid to assault himself,
when he was on earth. And therefore a very vain thing it is to think that he
fears these trifles, or any external matter. Let us then cast away these
profane and old wives fables. 1 Timothy 4, 7. Origin. lib. 3. in Job.
For (as Origin says) Incantationes sunt daemonum irrisiones, idolatriae faex,
animarum infatuatio, etc. Incantations are the Devils sport, the dregs of
Idolatry, the besotting of souls, etc.

Chrysostom says; I. Chrysostom. in Matthew.
there be some that carry about their necks a piece of a Gospel. But Mark that
here was no latin service. Idem. Ibid.
is it not daily read (says he) and heard of all men? But if they be never the
better for it, being put into their ears, how shall they be saved, by carrying
it about their necks? And further he says; Where is the virtue of the
Gospel? In the figure of the letter, or in the understanding of the sense? If
in the figure, thou do well to wear it about thy neck; but if in the
understanding, then thou should lay it up in thine heart. August. 26. quae.
ultim.
Augustine says; Let the faithful Ministers admonish and tell their people,
that these Magical Arts and incantations do bring no remedy to the
infirmities either of men or cattle, etc.

The heathen Philosophers shall at the last day confound the infidelity and
barbarous foolishness of our christian or rather antichristian or profane
Witchmongers. For as Aristotle says, that Incantamenta sunt muliercularum
figmenta: Enchantments are women's figments. So does Socrates (who was said to
be cunning herein) affirm, that Incantationes sunt verba animas decipientia
humanas, Incantations are words deceiving humane souls. Others say, Inscitiae
pallium sunt carmina, maleficium, and incantatio, Galen. in lib. de comi^iali
morbo.
The cloak of Ignorance are charms, witchery, and incantation. Galen also
says, that such as impute the falling evil, and such like diseases to divine
matter, and not rather to natural causes, Hippocrat. lib. de morbo sacro.
are Witches, Conjurers, etc. Hippocrates calls them arrogant; and in another
place affirming that in his time there were many deceivers and couseners, that
would undertake to cure the falling evil, etc. by the power and help of
Devils, by burying some lots or enchantments in the ground, or casting them
into the Sea, concludes thus in their credit, that they are all knaves and
couseners; for God is our only defender and deliverer. O notable sentence of a
beathen Philosopher!

The thirteenth Book.
CHAP. I.
The signification of the Hebrew word Hartumim, where it is found written in
the Scriptures, and how it is diversely translated: whereby the objection of
Pharaohs Magicians is afterward answered in this Book; also of natural magic
not evil in it self.

HArtumim is no natural Hebrew word, but is borrowed of some other nation^
howbeit, it is used of the Hebrews in these places; to wit, Genesis 4.1.8.24.
Exodus 7.13.24 and 8.7.18. and 9.11. Dan. 1.20. and 2.2. Hierom sometimes
translateth it Conjectores, Hieronymus in Genesis 41.8. and 24. In Exodus 7.13. In
Dan. 1.20.
sometimes Malefici, sometimes Arioll: which we for the most part translate by
this word witches. But the right signification hereof may be conceived, in that
the inchanters of Phaeraoh, being Magicians of Egypt, were called Hartumim.
And ye^ in Exodus they are named in some latin translations Venefici. Rabbi
L^i says, it betokens such as do strange and wonderful things, naturally,
artificially, and deceitfully. Rabbi Isaac Natar affirms, that such were so
termed, as amongst the Gentiles professed singular wisdom. A^^^ Ezra
expounds it, to signify such as know the secrets of nature, and the quality
of stones and herbs, etc. which is attained unto by Art, and specially by
natural magic. But we either for want of speech, or knowledge, call them all
by the name and term of witches.

Certainly, God induces bodies with wonderful graces, the perfect knowledge
whereof man has not reached unto: and on the one side, there is amongst them
such mutual love, society, and consent; and on the other side, such natural
discord, and secret enmity, that therein many things are wrought to the
astonishment of man's capacity. But when deceit and diabolical words are
coupled therewith, then extends it to witchcraft and conjuration, as
whereunto those natural effects are falsely imputed. The authors intention
touching the matter hereafter to be discoursed upon.
So as here I shall have some occasion to say somewhat of natural Magic;
because under it lies hidden the venom of this word Hartumim. This art is
said by some to be the profoundnesse, and the very absolute perfection of
natural Philosophy, and showing forth the active part thereof, and through the
aid of natural virtues, by the convenient applying of them, works are
published, exceeding all capacity and admiration; and yet not so much by art as
by nature. This art of it self is not evil; for it consists in searching
forth the nature, causes and effects of things. As far as I can conceive, it
has been more corrupted and profaned by us Christians, than either by Jews
or Gentiles.

CHAP. II.
How the Philosophers in times past traveled for the knowledge of natural
Magic, of Salomons knowledge therein, who is to be called a natural
Magician, a distinction thereof, and why it is condemned for Witchcraft.

MAny Philosophers; as namely Plato, Pythagoras, Empedocles, Democrituus, etc.
traveled over all the world to find out and learn the knowledge of this art:
and at their return they preached and taught, professed and published it. Yea,
it should appear by the Magicians that came to adore Christ, that the knowledge
and reputation thereof was greater than we conceive or make account of. But of
all other, Solomon was the greatest traveller in this Art, as may appear
throughout the Book of Ecclesiastes; and specially in the Book of Wisdom,
where he says Sap. 7, 17, 18, 19, 20,
God has given me the true science of things, so as I know how the world was
made, and the power of the Elements, the beginning and the end, and the midst
of times, how the times alter, and the change of seasons, the course of the
year, and the situation of the Stars, the nature of living things and the
furiousness of beasts, the power of the wind, and the imaginations of men, the
diversities of plants, and the virtues of roots, and all things both secret and
known, 21.
etc. Finally, he was so cunning in this Art, Sae Iidionii.
that he is said to have been a Conjurer or Witch, and is so reputed in the
Romish Church at this day. Whereby you may see, how fools and papists are
inclined to credit false accusations in matters of witchcraft and conjuration.
The less knowledge we have in this art, the more we have it in contempt: in
which respect Plato says truly to Dionysius; They make Philosophy a mockery,
that deliver it to profane and rude people. Certainly the witchcraft,
conjuration, and enchantment that is imputed to Solomon, Eccle. 1. and 1.
is gathered out of these his words following: I applied my mind to knowledge,
and to search and seek out science, wisdom and understandiug, to know the
foolishness of the ungodly, and the error of doting fools. In this art of
natural magic (without great heed be taken) a student shall soon be abused.
For many (writing by report, without experience) mistake their authors, and set
down one thing for another. Then the conclusions being found false, the
experiment grows into contempt, and in the end seems ridiculous, though
never so true. Pliny and Albert being curious writers herein, are often
deceived; insomuch as Pliny is called a noble lier, and Albert a rusticall
lier; the one lying by hearsay, the other by authority.

A Magician described and the art distinguished.
A Magician is indeed that which the Latins call a wise man, as N^ma Pompilius
was among the Romans; the Greeks, a Philosopher, as Socrates was among them;
the Egyptians a Priest, as Hermes was; the Cabalists called them Prophets. But
although these distinguished this art, accounting the one part thereof
infamous, as being too much given unto wicked, vain, and impious curiosity, as
unto movings, numbers; figures, sounds, voices, tunes, lights, affections of
the mind, and words; and the other part commendable, as teaching many good and
necessary things, as times and seasons to sow, plant, till, cut, etc. and
diverse other things, which I will make manifest unto you hereafter; yet we
generally condem^ the whole art without distinction, as a part of witchcraft;
having learned to hate it, before we know it; affirming all to be witchcraft,
which our gross heads are not able to conceive, and yet can think that an old
doting woman sees through it, etc. Wherein we consider not how God bestows
his gifts, and has established an order in his works, graffing in them sundry
virtues to the comfort of his several creatures; and specially to the use and
behoof of man: neither do we therein weigh that art is servant unto nature,
and waits upon her as her handmaiden.

CHAP. III.
What secrets do lie hidden, and what is taught in natural Magic, how Gods
glory is magnified therein, Read Pliny in natural. hist. Cardan de rerum
variet. Albertus de occulta rerum proprietate. Barthol. Neap. in natural.
magia, and many others.
and that it is nothing but the work of nature.

IN this art of natural Magic, God Almighty has hidden many secret
mysteries; as wherein a man may learn the properties, qualities, and knowledge
of all nature. For it teaches to accomplish matters in such sort and
opportunity, as the common people thinks the same to be miraculous; and to be
compassed none other way, but only by witchcraft. And yet in truth, natural
Magic is nothing else, but the work of nature. For in tillage, as nature
produces corn and herbs; so art, being natures minister, prepares it.
Wherein times and seasons are greatly to be respected: for Annus non arvus
producit aristas.

But as many necessary and sober things are herein taught; so does it partly (I
say) consist in such experiments and conclusions as are but toies, but
nevertheless lie hid in nature, and being unknown, do seem miraculous,
specially when they are intermedled and corrupted with cunning illusion, or
legierdemain, from whence is derived the estimation of witchcraft. But being
learned and known, they are contemned, and appear ridiculous; for that only is
wonderful to the beholder, whereof he can conceive no cause nor reason,
according to the saying of Ephesius, Miraculum solvitur uade videtur esse
miraculum. And therefore a man shall take great pains herein, and bestow great
cost to learn that which is of no value and a mere juggling knack. Whereupon it
is said that a man may not learn Philosophy to be rich; but must get riches to
learn philosophy: for to sluggards, niggards, and dizzards, the secrets of
nature are never opened. Natural magic has a double end, which proves the
excellency of the same.
And doubtless a man may gather our of this art, that which being published,
shall set forth the glory of God, and be many ways beneficial to the
Commonwealth: the first is done by the manifestation of his works; the
second, by skilfully applying them to our use and service.

CHAP. IV.
What strange things are brought to pass by natural magic.

THE daily use and practice of medicine takes away all admiration of the
wonderful effects of the same. Many other things of less weight, being more
secret and rare, seem more miraculous. As for example (if it be true that I.
Bap. Neap. and many other writers do constantly affirm) Tie a wild Bull to a
fig tree, and he will be presently tame; or hang an old cock thereupon, and he
will immediately be tender; as also the feathers of an Eagle consume all other
feathers, if they be intermedled together. Wherein it may not be denied, but
nature shows herself a proper workwoman. But it seems unpossible, that a
little fish being but half a foot long, Pompanatius. lib. de incant. cap. 3.

I. Wierus de lamiis Iasp. Peucer. H. Cardan. etc.


called Remora or Remiligo, or of some Echeneis, stays a mighty ship with all
her load and tackling, and being also undersail. And yet it is affirmed by so
many and so grave Authors, that I dare not deny it; specially, because I see as
strange effects of nature otherwise: as the property of the loadstone, which is
so beneficial to the marine^; and of Rheubarb, which only medleth with choler,
and purges neither fleg ^n nor melancholy, and is as beneficial to the
Physician, as the other to the Mariner.

CHAP. V.
The incredible operation of Waters, both standing and running; of wels, lakes,
rivers, and of their wonderful effects.

THe operation of waters, and their sundry virtues are also incredible, I mean
not of waters compounded and distilled: for it were endless to treat of their
forces, specially concerning medicines. But we have here even in England
natural springs, wels, and waters, both standing and running, of excellent
virtues, even such as except we had seen, and had experiment of, we would not
believe to be in rerum natura. And to let the physical nature of them pass,
(for the which we cannot be so thankful to God, Of late experience near
Coventry, etc.
as they are wholesome for our bodies) is it not miraculous, that wood is by
the quality of diverse waters here in England transubstantiated into a stone?
The which virtue is also found to be in a lake besides the City Masaca in
Cappadocia, there is a river called Scarmandru^, that makes yellow sheep. Yea,
there be many waters, as in Pontus and Thessalia, Aristot. in lib. de hist.
animalium.
and in the land of Assyrides, in a river of Thracia (as Aristotle says) that
if a white sheep being with lamb drink thereof, the lamb will be black. Strabo
writes of the river called Crantes, in the borders of Italy, running toward
Tarentum, where men's hair is made white and yellow being washed therein. Plin
de laxicii color.
Pliny does write that of what color the vein^ are under the rams tongue, of
the same color or colors will the lambs be. There is a lake in a field called
Cornetus, in the bottom whereof manifestly appears to the eye, the carcasses
of Snakes, Ewts, and other Serpents; whereas if you put in your hand, to pull
them out, you shall find nothing there. There droppeth water out of a Rock in
Arcadia, the which neither a silvern nor a brazen boll can contain, but it
leapeth out, and sprinkleth away; and yet will it remain without motion in the
hoof of a mule. Such conclusions (I warrant you) were not unknown to James and
Iambres.

CHAP. VI.
The virtues and qualities of sundry precious stones, of cousening Lapidaries,
etc.

THe excellent virtues and qualities in stones, found, conceived and tried by
this art, is wonderful. Howbeit many things most false and fabulous are added
unto their true effects, wherewith I thought good in part to try the Readers
patience and cunning withal. An Aggat (they say) has virtue against the
biting of Scorpions or Serpents. It is written (but I will not stand to it)
that it makes a man eloquent, and procures the favor of Princes; yea that
the fume thereof does turn away tempests. Alectorins is a stone about the
bigness of a bean, as clear as the crystal, Ludovicus Coelius Rhodo. lib.
antiq. lect. 11. cap. 70. Barthol. Anglicus. lib. 16.
taken out of a Cocks belly which has been gelt or made a Cap^n four years. If
it be held in ones mouth, it asswageth thirst, it makes the husband to love
the wife, and the bearer invincible: for hereby Milo was said to overcome his
enemies. A Crawpock delivers from prison. Chelidonius is a stone taken out of
a Swallow, which cures melancholy: howbeit, some Authors say, it is the herb
whereby the swallows recover the sight of their young, even if their eyes be
picked out with an instrument. Geranites is taken out of a Crane, and
Draconites out of a Dragon. But it is to be noted, that such stones must be
taken out of the bellies of the serpents, beasts, or birds (wherein they are)
whiles they live: otherwise, they vanish away with the life, and so they
retain the virtues of those stars under which they are. Amethysus makes a
drunken man sober, and refreshes the wit. The Avicenna cano. 2. tract. 2. cap.
124. Serapio agg. cap. 100. Dioscor. lib. 5. cap. 9^.
corrall preserves such as hear it from fascination or bewitching, and in this
respect they are hanged about childrens necks. But from whence that
superstition is derived, and who invented the lie, I know not: but I see how
ready the people are to give credit thereunto, by the multitude of corrals that
were employed. I find in good Authors, that while it remains in the sea, it
is an herb; and when it is brought thence, into the air, it hardens, and
becomes a stone.

Heliotropius stancheth blood, drives away poisons, preserves health; yea,
and some write, that it provokes rain, and darkneth the Sun, suffering not him
that bears it to be abused. Hyacinthus does all that the other does, and also
preserves from lightning. Oinothera hanged about the neck, collar, or yoke of
any creature, tameth it presently. A Topase heals the lunatike person of his
passion of lunacie. Aitites, if it be shaken, sounds as if there were a
little stone in the belly thereof: it is good for the falling Sickness, and to
prevent untimely birth. Amethysus aforesaid resists drunkenness, so as the
bearers shall be able to drink freely, and recover themselves soon being drunk
as Apes: the same makes a man wise. Chalcedonius makes the bearer lucky in
Law, quickens the power of the body, and is of force also against the
illusions of the devil, and fantastical cogitations arising of melancholy.
Co^neolus mitigateth the heat of the mind, and qualifieth maiice, it stancheth
bloody fluxes, Plin. lib. 37. cap. 10. Albert. lib. 2. cap. 7. Solin. cap. 32.
specially of women that are troubled with their flowers. Heliotropius
aforesaid darkeneth the Sun, raises showers, stancheth blood, procures good
fame, keeps the bearer in health, and suffers him not to be deceived. If
this were true, one of them would be dearer then a thousand Diamonds.

Hyacinthus delivers one from the danger of lightening, drives away poison
and pestilent infection, and has many other virtues. Iris helps a woman to
speedy deliverance, and makes rainbows to appear. A Sapphire preserves the
members, and makes them lively, and helps Agues and Gowts, and suffers not
the bearer to be afraid: it has virtue against venom, and stays bleeding at
the nose being often put thereto. A Rabbi Moses aphorism. partic. 22. Isidor.
lib. 14. cap. 3.
Smarag is good for the eyesight, and suffers not carnal copulation, it
makes one rich and eloquent. A Topase increases riches, heals the lunatique
passion, and stancheth blood. Mephis (as Aaron and Hermes report out of
Albertus Magnus) being broken into powder, Savanorola.
and drunk with water, makes insensibility of torture. Hereby you may
understand, that as God has bestowed upon these stones, and such other like
bodies, most excellent and wonderful virtues: so according to the abundance
of humane superstitions and follies, many ascribe unto them either more
virtues, or other than they have; other boast that they are able to add new
qualities unto them. And herein consists a part of witchcraft and common
cousenage used sometimes of the Lapidaries for gains; sometimes of others for
cousening purposes. Some part of the vanity hereof I will here describe,
because the place serves well therefore. And it is not to be forgotten or
omitted, that Pharaohs Magicians were like enough to be cunning therein.

Nevertheless, I will first give you the opinion of one, who professed himself
a very skillful and well experimented Lapidary, as appears by a book of his
own penning, published under this title of Dactylotheca, and (as I think) to
be had among the Booksellers. And thus follows his assertion: Marbedeus
Gallus in sua dactylotheca. page 56.
Evax rex Arabum sertur scripsisse Neroni,
(Qui post Augustum reguavit in orb secundus)
Quot species lapidis, quae nomina, quive colores,
Quaeque sit his ^egio, vel quanta potentia cnique.
Ocultas etenim lapidum cognoscere vires,
Quorum causa latens eff^^tus dat manifestos,
Egregium quiddam volumus rarumque videri.
Scilicet hinc solers medicorum cura juvatur,
Auxilio lapidum morbos expellere docta.
Nec minus inde dari cunctarum commoda rerum
Aulores perhibent, quibus haet perspecta feruntur.
Nec dubium cuiquam debet salsumque videri,
Quiu sua sit gemmis divinitus insita virtus.
Englished by Abraham Fleming.
Evax an old Arabian king
is named to have writ
A treatise, and on Nero's Grace
to have bestowed it,
(Who in the World did second reign
after Augustus time)
Of precious stones the sundry sorts,
their names, and in what clime
And country they were to be found,
their colors and their hue,
Their privy power and secret force,
the which with knowledge true
To understand their hidden cause
most plain effects declare:
And this will we a noble thing
have counted be and rare.
The skillfull care of leeches Vis gemmarum and lapillorum preciosorum negatur,
quia occulta est, rarissimeque sub s^n. sum cadit.

learned is aided in this case,
And hereby helped, and are taught
with aid of stones to chase
Away from men such sicknesses
as have in them a place.
No less precise commodities
of all things else thereby
Are ministered and given to men,
if authors do not lie,
To whom these things are said to be
most manifestly known.
It shall no false or doubtful case
appear to any one,
But that by heavenly influence
each precious pearl and stone,
Has in his substance fixed force
and virtue largely sown.


Whereby it is to be concluded, that stones have in them certain proper
virtues, which are given them of a special influence of the planets, and a due
proportion of the elements, their substance being a very fine and pure
compound, consisting of well tempered matter wherein is no gross mixture: as
appears by plain proof of India and Aethiopia, where the sun being orient and
meridionall, does more effectually show his operation, procuring more precious
stones there to be engendered, than in the countries that are occident and
septentrionall. Many mo authors may be named of no less antiquity and learning.
Unto this opinion do diverse ancients accord; namely, Alexander
Peripateticus, Hermes, Euax, Bocchos, Zoroastes, Isaac Iudaeus, Zacharias,
Babylonicus, and many more beside.

CHAP. VII.
Whence the precious stones receive their operations, how curious Magicians use
them, and of their seals.

CUrious Magicians affirm, that these stones receive their virtues altogether
of the planets and heavenly bodies, and have not only the very operation of the
planets, but sometimes the very images and impressions of the stars naturally
ingraffed in them, and otherwise ought always to have graven upon them, the
similitudes of such monsters, beasts, and other devices, as they imagine to be
both internally in operation, and externally in view, Plin. lib. 37. cap 10.
Albert. miner. li. 2. cap. 1. Solin. cap. 11.
expressed in the planets; As for example, upon the Achate are graven serpents
or venomous beasts; and sometimes a man riding on a serpent; which they know to
be Aesculapius, which is the colestiall serpent, whereby are cured (they say)
poisons and stingings of serpents and scorpions. These grow in the river of
Achates, where the greatest scorpions are engendered, Diurius in scrin. cap de
complexionibus and complexatis.
and their noisomnesse is thereby qualified, and by the force of the scorpions,
the stones virtue is quickened and increased. Also, if they would induce love
for the accomplishment of venery, they inscribe and express in the stones,
amiable embracings and lovely countenances and gestures, words and kissings in
apt figures. For the desires of the mind are consonant with the nature of the
stones, which must also be set in rings, and upon foiles of such metals as have
affinity with those stones, through the operation of the planets whereunto they
are addicted, whereby they may gather the greater force of their working.

Geor. Pictorius. Villang. doct. medici i^ scholiis super Marbod dactil.
As for example, They make the images of Saturn in lead, of Sol in gold, of
Luna in silver. Marry there is no small regard to be had for the certain and
due times to be observed in the graving of them: for so are they made with more
life, and the influences and configurations of the planets are made thereby the
more to abound in them. As if you will procure love, you must work in apt,
proper, and friendly aspects, as in the hour of Venus, etc. to make debate, the
direct contrary order is to be taken. If you determine to make the image of
Venus, you must expect to be under Aquarius or Capricornus: for Saturn,
Taurus, and Libra must be taken heed of. Many other observations there be, as
to avoid the unfortunate seat and place of the Planets, when you would bring a
happy thing to pass, and specially that it be not done in the end, delineation
^^ heel (as they term it) of the course thereof for then the planet mou^^^^ and
is dull.

Such signs as ascend in the day, must be taken in the day; if in (...) night
they increase, then must you go to work by night, etc. For is Aries, Leo, and
Sagittarie is a certain triplicity, wherein the Sun has do^^nion by day,
Jupiter by night, and in the twilight the cold star of (...). But because there
shall be no excuse wanting for the faults espied herein, they say that the
virtues of all stones deoay through tract of time so as such things are not now
to be looked for in all respects as are written. Howbeit Iannes and Iambres
were living in that time, and in no inconvenient place; and therefore not
unlike to have that help toward the abusing of Pharaoh. Cardane says, that
although men attribute no small force unto such seals; as to the seal of the
Sun, H. Card. lib. de subtle. 10.
authorities, honors, and favors of princes; of Jupiter, riches and friends;
of Venus, pleasures; of Mars, boldness; of Mercury, diligence; of Saturn,
patience and enduring of labor; of Luna, favor of people: I am not ignorant
(says he) that stones do good, and yet I know the seals or figures do none at
all. And when Cardano had showed fully that art, and the folly thereof, and the
manner of those terrible, H. Card. lib. de var. rer. 16. cap. 90.
prodigious, and deceitful figures of the (...) with their characters, etc. he
says that those were deceitful inventions devised by couseners, and had no
virtue indeed nor truth in them. But because we spoke somewhat even now of
signets and seals, I will show you what I read reported by Vincentius in suo
speculo, where making mention of the Jasper stone, whose nature and property
Marbodeus Gallus describes in the verses following; Iaspides esse december
species septemque feruntur, Marbodeus in sua dactylotheca, page 41. 52.

His and multorum cognoscitur esse colorum,
Et multis naset perbibetur partibus orbis,
Optimus in viridi translucentique color,
Et qui plus soleat virtutis habere pro batur,
Cost gestatus fibrem fugat, arcet hydropem,
Adpositusque juvat mulierem parturientem,
Et tutamentum portants creditur esse.
Nam consecratus gratum facit abque potentem,
Et, sicut perhibent, phantasmata noxia p^llit,
Cuiusin argento visfortior esse putatur.
Seven kinds and ten of Jasper stones
reported are to be, Englished by Abraham Fleming.

Of many colors this is known
which noted is by me,
And said in many places of
the world for to be seen,
Where it is bred; but yet the best
is through shining green,
And that which proved is to have
in it more virtue plaste; Memorandum the authors meaning is, that this stone
be set in silver, and worn on the finger for a ring: as you shall see
afterward.

For being borne about of such
as are of living chaste.
It drives away their ague fist,
the dropsy thirsting dry,
And put upon a woman weak
in travel which does lie,
It helps, assists, and comforts her
in pangs when she does cry.
Again, it is believed to be
a safeguard frank and free,
To such as wear and bear the same;
and if it hallowed be,
It makes the parties gracious,
and mighty too that have it,
And noisome fancies (as they write
that meant not to deprave it)
It does displace out of the mind:
The force thereof is stronger,
In silver if the same he set,
and will endure the longer.


But (as I said) Vincentius making mention of the Jasper stone, Vincent. lib.
9. cap. 77. Dioscor. lib. 5. cap. 100.

Aristot in Lapidario.


touching which (by the way of a parenthesis) I have inferred Marbodeus his
verses, he says that some Jasper stones are found having in them the lively
image of a natural man, with a shield at his neck and a spear in his hand, and
under his feet a serpent; which stones so marked and signed, he prefers
before all the rest, because they are antidotaries or remedies notably
resisting poison. Othersome also are found figured and marked with the form of
a man bearing on his neck a bundle of herbs and flowers, with the estimation
and value of them noted, that they have in them a faculty or power restrictive,
and will in an instant or moment of time stanch blood. Such a kind of stone (as
it is reported) Galen wore on his finger. Othersome are marked with a cross,
as the same author writes, and these be right excellent against inundations or
overflowings of waters. I could hold you long occupied in declarations like
unto these, wherein I lay before you what other men have published and set
forth to the world, choosing rather to be an academical discourser, than an
universal determiner: but I am desirous of brevity.

CHAP. VIII.
The sympathy and antipathy of natural and elementary bodies declared by diverse
examples of beasts, birds, plants, etc.

Agreement and disagreement in sufferance.
IF I should write of the strange effects of Sympathia and Antipathia, I should
take great pains to make you wonder, and yet you would scarce believe me. And
if I should publish such conclusions as are common and known, you would not
regard them. And yet Empedocles thought all things were wrought hereby. It is
almost incredible, that the grunting or rather the wheeking of a little pig, of
the sight of a simple sheep should terrify a mighty Elephant: and yet by that
means the Romans did put to flight Pyr^hus and all his host. A man would
hardly believe, that a cocks comb or his crowing should abash a puissant lion:
but the experience hereof has satisfied the whole world. Who would think that
a serpent should abandon the shadow of an ash, etc? But it seems not strange,
because it is common, that some man otherwise hardy and stout enough, should
not dare to abide or endure the sight of a cat. Or that a draught of drink
should so overthrow a man, that never a part or member of his body should be
able to perform his duty and office; and should also so corrupt and alter his
senses, understanding, memory, and judgment, that he should in every thing,
saving in shape, become a very beast. And herein the poets experiment of liquor
is verified, in these words following.

-- sunt qui non corpora tantum,
Englished by Abraham Fleming.
Verum animas etiam valiant mutare liquores:
Some waters have so powerfell been,
As could not only bodies change,
But even the very minds of men,
Their operation is so strange.
The friendly society betwixt a fox and a serpent is almost incredible? Read a
little tract of Erasmus entitled De amicitia, where enough is said touching
this point.
how loving the lizzard is to a man, we may read though we cannot see. Yet some
affirm that our newt is not only like to the lizzard in shape, but also in
condition. From the which affection toward a man, a spaniell does not much
differ, whereof I could cite incredible stories. The amity betwixt a castrell
and a pigeon is much noted among writers; and specially how the castrell
defends her from her enemy the sparrow-hawke; whereof they say the dove is
not ignorant. Besides, the wonderful operation and virtue of herbs, which to
repeat were infinite; and therefore I will only refer you to Mattheolus his
herball, or to Dodonaeus. There is among them such natural accord and discord,
as some prosper much the better for the others company, stand some wither away
being planted near unto the other. The lilly and the rose rejoice in each
others neighborhood. The flag and the fernebush abhor each other so much,
that the one can hardly live besides the other. The cowcumber loves water, and
hates oil to the death. And because you shall not say that herbs have no
virtue, for that in this place I cite none, I am content to discover two or
three small qualities and virtues, which are affirmed to be in herbs; marry as
simple as they be, Iannes and Iambre's might have done much with them, if they
had had them. If you prick out a young swallows eyes, the old swallow
restores again their sight, with the application (they say) of a little
Celandine. Xanthus in hist. prima. Iub. lib. 25. cap. 2.
Xanthus the author of histories reports, that a young dragon being dead, was
revived by her dam, with an herb called Balim. And Iuba says, that a man in
Arabia being dead was revived by the virtue of another herb.

CHAP. IX.
The former matter proved by many examples of the living and the dead.

ANd as we see in stones, herbs, etc. strange operation and natural love and
dissension; This common experience can justify.
so do we read, that in the body of a man, there be as strange properties and
virtues natural. I have heard by credible report, and I have read many grave
authors, constantly affirm, that the wound of a man murdered renews
bleeding, at the presence of a dear friend, or of a mortal enemy. Diverse also
write, that if one pass by a murdered body (though unknown) he shall be
stricken with fear, and fell in him self some alteration by nature. Also that
a woman, above the age of fifty years, being bound hand and foot, her clothes
being upon her, and laid down softly into the water sinketh not in a long time;
I. Wierus.
some say not at all. By which experiment they were wont to try witches, as
well as by Ferrum candens; Plutarch. in vita Pyrrhi. Albert. lib. de mor.
animal. cap. 3.
which was, to hold hot iron in their hands, and by not burning to be tried.
Howbeit, Plutarch says that Py^^bus his great toe had in it such natural or
rather divine virtue, that no fire could burn it.

And Albertus says, and many other also repeat the same story, saying, that
there were two such children borne in Germany, as if that one of them had been
carried by any house, all the doors right against one of his sides would fly
open: and that virtue which the one had in the left side, the other brother had
in the right sides. He says further, that many saw it, P^mpan. lib. de incant.
cap. 4.
and that it could be referred to nothing, but to the propriety of their
bodies, Pompanatius writes that the kings of France do cure the disease called
now the Kings evil, or Queens evil; which has been (...) ways thought, and
to this day is supposed to be a miraculous and a peculiar gift, and a special
grace given to the kings and queens of England. Which some refer to the
propriety of their persons, some to the peculiar gift of God, and some to the
efficacy of words. But if the French king use it no worse then our Princess
does, God will not be offended (...)* for her Majesty only uses godly and
divine prayer, with some al^^^ and refers the cure to God and to the
Physician. Plutar. in vita Catonis.
Plutarch writes that there be certain men called Psilli, which with their
mouths heal the bitings of serpents. And I. Bap. Neap. says, that an olive
being planted by the hand of a virgin, prospers; which if a harlot do, it
withers away. I. Bap. Neap. in lib. de nature. magia. 1.
Also if a serpent or viper lie in a hole it may easily be pulled (...) with
the left hand, whereas with the right hand it cannot be removed. Although this
experiment, and such like are like enough to be false, (...) are they not
altogether so impious as the miracles said to be done by characters, charms,
etc. For many strange properties remain in sundry parts of a living creature,
which is not universally dispersed, and indiferently spread through the whole
body: as the eye smells not, the nose sees not, the ear tastes not, etc.

CHAP. X.
The bewitching venom contained in the body of an Harlot, how her eye, her
tongue, her beauty and behavior bewitcheth some men: of bones and horns
yielding great virtue.

The venom or poison of an Harlot.
THe virtue contained within the body of an harlot, or rather the venom
proceeding out of the same, may be beheld with great admiration. For her eye
infecteth, enticeth, and (if I may so say) bewitcheth them many times, which
think themselves well armed against such manner of people. Her tongue, her
gesture, her behavior, her beauty, and other allure^^^^ poison and intoxicate
the mind: yea, her company induces impudency, corrupts, virginity,
confounds and consumes the bodies, goods, and the very souls of men. And
finally her body destroys and rotteth the very flesh and bones of man's body.
And this is common that we wonder not at all thereat, nay we have not the
course of the sun, the moon, or the stars in so great admiration, as the
globe, counterfeiting their order: which is in respect but a boble made by an
artificer. So as (I think) if Christ himself had continued long in the
execution of miracles, and had left that power permanent and common in the
Church; they would have grown into contempt, and not have been esteemed,
according to his own saying: Matthew. 13. Mark 6. Luke 4. John 4.
A prophet is not regarded in his own country* I might retire infinite
properties, wherewith God has endued the body of man, worthy of admiration, and
fit for this place. As touching other living creatures; God has likewise (for
his glory, and our behoof) bestowed most excellent and miraculous gifts and
virtues upon their bodies and members, and that in several and wonderful
wise. Wonderful natural effects in bones of fishes, beasts, etc.
We see that a bone taken out of a carps head, stancheth blood, and so does
none other part besides of that fish. The bone also in a hares foot mitigateth
the cramp, as none other bone nor part else of the hare does. How precious is
the bone growing out of the forehead of a Unicorne; if the horn, which we see
grow there, which is doubted: and of how small account are the residue of all
his bones? At the excellency whereof, as also at the noble and innumerable
virtues of herbs we muse not at all; because it has pleased God to make them
common unto us. Which perchance might in some part assist Iannes and Iambre,
toward the hardening of Pharaohs heart. But of such secret and strange
operations read Albert. De mineral. cap. 1* 11 17. Also Marsilius Picinus, cap.
1. lib. 4. Cardan. de rerum verielate. J. Bap. Neap. de magia naturali. Peucet,
Wier, Pompanatius, Fernelius, and others.

CHAP. XI.
Two notorious wonders and yet not marvelled at.

I Thought good here to insert two most miraculous matters; of the one I am
Testis oculatus, an eie-witnesse; of the other I am so credibly and certainly
informed, that I dare and do believe it to be very true. When Master T.
Randolph returned out of Russia, after his embassage dispatched, a gentleman of
his train brought home a monument of great account, in nature and in property
very wonderful. And because I am loath to be long in the description of
circumstances, I will first describe the thing it self: which was a piece of
earth of a good quantity, and most excellently proportioned in nature, Strange
properties in a piece of earth.
having these qualities and virtues following. If one had taken a piece of
perfect steel, forked and sharpened at the end, and heated it red hot, offering
therewith to have touched it; it would have fled with great celerity: and on
the other side, it would have pursued gold, either in coin or bulloin, with as
great violence and speed as it shunned the other. No bird in the air durst
approach near it; no beast of the field but feared it, and naturally fled from
the sight thereof. It would be hear to day, and to morrow twenty miles of, and
the next day after in the very place it was the first day, and that without the
help of any other creature.

Johannes Fernelius writes of a strange stone lately brought out of India,
Strange properties in a stone: the like qualities in other stones.
which has in it such a mavelous brightness, purity and shining, that
therewith the air round about is so lightened and cleared, that one may see to
read thereby in the darkness of night. It will not be contained in a close
room, but requires an open and free place. It would not willingly lie rest or
stay here below on the earth, but always labors to ascend up into the air.
If one press it down with his hand, it resists, and strikes very sharply.
It is beautiful to behold, without either spot or blemish, and yet very
unpleasant to taste or feel. If any part thereof be taken away it is never a
whit diminished, the form thereof being inconstant, and at every moment
mutable. These two things last rehearsed are strange, and so long wondered at,
as the mystery and morality thereof remains undiscovered: but when I have
disclosed the matter, and told you that by the lump of earth a man is meant,
and some of his qualities described; and that that which was contained in the
far fetched stone, was fire, or rather flame: the doubt is resolved, and the
miracle ended. And ye^ (I confess) there is in these two creatures contained
more miraculous master, then in all the loadstones and diamonds in the world.
And hereby is to be noted, that even a part of this Art, which is called
natural or witching magic, consists as well in the deceit of words, as in
the sleight of hand: wherein plain lying is avoided with a figurative speech,
in the which, either the words themselves, or their interpretation have a
double or doubtful meaning, according to that which has been said before in
the title being in the 7. book of this discovery: Where discourse is made of
oracles, etc.
Ob or Pytho: and shall be more at large hereafter in this treater manifested.

CHAP. XII.
Of illusions, confederacies, and legierdemaine, and how they may be well or
ill used.

MAny writers have been abused, as well by untrue reports, as by illusion, and
practices of confederacy and logierdemain, etc. sometimes imputing unto words
that which rests in the nature of the thing; and sometimes to the nature of
the thing, that which proceeds of fraud and deception of sight. But when
these experiments grow to superstition or in^ piety, they are either to be
forsaken as vain, or denied as false. Howbeit, if these things be done for
mirth and recreation, and not to the hurt of our neighbor, nor to the abusing
or profaning of Gods name, in mine opinion they are neither impious nor
altogether unlawful: though herein or hereby a natural thing be made to seem
supernatural. Look hereaf-in this book for diverse conceits of juggling set
forth at large,
Such are the miracles wrought by juglers, consisting in fine and nimble
conveyance, called legierdemain as when they seem to cast away, or to deliver
to another that, which they retein still in their own hands; or convey
otherwise: or seem to eat a knife, or some such other thing, when indeed they
bestow the same secretly into their bosoms or laps. Another point of juggling
is when they thrust a knife through the brains and head of a chicken or pullet,
and seem to cure the same with words: which would live and do well, though
never a word were spoken. Some of these toies also consist in arithmeticall
devises, partly in experiments of natural magic, and partly in private, as
also in public confederacy.

CHAP. XIII.
Of private confederacy, and of Brandons Pigeon.

PRivate confederacy I mean, when one (by a special plot laid by himself,
without any compact made with others) persuades the beholders, that he will
suddenly and in their presence do some miraculous feat, which he has already
accomplished privily. As for example, he will show you a card, or any other
like thing: and will say further unto you; Behold and see what a mark it has,
and then burns it; and nevertheless ^etcheth another like card so marked out
of some bodies pocket, or out of some corner where he himself before had placed
it; to the wonder and astonishment of simple beholders, which conceive not that
kind of illusion, but expect miracles and strange works.

What wondering and admiration was there at Brandon the juggler, Example of a
ridiculous wonder.
who painted on the wall the picture of a dove, and seeing a pigeon sitting on
the top of a house, said to the King; Lo now your grace shall see what a
juggler can do, if he be his crafts master; and then pricked the picture with a
knife so hard and so often, and with so effectua^ words, as the pigeon fell down
from the top of the house stark dead. I need not write any further circumstance
to show how the matter was taken, what wondering was thereat, how he was
prohibited to use that feat any further, lest he should employ it in any other
kind of murder, as though he, whose picture soever he had pricked, This I have
proved upon crows and pies.
must needs have died, and so the life of all men in the hands of a juggler: as
is now supposed to be in the hands and wills of witches. This story is, until
the day of the writing hereof, in fresh remembrance, and of the most part
believed as canonical, as are all the fables of witches: but when you are
taught the feat or slight (the secrecy and sorcery of the matter being
bewraied, and discovered) you will think it a mockery, and simple illusion.
This might be done by a confederate, who standing at some window in a church
steeple, or other fit place, and holding the pigeon by the leg in a string,
after a sign given by his fellow, pulls down the pigeon, and so the wonder is
wrought.
To interpret unto you the revelation of this mystery; so it is, that the poor
pigeon was before in the hands of the juggler, into whom he had thrust a dram
of Nux vomica, or some other such poison, which to the nature of the bird was
so extreme a venom, as after the receipt thereof it could not live above the
space of half an hour, and being let lose after the medicine ministered* she
always resorted to the top of the next house: which she will the rather do, if
there be any pigeons already sitting there, and (as it is already said) after a
short space falls down, either stark dead, or greatly astonished. But in the
mean time the juggler used words of art, partly to protract the time, and
partly to gain credit and admiration of the beholders. If this or the like feat
should be done by an old woman, every body would cry out for fire and faggot to
burn the witch.

CHAP. XIV.
Of public confederacy, and whereof it consists.

Public confederacy is, when there is beforehand a compact made betwixt
diverse persons; the one to be principal, the rest to be assistants in working
of miracles, or rather in cousening and abusing the beholders. As when I tell
you in the presence of a multitude what you have thought or done, or shall do
or think, when you and I were thereupon agreed before. And if this be cunningly
and closely handled, it will induce great admiration to the beholders;
specially when they are before amazed and abused by some experiments of
natural magic, arithmeticall conclusions, or legierdemain. Such were, for the
most part, the conclusions and devices of ^eats: wherein doubt you not, but
Iannes and Iambres were expert, active, and ready.

CHAP. XV.
How men have been abused with words of equivocation, with sundry examples
thereof.

SOme have taught, and others have written certain experiments; in the
expressing whereof they have used such words of equivocation, as whereby many
have been overtaken and abused through rash credulity: so (...) sometimes (I
say) they have reported, taught, and written that which their capacity took
hold upon, A jest among watermen touching Stone church in Kent as light at
midnight as at midday.
contrary to the truth and sincere meaning of the author. It is a common jest
among the water men of the Thames, to show the parish Church of Stone to the
passengers, calling the same by the name of the lantern of Kent; affirming,
and that not untruly, that the said church is as light (meaning in weight and
not in brightness) at midnight, as at noonday. Whereupon some credulous person
is made believe, and will not stick to affirm and swear, that in the same
church is such continual light, that any man may see to read there at all
times of the night without a candle.

An excellent philosopher, whom (for reverence unto his same and learning) I
will forbear to name, was overtaken by his hossesse at Dover; who merrily told
him, that if he could retein and keep in his mouth certain pibbles (lying at
the shore side) he should not perbreak until he came to Calice, how rough and
tempestuous so ever the seas were. Which when he had tried, and being not
forced by sickness to vomit, nor to lose his stones, as by vomitting he must
needs do, he thought his hostess had discovered unto him an excellent secret,
nothing doubting of her amphibologicall speech: and therefore thought it a
worthy note to be recorded among miraculous and medicinable stones; and
inserted it accordingly into his book, among other experiments collected with
great industry, learning, travel, and judgment. All these toies help a subtle
cousener to gain credit with the multitude. Yea, to further estimation, many
will whisper prophecies of their own invention into the ears of such as are not
of quickest capacity; A slender shift to save the credit of their cunning.
as to tell what weather, etc. shall follow. Which if it fall out true, then
boast they and triumph, as though they had gotten some notable conquest; if
not, they deny the matter, forget it, excuse it, or shift it off; as that they
told another the contrary in earnest, and spoke that but in jest. All these
helps might Pharaohs jugglers have to maintain their cousenages and illusions,
toward the hardening of Pharaohs hearts.

Hereunto belong all manner of charms, periapts, amulets, characters, and such
other superstitions, both popish and profane: whereby (if that were true,
which either papists, conjurors, or witches undertake to do) we might daily see
the very miracles wrought indeed, which Pharaoh's magicians seemed to perform.
Howbeit, because by all those devices or cousenages, there cannot be made so
much as a nit, so as Iannes and Iambres could have no help that way, I will
speak thereof in place more convenient.

CHAP. XVI.
How some are abused with natural magic, and sundry examples thereof when
illusion is added thereunto, of Jacobs pied sheep, and of a black Moore.

BUt as these notable and wonderful experiments and conclusions that are found
out in nature it self (through wisdom, learning and industry) do greatly
oppose and astonish the capacity of man: so (I say) when deceit and illusion is
annexed thereunto, then is the wit, the faith, and constancy of man searched
and tried. For if we shall yield that to be devine, supernatural, and
miraculous, which we cannot comprehend; a witch, a papist, a conjuror, a
cousener, and a juggler may make us believe they are gods: The inconvenience of
holding opinion, that whatsoever passes our capacity, is divine,
supernatural, etc.
or else with more impiety we shall ascribe such power and omnipotency unto
them, or unto the devil, as only and properly appertains to God. As for
example. By consederacy or cousenage (as before I have said) I may seem to
manifest the secret thoughts of the heart, which (as we learn in Gods book)
none knows or searches, but God himself alone. And therefore, whosoever
believes that I can do as I may seem to do makes a god of me, and is an
idolater. In which respect, whenever we hear papist, witch, conjuror, or
cousener, take upon him more than lies in humane power to perform, we may
know and boldly say it is a knack of knavery; and no miracle at all. And
further we may know, that when we understand it, it will not be worth the
knowing. And at the discovery of these miraculous toies, we shall leave to
wonder at them, and begin to wonder at our selves, that could be so abused with
bables. Howbeit, such things as God has laid up secretly in nature are to be
weighed with great admiration, and to be searched out with such industry, as
may become a Christian man: I mean, so as neither God, nor our neighbor be
offended thereby, which respect doubtless Iannes and Iambres never had. We
find in the Scriptures diverse natural and secret experiments practiced; as
namely that of Jacob, for pied sheep; which are confirmed by profane authors,
and not only verified in lambs and sheep, I. Bap. Neapol in natural. mag.
but in horses, peacocks, conies, etc. We read also of a woman that brought
forth a young black Moore, by means of an old black Moor who was in her house
at the time of her conception, whom she beheld in fantasy, as is supposed:
howbeit a jealous husband will not be satisfied with such fantastical
imaginations. For in truth a black Moor never fails to beget back children,
of what color soever the other be; Et se^ contra.

CHAP. XVII.
The opinion of Winchmo^gers, that Devils can create bodies, and of Pharaohs
Magicians.

M. malef. p. 1. q. 10.
IT is affirmed by James Sprenger and Henry Institor, in M. Mal. who cite
Albert. In lib. de animalib. for their purpose, that devils and Witches also
can truly make living creatures as well as God; though not at an instant, yet
very suddenly. Howbeit, all such who are rightly informed in Gods word, shall
manifestly perceive and confess the contrary, as has been by Scriptures
already proved, and may be confirmed by places infinite. And therefore Iannes
and Iambres, John 1.3. Colos. 1.16.
though Satan and also Beelzebub had assisted them, could never have made the
serpent or the frogs of nothing, nor yet have changed the waters with words.
Nevertheless, all the learned expositors of that place affirm, that they made
a show of creation, etc. exhibiting by cunning a resemblance of some of those
miracles, which God wrought by the hands of Moses. Yea S. Augustine and many
other hold, that they made by art (and that truly) the serpents, etc. But that
they may by art approach somewhat nearer to those actions, than has been yet
declared, shall and may appear by these and many other conclusions, if they be
true.

CHAP. XVIII.
How to produce or make monsters by Art Magic, and why Pharaohs Magicians
could not make lice.

Natural conclusions.
STrato, Democritus, Empedoclis, and of late, Io. Bap. Neap. teach by what
means monsters may be produced, both from beast and also from foul* Aristotle
himself teaches to make a chicken have four legs, and as many wings, only by a
double yolked Eg; whereby also a Serpent may be made to have many legs. Or any
thing that produces Eggs* may like wise be made double, or membred dismembered;
and the viler creature the sooner brought to monstrous deformity, which in more
noble creatures is more hardly brought to pass. To produce any fowl out of an
Egg, without the ^^turall help of the hen.
There are also pretty experiments of an Egg, to produce any foul, without
the natural help of the Hen, the which is brought to pass, if the Eg be laid
in the powder of the Hens dung, dried and mingled with some of the hens
feathers, and stirred every fourth hour. You may also produce (as they say)
the most venomous, noisome, and dangerous Serpent, called a Cockatrice, by
melting a little arsenick, and the poison of Serpents, or some other strong
venom, and drowning an Egg therein, which there must remain certain days; and
if the Egg be set upright, the operation will be the better. This may also be
done, if the Egg be laid in dung, which of all other things gives the most
singular and natural hea^; and as I. Bap. Neap. says is The mother of marvels.
Mirabilium rerum pa^ens; who also writes, that Crines soeminae menstruosae
the ha^s of a menstruous woman, are turned into Serpents within short space;
and he further says, that basil being beaten, and set out in a moist place,
betwixt a couple of Tiles, does engender Scorpions. The ashes of a D^ck being
put between two dishes, and set in a moist place, does engender a huge Toad,
Quod etiam efficit sanguis ni enstruosus, Two kind of toa^^, natural and
temporal.
which also does menstruous blood. Many writers conclude, that there be two
manner of ^oads, the one bred by natural course and order of generation, the
other growing of themselves, which are called temporary, being only ingendered
of showers and dust; and (as I. Bap. Neap. says) they are casie to be made.
Plutarch and Heracl^les do say, that they have seen these to* descend in rain,
so as they have lain and crawled on the tops of houses, etc. Also Aelianus does
say that he saw frogs and toades, whereof the heads and shoulders were
alive, and became flesh; the hinder parts being but earth, and so crawled on
two feet, the other being not yet fashioned or fully framed. And Macr^b^us
reports, that in Egypt, mice grow of earth and showers; as also frogs,
toads, and serpents in other places. They say that Danmatns Hispa^us could make
them when and as many as he listed. Maggots engendered of the inwards of a beast
are g^^l for angling.
He is no good angler, that knows not how soon the entrails of a beast, when
they are buried, will engender Maggots (which in a civiler term are called
Gen^les) a good bait for small fishes. Whosoever knows the order of
preserving of silke-worms, may perceive a like conclusion; because in the
winter, that is a dead seed, which in the summer is a lively creature. Such and
greater experiments might be known to Iannes and Iambres, and serve well to
their purpose, especially with such excuses, delays, and cunning, as they
could join therewithal. But to proceed, and come a little nearer to their
feats, and to show you a knack beyond their cunning; I can assure you that of
the fat of a man or a woman, lice are in very short space engendered; and yet I
say, Pharaohs Magicians could not make them, with all the cunning they had.
Whereby you may perceive, that God indeed performed the other actions, to
indurate Phara^h, though he thought his Magicians did with no less d^xt^rity
than Moses work miracles and wonders. But some of the interpreters of that
place excuse their ignorance in that matter, Giles All. y. See the peer man's
library.
thus; the devil (say they) can make no creature under the quantity of a barley
corn, and lice being so little cannot therefore be created by them. As though
he that can make the greater, could not make the less. A very gross
absurdity. And as though that he which has power over great, had not the like
over small.

CHAP. XIX.
That great matters may be wrought by this art, when Princes esteem and
maintain it: of diverse wonderful experiments, and of strange conclusions in
glasses of the art perspective, etc.

HOwbeit, these are but trifles in respect of other experiments to this effect,
specially when great Princes maintain and give countenance to students in those
magical arts, which in these countries and in this age is rather prohibited
than allowed, by reason of the abuse commonly coupled therewith; which in truth
is it that moves admiration and estimation of miraculous workings. As for
example. If I affirm, that with certain charms and popish prayers I can set an
horse or an asses head upon a man's shoulders, I shall not be believed;
Wonderful experiments.
or if I do it, I shall be thought a witch. And yet if I. Bap. Neap.
experiments be true, it is no difficult matter to make it seem so; and the
charm of a witch or a papist joined with the experiment, will also make the
wonder seem to proceed thereof. The words used in such case are uncertain, and
to be recited at the pleasure of the witch or cousener. But the conclusion of
this, cut off the head of a horse or a ^ ass (before they be dead, To set an
horses or an asses head on a mans^ neck and shoulders.
otherwise the virtue or strength thereof will be the less effectual) and make
an earthen vessel of fit capacity to contain the same, and let it be filled
with the oil and fat thereof, cover it close, and dawb it over with lome; let
it boil over a soft fire three days continually, that the flesh boiled may run
into oil, so as the bare bones may be seen; boat the ha^r into powder, and
mingle the same with the^ oil, and anoint the heads of the standers by, and
they shall seem to have horses or asses heads. If beasts heads be anointed
with the like oil made of a man's head, they shall seem to have men's faces, as
diverse authors soberly affirm. If a lamp be anointed here with, every thing
shall seem most monstrous. It is also written, that if that which is called
Sperma in any beast be burned, and any bodies face there withal anointed, he
shall seem to have the like face as the beast had. But if you beat arsenick
very fine, and boil it with a little sulphur in a covered pot, and kindle it
with a new candle, the standers by will seem to be headless. Aqua composita
and salt being fired in the night, and all other lights extinguished, make the
standers by seem as dead. All these things might be very well perceived and
known, Strange things to be done by perspective glasses.
and also practiced by Iannes and Iambres. But the wondrous devices, and
miraculous sights, and conceits made and contained in glass, do far exceed
all other; whereto the art perspective is very necessary. For it shows the
illusions of them, whose experiments be seen in diverse sorts of glasses; as in
the hallow, the plain, the embossed, the columnary, the pyramidate or piked,
the turbinall, the bounched, the round, the cornered, the inversed, the
eversed, the massy, the regular, the irregular, the colored and clear
glasses; for you may have glasses so made, as what image or favor soever you
print in your imagination, you shall think you see the same therein. Others
are so framed, as therein one may see what others do in places far distant;
others, whereby you shall see men hanging in the air; others, whereby you may
perceive men flying in the air; others, wherein you may see one coming, and
another going; others, where one image shall seem to be one hundred, etc. There
be glasses also wherein one man may see another man's image, and not his own;
others, to make many similitudes; others, to make none at all. Others, contrary
to the use of all glasses, make the right side turn to the right, and the left
side to the left; Concerning these glasses remember that the eiesight is
deceived; for Non est in speculo res quae speculatur in illo.
others, that burn before and behind; others, that represent not the Images
received within them, but cast them far off in the air, appearing like airy
images, and by the collection of sun beams, with great force sets fire (very
far off) in every thing that may be burned. There be clear glasses, that make
great things seem little, things far often to be at hand; and that which is near
to be far off; such things as are ever us, to seem under us; and those that are
under us, to be above us. There are some glasses also, that represent things in
diverse colors, and them most gorgeous, specially any white thing. Finally, the
thing most worthy of admiration concerning these glasses, is, that the lesser
glass does lessen the shape; but how big so ever it be, it makes the shape no
bigger than it is. And therefore Augustine thinks some hidden myst^ry to be
therein. Vitellius, and I. Bap. Neap. write largely hereof. These I have for
the most part seen, and have the receipt how to make them; which if desire of
brevity had not forbidden me, I would here have set down. But I think not but
Pharaohs Magicians had better experience than I for those and such like
devices. Rash opinion can never judge soundly.
And as ( Pompanacius says) it is most true, that some for these feats have
been accounted Saints, some other witches. And therefore I say, that the Pope
makes rich witches, saints; and burns the poor witches.

CHAP. XX.
A comparison betwixt Pharaohs Magicians and our Witches, and how their cunning
consisted in juggling knacks.

THus you see that it has pleased God to show unto men that seek for
knowledge, such cunning in finding out, compounding, and framing of strange and
secret things, as thereby he seems to have bestowed upon man, somepart of his
Divinity. Howbeit, God (of nothing, with his word) has created all things, and
does at his will, beyond the power and also the reach of man, An apith
imitation in Iannes and Iambres of working wonders.
accomplish whatsoever he list. And such miracles in times past he wrought by
the hands of his Prophets, as here he did by Moses in the presence of Pharaoh,
which Iannes and Iambres apishly followed. But to affirm that they by
themselves, or by all the devils in hell, could do indeed as Moses did by the
power of the Holy Ghost, is worse than infidelity. If any object and say, that
our witches can do such feats with words and charms, as Pharaohs Magicians did
by their art, I deny it: and all the world will never be able to show it. That
which they did was openly done; as our witches and conjurers never do any
thing; Io. Calvine, lib. institut. 1. cap. 8. Cle. recog. 3.
so as these cannot do as they did. And yet (as Calvine says of them) they
were but Jugglers. Neither could they do, as many suppose. For as Clemens
says; These Magicians did rather seem to do these wonders, than work them
indeed. And if they made but prestigious shows of things, Erast. in disputat.
de. lamiis.
I say it was more than our witches can do. For witchcrafts (as Erastus
himself confesses in drift of argument) are but old wives tables. If the
Magicians Serpent had been a very Serpent, it must needs have been transformed
out of the rod. And therein had been a double work of God; to wit, the
qualifying and extinguishment of one substance, Actions unpossible to devils*
Ergo to witches, conjurers, etc.
and the creation of another. Which are actions beyond the devils power, for he
can neither make a body to be no body, nor yet no body to be a body; as to make
something nothing, and nothing something; and contrary things, one; nay, they
cannot make one hair either white or black. If Pha^a^^s Magicians had made very
frogs upon a sudden, why could they not drive them away again? If they could
not hurt the frogs, why should we think that they could make them? Or that our
witches, which cannot do so much as counterfeit them, can kill cattle and
other creatures with words or wishes? Iamb. d^ mys^^riis.
And therefore I say with Iamblichus, Quae sascinati imaginamu, ^^ter
imaginamenta nullam habent actionis and essentiae veritatems Such things as we
being bewitched do imagine, have no truth at all either of action or essence,
beside the bare imagination.

CHAP. XXI.
That the Serpents and Frogs were truly presented, and the water poisoned
indeed by Jannes and Jambres; of false prophets and of their miracles, of
Balams ass.

TRuly I think there were no inconvenience granted, though I should admit that
the serpent and frogs were truly presented, and the water truly poisoned by
James and Iambres; Pharaohs Magicians were not masters of their own actions.
not that they could execute such miracles of themselves, or by their familiars
or devils: but that God, by the hands of those counterfeit couseners, contrary
to their own expectations, overtook them, and compelled them in their
ridiculous wickedness to be instruments of his will and vengeance, upon their
master Pharaoh; so as by their hands God showed some miracles, which he himself
wrought; Exodus 10.
as appears in Exodus. For God did put the spirit of tenth into Baalams
mouth, who was hired to curse his people. And although he were a corrupt and
false prophet, and went about a mischievous interprise; yet God made him an
instrument (against his will) to the confusion of the wicked. God uses the
wicked as instruments to execute his counsels and judgments.
Which if it pleased God to do here, as a special work, whereby to show his
omnipotency, to the confirmation of his peoples faith, in the doctrine of their
Messiah delivered unto them by the Prophet Moses, then was it miraculous and
extraordinary, and not to be looked for now. And (as some suppose) there were
then a consort or crew of false prophets, which could also foretell things to
come, and work miracles. I answer, it was extraordinary and miraculous, and
that it pleased God so to try his people; but he works not so in these days;
for the working of miracles is ceased. The contrary effects that the miracles
of Moses and the miracles of Egyptian magicians wrought in the heart of Pharaoh.
Likewise in this case it might well stand with Gods glory, to use the hands of
Pharaohs Magicians, toward the hardening of their Masters heart; and to make
their illusions and ridiculous conceits to become effectual. For God had
promised and determined to harden the heart of Pharaoh. As for the miracles
which Moses did, they mollified it so, as he always relented upon the sight of
the same. For unto the greatness of his miracles were added such modesty and
patience, as might have moved even a heart of steel or flint. But Pharaohs
frowardness always grew upon the Magicians actions: the like example, or the
resemblance whereof, we find not again in the Scriptures. And though there were
such people in those days suffered and used by God, for the accomplishment of
his will and secret purpose: yet it follows not, that now, when Gods will is
wholly revealed unto us in his word, and his Son exhibited (for whom, or rather
for the manifestation of whose coming all those things were suffered or
wrought) such things and such people should yet continue. So as I conclude, the
cause being taken away, the thing proceeding thence remains not. And to
assign our witches and conjurers their room, is to mock and contemn Gods
wonderful works; and to oppose against them cousenages, juggling, knacks and
things of naught. And therefore, as they must confess, that none in these
days can do as Moses did; so it may be answered, that none in these days can
do as Iannes and Iambres did: who, if they had been false Prophets, as they
were Jugglers, had yet been more privileged to exceed our old women or
conjurors, in the accomplishing of miracles, or in prophesying, etc. For who
may be compared with Balaam? Nay, I dare say, that Balaams ass wrought a
greater miracle, and more supernatural, than either the Pope or all the
conjurors and witches in the world can do at this day.

To conclude, That the art of juggling is more, or at least no less strange in
working miracles than conjuring, witchcraft, etc.
it is to be avouched (and there be proofs manifest enough) that our Jugglers
approach much nearer to resemble Pharaohs Magicians, than either witches or
conjurors, and make a more lively show of working miracles than any inchantors
can do: for these practice to show that in action, which witches do in words
and terms. But that you may think I have reason for the maintenance of mine
opinion in this behalf, I will surcease by multitude of words to amplify this
place, referring you to the tract following of the art of juggling, where you
shall read strange practices and cunning conveyances; which because they cannot
so conveniently be described by phrase of speech, as that they should presently
sink into the capacity of you that would be practitioners of the same; I have
caused them to be set forth in form and figure, that your understanding might
be somewhat helped by isntrumental demonstrations. And when you have perused
that whole discovery of Juggling, compare the wonders thereof with the wonders
imputed to conjurors and witches, (not omitting Pharaohs Sorcerers at any hand
in this comparison) and I believe you will be resolved, that the miracles done
in Pharaohs sight by them, and the miracles ascribed unto witches, conjurors,
etc. may be well taken for false miracles, mere delusions, etc. and for such
actions as are commonly practiced by cunning jugglers; be it either by
legierdemain, confederacy, or otherwise.

CHAP. XXII.
The art of juggling discovered, and in what point it does principally consist.

NOw because such occasion is ministered, and the matter so pertinent to my
purpose, and also the life of witchcraft and cousenage so manifestly delivered
in the art of juggling; I thought good to discover it, together with the rest
of the other deceitful arts; being sorry that it falls out to my lot, to lay
open the secrets of this mystery, to the hinderance of such poor men as live
thereby: In what respects juggling is tolerable and also commendable.
whose doings herein are not only tolerable, but greatly commendable, so they
abuse not the name of God, nor make the people attribute unto them his power,
but always acknowledge wherein the art consists, so as thereby the other
unlawful and impious arts may be by them the rather detected and bewrayed.

The true art therefore of juggling consists in legierdemain; to wit, the
nimble conveyance of the hand, which is especially performed three ways. The
three principal points wherein legierdemain or nimblenesse of hand does
consist.
The first and principal consists in hiding and conveying of bals, the
second in the alteration of money, the third in the shuffling, of the cards. He
that is expert in these may show much pleasure, and many fe^^^, and has more
cunning than all other witches or magicians. All other parts of this art are
taught when they are discovered; but this part cannot be taught by any
description or instruction, without great exercise and expense of time. And
forasmuch as I profess rather to discover than teach these mysteries, it shall
suffice to signify unto you, that the endeavor and drift of jugglers is only
to abuse men's eyes and judgments. Now therefore my meaning is, in words as
plain as I can, to rip up certain proper tricks of that art; whereof some are
pleasant and delectable, othersome dreadful and desperate, and all but mere
delusions, or counterfeit actions as you shall soon see by due observation of
every knack by me hereafter deciphered.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the ball, and the manner of legierdemain therewith, also notable feats with
one or diverse bals.

Great variety of play with the bals, etc.
COncerning the Ball, the plays and devices thereof are infinite, in so much as
if you can by use handle them well, you may show there with a hundredth feats.
But whether you seem to throw the ball into your left hand or into your mouth,
or into a pot, or up into the air, etc. it is to be kept still in your right
hand. If you practice first with a leaden bullet, you shall (...) sooner and
better do it with bals of cork. The first place at your first learning, where
you are to bestow a great ball, is in the palm of your hand, with your ring
finger; but a small ball is to be placed with your thumb, betwixt your
ring-finger and middle-finger, then are you to practice to do it betwixt the
other fingers, then betwixt the forefinger and the thumb, with the forefinger
and middle-finger jointly, and therein is the greatest and strangest cunning
showed. These feats are nimbly, cleanly and swiftly to be conveyed; so as the
eyes of the beholders may not discern or perceive the drift.
Lastly, the same ball is to be practiced in the palm of the hand, and by use
you shall not only seem to put any one ball from you, and yet retain it in your
hand; but you shall keep four or five as cleanly and certainly as one. This
being attained unto, you shall work wonderful feats; as for example.

Lay three or four bals before you, and as many small candlesticks, bols,
saltsetter's or saltseller covers, which is the best. Then first seem to put
one bal into your left hand, and therewithal seem to hold the same fast: then
take one of the candlesticks, or any other thing (having a hollow foot, and not
being too great) and seem to put the ball which is thought to be in your left
hand, underneath the same, and so under the other candlesticks seem to bestow
the other bals: and all this while the beholders will suppose each ball to be
under each candlestickt this done, some charm or form of words is commonly
used. Then take up one candlestick with one hand, and blow, saying; Lo, you see
that is gone: and so likewise look under each candlestick with like grace and
words, Memorandum that the juggler must set a good grace on the matter: for
that is very requisite.
and the beholders will wonder where they are become. But if you, in lifting up
the candlesticks with your right hand, leave all those three or four bals under
one of them (as by use you may easily do, having turned them all down into
your hand, and holding them fast with your little and ring-fingers) and take
the candlestick with your other fingers, and cast the bals up into the
hollownesse thereof (for so they will not roll so soon away) the standers by
will be much astonished. But it will seem wonderful strange, if also in showing
how there remains nothing under another of those candlesticks, taken up with
your left hand, you leave behind you a great ball or any other thing, the
miracle will be the greater. For first they think you have pulled away all the
bals by miracle; then, that you have brought them all together again by like
means, and they neither think nor look that any other thing remains behind
under any of them. And therefore, after many other feats done, return to your
candlesticks, remembering where you left the great ball, and in no wise touch
the same; but having another like ball about you, seem to bestow the same in
manner and form aforesaid, under a candlestick which stands furthest off from
that where the ball lies. And when you shall with words or charms seem to
convey the same ball from under the same candlestick and afterward bring it
under the candlestick which you touched not, it will (I say) seem wonderful
strange.

To make a little ball swell in your hand till it be very great.
TAke a very great ball in your left hand, or three indifferent big bals; and
showing one or three little bals, seem to put them into your said left hand,
concealing (as you may well do) the other bals which were there in before:
then use words, and make them seem to swell, and open your hand, etc. This play
is to be varied a hundredth ways: for as you find them all under one
candlestick, so may you go to a stander by, and take off his hat or cap, and
show the bals to be there, and conveying them thereinto, as you turn the
bottom upward.

To consume (or rather to convey) one or many bals into nothing.
IF you take one ball, or more, and seem to put it into your other hand, and
whilst you use charming words, you convey them out of your right hand into
your lap; it will seem strange. For when you open your left hand immediately,
the sharpest lookers on will say it is in your other hand, which also then you
may open; and when they see nothing there, they are greatly overtaken.

How to wrap a wag upon the knuckles.
BUt I will leave to speak any more of the ball, for herein I might hold you
all day, and yet shall I not be able to teach you to use it, nor scarsly to
understand what I mean or write concerning it: but certainly many are persuaded
that it is a spirit or a fly, etc. Memorandum, that always the right hand be
kept open and straight, only keep the palm from view, and therefore you may end
with this miracle. Lay one ball upon your shoulder, another on your arm, and
the third on the table: which because it is round, This ^eat tends chiefly to
the moving of laughter and mirth.
and will not easily lie upon the point of your knife, you must bid a stander by
lay it thereon, that you mean to throw all those three bals into your mouth at
once: and holding a knife as a pen in your hand, when he is laying it upon the
point of your knife, you may easily with have rap him on the fingers, for the
other matter will be hard to do.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of conveyance of money.

The money must not be of too small nor of too large a circumference for
hindering of the conveyance.
THe conveying of money is not much inferior to the ball, but much easier to
do. The principal place to keep a piece of money is the palm of your hand,
the best piece to keep is a testor; but with exercise all will be alike, except
the money be very small, and then it is to be kept betwixt the fingers, almost
at the fingers end, whereas the ball is to be kept below near to the palm^.

To convey money out of one of your hands into the other by legierdemain.
FIrst you must hold open your right hand, and lay therein a testor, or some
big piece of money: then lay thereupon the top of your long left finger, and use
words, and upon the sudden slip your right hand from your finger wherewith you
held down the testor, and bending your hand a very little, you shall remain the
testor still therein: and suddenly (I say) drawing your right hand through your
left, you shall seem to have left the testor there, specially when you shut in
due time your left hand, Which that it may more plainly appear to be truly
done, This is pretty if it be cunningly handled; for both the ear and the eye
is deceived by this device.
you may take a knife, and seem to knock against it, so as it shall make a
great sound: but in stead of knocking the piece in the left hand (where none
is) you shall hold the point of the knife fast with the left hand, and knock
against the testor held in the other hand, and it will be thought to hit
against the money in the left hand. Then use words, and open your hand, and
when nothing is seen, it will be wondered at how the testor was removed.

To convert or transubstantiate money into counters, or counters into money.
ANother way to deceive the lookers on, is to do as before, with a testor; and
keeping a counter in the palm of the left hand secretly to seem to put the
testor thereinto; which being retained still in the right hand, when the left
hand is opened, the testor will seem to be transubstantiated into a counter.

To put one testor into one hand, and another into the other hand, and with
words to bring them together.
HE that has once attained to the facility of retaining one piece of money in
his right hand, Variety of tricks may be showed in juggling with money.
may show a hundredth pleasant conceits by that means, and may reserve two or
three as well as one. And lo them may you seem to put one piece into your left
hand, and retaining it still in your right hand, you may together therewith
take up another like piece, and so with words seem to bring both pieces
together.

To put one testor into a strangers hand, and another into your own, and to
convey both into the strangers hand with words.
ALso you may take two testors evenly set together, and put the same in stead
of one testor, into a strangers hand, and then making as though you did put one
testor into your left hand, with words you shall make it seem that you convey
the testor in your hand, into the strangers hand: for when you open your said
left hand, there shall be nothing seen; and he opening his hand shall find two,
where he thought was but one. By this device (I say) a hundredth conceits may
be showed.

How to do the same or the like seat otherwise.
TO keep a testor, etc. betwixt your finger, serves specially for this and
such like purposes. You must take heed that you be close and sly: or else you
discredit the art.
Hold out your hand, and cause one to lay a testor upon the palm thereof, then
shake the same up almost to your fingers ends, and putting your thumb upon it;
you shall easily, with a little practice, convey the edge betwixt the middle
and forefinger, whilst you proffer to put it into your other hand (provided
always that the edge appear not through the fingers on the backside) which
being done, take up another testor (which you may cause a stander by to lay
down) and put them both together, either closely in stead of one into a
strangers hand, or keep them still in your own: and (after words spoken) open
your hands and there being nothing in one, and both pieces in the other, the
beholder will wonder how they came together.

To throw a piece of money away, and to find it again where you lost.
Use and exercise makes men ready and practive.
YOu may, with the middle or ring finger of the right hand, convey a testor into
the palm of the same hand, and seeming to cast it away, (...) it still: which
with confederacy will seem strange; to wit, when you find it again, where
another has bestowed the very like piece. But these things without exercise
cannot be done, and therefore I will proceed to show things to be brought to
pass by money, with less difficulty; and yet as strange as the rest: which
being unknown are marvellously commended, but being known are decided, and
nothing at all regarded.

With words to make a groat or a testor to leap out of a pot, or to run along
upon a table.
This feat is the stranger if it be done by night; a candle placed between the
lookers on and the juggler: for by that means their eie-sight is hindered from
discerning the conceit.
YOu shall see a juggler take a groat or a testor, and throw it into a pot, or
lay it in the midst of a table, and with enchanting words cause the sa^^ to
leap out of the pot, or run toward him, or from him ward along the table.
Which will seem miraculous, until you know it is done with a long black hair
of a woman, head, fastened to the brim of a groat, by means of a little hole
driven through the same with a Spanish needle. In like son you may use a knife,
or any other small thing: but if you would have it go from you, you must have a
confederate, by which means all juggling is graced and amended.

To make a great or a testor to sink through a table, and to vanish out of a
handkercher very strangely.
A Juggler also sometimes will borrow a groat or a testor, etc. and make it
before you, and seem to put the same into the midst of a handkercher, and wind
it so, as you may the better see and feel it. Then will he take you the
handkercher, and bid you feel whether the groat be there or nay; and he will
also require you to put the same under a candlestick, or some such thing. Then
will he send for a basin, and holding the same under the board right against
the candlestick, will use certain words of enchantments; and in short space
you shall hear the groat fall into the basin. This done one takes off the
candlestick, and the juggler takes the handkercher by a tassell, A discovery
of this juggling knack.
and shakes it; but the money is gone: which seems as strange as any feat
whatsoever, but being known, the miracle is turned to a babble. For it is
nothing else, but to sow a groat into the corner of a handkercher, finely
covered with a piece of linen, little bigger then your groat: which corner you
must convey instead of the groat delivered to you, into the middle of your
handkercher; leaving the other either in your hand or lap, which afterward you
must seem to pull through the board, letting it fall into a basin, etc.

A notable trick to transform a counter to a groat.
TAke a groat, or some less piece of money, and grind it very thin at the one
side; and take two counters, and grind them, the one at the one side, the other
on the other side: glue the smooth side of the groat to the smooth side of one
of the counters, joining them so close together as may be, specially at the
edges, which may be so filed, as they shall seem to be but one piece; to wit,
one side a counter, and the other side a groat, then take a very little green
wax (for that is so frest and therefore best) and lay it so upon the smooth
side of the other counter, as it do not much discolor the groat: The juggler
must have none of his trinkets, wanting: besides that, it behoeveth him to be
mindful, lest he mistake his tricks.
and so will that counter with the groat cleave together, as though they were
glewed; and being filed even with the groat and the other counter, it will seem
so like a perfect entire counter, that though a stranger handle it, he shall
not bewray it; then having a little touched your forefinger, and the thumb of
your right hand with soft wax, take therewith this counterfeit counter and lay
it down openly upon the palm of your left hand, in such sort as an auditor
lays down his counters, wringing the same hard, so as you may leave the
glewed counter with the groat apparently in the palm of your left hand; and the
smooth side of the waxed counter will stick fast upon your thumb, by reason of
the wax wherewith it is smeared, and so may you hide it at your pleasure.
Provided always, that you lay the waxed side downward, and the glewed side
upward: then close your hand, and in or after the closing thereof turn the
piece, and so in stead of a counter (which they supposed to be in your hand)
you shall seem to have a groat, to the astonishment of the beholders, if it be
well handled.

CHAP. XXV.
An excellent feat, to make a two penie piece lie plain in the palm of your
hand, and to be passed from thence when you list.

PUt a little red wax (not too thin) upon the nail of your longest finger,
then let a stranger put a two penny piece into the palm of your hand, and shut
your fist suddenly, and convey the two penny piece upon the wax, which with use
you may so accomplish, as no man shall perceive it. Then and in the mean time
use As, Ailif, casyl, zaze, hit mel meltat: Saturnus, Jupiter, Mars, Sol,
Venus, Mercury, Luna, or such like.
words of course, and suddenly open your hand, holding the tips of your fingers
rather lower than higher than the palm of your hand, and the beholders will
wonder where it is become Then shut your hand suddenly again, and lay a wager
whether it be there or no; and you may either leave it there, or take it away
with you at your pleasure. This (if it be well handled) has more admiration
than any other feat of the hand. Memorandum this may be best handled, by
putting the wax upon the two penny piece, but then must you lay it in your
hand your self.

To convey a testor out of ones hand that holds it fast.
STick a little wax upon your thumb, and take a stander by by the finger,
showing him the testor, and telling him you will put the same into his hand:
then wring it down hard with your waxed thumb, and using many words look him in
the face, and as soon as you perceive him to look in your face, or from your
hand, suddenly take away your thumb, and close his hand, and so will it seem to
him that the testor remains, even as if you wring a testor upon ones
forehead, it will seem to stick, when it is taken away, especially if it be
wet. Then cause him to hold his hand still, and with speed put it into another
man's hand (or into your own) two testor^ in stead of one, and use words of
course, whereby you shall make not only the beholders, but the holders believe,
when they open their hands, that by enchantment you have brought both together.

To throw a piece of money into a deep pond, and to fetch it again from whence
you list.
In these knacks of confederacy Feats had the name, whilst he lived.
THere be a mavelous number of feats to be done with money, but if you will
work by private confederacy, as to mark a shilling, or any other thing, and
throw the same into a river or deep pond, and having bid a shilling before with
like marks in some other secret place; bid some go presently and fetch it,
making them believe that it is the very same which you threw into the river:
the beholders will marvel much at it. And of such feats there may be done a
mavelous number; but many more by public confederacy, whereby one may tell
another how much money he has in his purse, and a hundredth like toies, and all
with money.

To convey one shilling being in one hand into another, holding your hands
abroad like a rood.
A knack more merry than mavelous.
EVermore it is necessary to mingle some merry toies among your grave miracles,
as in this case of money, to take a shilling in each hand, and holding your
arms abroad, to lay a wager that you will put them both into one hand, without
bringing them any whit nearer together. The wager being made, hold your arms
abroad like a rood, and turning about with your body, lay the shilling out of
one of your hands upon the table, and turning to the other side take it up with
the other hand: and so you shall win your wager.

How to rap a wag on the knuckles.
Another to the same purpose road in page 228.
DEliver one piece of money with the left hand to one, and to a second person
another, and offer him that you would rap on the fingers the third; for he
(though he be ungratious and subtle) seeing the other receive money, will not
lightly refuse it, and when he offers to take it, you may rap him on the
fingers with a knife, or somewhat else held in the right hand, saying that you
knew by your familiar, that he meant to have kept it from you.

CHAP. XXVI.
To transform any one small thing into any other form by folding of paper.

TAke a sheet of paper, or a handkercher, and fold or double the same, so as
one side be a little longer then another: then put a counter between the two
sides or leaves of the paper or handkercher, up to the middle of the top of the
fold, holding the same so as it be not perceived, and any a groat on the
outside thereof, right against the counter, and fold it down to the end of the
longer side: and when you unfold it again, the groat will be where the counter
was, and the counter where the groat was; so as some will suppose that you have
transubstantiated the money into a counter, and with this many feats may be
done.

The like or rather stranger than it may be done, with two papers three inches
square a piece, divided by two folds into three equal parts at either side, so
as each folded paper remain one inch square: then glow the backsides of the two
papers together as they are folded, and not as they are open, and so shall both
papers seem to be but one; and which side soever you open, it shall appear to
be the same, if you hide handsomely the bottom, as you may well do with your
middle finger, so as if you have a groat in the one and a counter in the other,
you (having showed but one) may by turning the paper seem to transubstantiate
it. This may be best performed, by putting it under a candlestick, or a hat,
etc. and with Such as you shall find in page 227, and 330. in the marginalnotes
notes, or some strange terms of your own devising. Of dice play and the like
unthrifty games, mark these two old verses: Ludens taxillis been respice quid
sit in illis, Mors tua, sors tua, res tua, spes tua pendet in illis: and
remember them.
words seem to do the feat.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of cards, with good cautions how to avoid cousenage therein: special rules to
convey and handle the cards, and the manner and order how to accomplish all
difficult and strange things wrought with cards.

HAving now bestowed some waste money among you, I will set you to cards; by
which kind of witchcraft a great number of people have juggled away not only
their money, but also their lands, their health, their time, and their honesty.
I dare not (as I could) show the lewd juggling that cheaters practice, lest it
minister some offense to the well disposed, to the simple hurt and losses, and
to the wicked occasion of evil doing. But I would wish all gamesters to beware,
not only with what cards and dice the play, but especially with whom and where
they exercise gaming. And to let dice pass (as whereby a man may be inevitably
cousened) one that is skilful to make and use Bumcards, may undo a hundredth
wealthy men that are given to gaming: but if he have a confederate present,
either of the players or standers by, the mischief cannot be avoided. If you
play among strangers, beware of him that seems simple or drunken; for under
their habit the most special couseners are presented, and while you think by
their simplicity and imperfections to beguile them (and thereof perchance are
persuaded by their confederates, your very friends as you think) you your self
will be most of all overtaken. Beware also of the ^^^tors by, and lookers on,
and namely of them that bet on your side, for whilst they look on your game
without suspicion, they discover it by signs to your adversaries, with whom
they bet, and yet are their confederates.

But in showing feats, and juggling with cards the principal point consists
in shuffling them nimbly, and always keeping one certain card either in the
bottom, or in some known place of the stock, four or five cards from it.
Hereby you shall seem to work wonders; for it will be easy for you to see or
spy one card, which though you be perceived to do, it will not be suspected,
Note.
if you shuffle them well afterward. And this note I must give you, that in
reserving the bottom card, you must always (whilst you shufflle) keep him a
little before or a little behind all the cards lying underneath him, bestowing
him (I say) either a little beyond his fellows before, right over the
forefinger, or else behind the rest, so as the little finger of the left hand
may meet with it: which is the easier, the readyer, and the better way. In the
beginning of your shuffling, shuffle as thick as you can; and in the end throw
upon the stock the nether card (with so many mo at the least as you would have
preserved for any purpose) a little before or behind the rest. Provided
always, that your fore finger, if the pack be laid before, or the little
finger, if the pack lie behind, creep up to meet with the bottom card, and
not lie betwixt the cards: and when you feel it, you may there hold it, until
you have shuffled over the cards again, still leaving your kept card below.
Being perfect herein, you may do almost what you list with the cards. By this
means, what pack soever you make, though it consist of eight, twelve, or twenty
cards, you may keep them still together unsevered next to the nether card, and
yet shuffle them often to satisfy the curious beholders. As for example, and
for brevity sake, to show your diverse feats under one.

How to deliver out four aces, and to convert them into four knaves.
MAke a pack of these eight cards; to wit, four knaves and four aces and
although, all the eight cards must lie immediately together, yet must each
knave and ace be evenly severed, and the same eight cards must lie also in the
lowest place of the bunch. You must be well advised in the shuffling of the
bunch, lest you overshoot your self.
Then shuffle them so, as always at the second shuffling, or at least wise at
the end of your shuffling the said pack, and of the pack one ace may lie
neathermost, or so as you may know where he goes and lies: and aiwaies (I
say) let your foresaid pack with three or four cards more lie unseparably
together immediately upon and with that ace. Then using some speech or other
device, and putting your hands with the cards to the edge of the table to hide
the action, let our privily a piece of the second card which is one of the
knaves, holding forth the stock in both your hands, and showing to the standers
by the nether card (which is the ace or kept card) covering also the head or
piece of the knave (which is the next card) with your four fingers, draw out
the same knave, laying it down on the table: then shuffle again, keeping your
pack whole, and so have you two aces lying together in the bottom. And
therefore, to reform that disordered card, as also for a grace and countenance
to that action, take off the uppermost card of the bune^, and thrust it into
the midst of the cards; and then take away the neathermost card, which is one
of your said aces, and bestow him likewise. Then may you begin as before,
showing another ace, and instead thereof lay down another knave: and so forth,
until instead of four aces you have laid down four knaves. The beholders all
this while thinking that there lie four aces on the table, are greatly abused,
and will marvel at the transformation.

How to tell one what card he sees in the bottom, when the same card is
shuffled into the stock.
WHen you have seen a card privily, or as though you marked it not, lay the
same undermost, and shuffle the cards as before you are taught, till your card
lie again below in the bottom. Then show the same to the beholders, willing
them to remember it: then shuffle the cards, or let any other shuffle them; for
you know the card already, and therefore may at any time tell them what card
they saw: which For that will draw the action into the greater admiration.
nevertheless would be done with great circumstance and show of difficulty.

Another way to do the same, having your self indeed never seen the card.
IF you can see no card, or be suspected to have seen that which you mean to
show, then let a stander by first shuffle, and afterward take you the cards
into your hands, and (having showed and not seen the bottom card) shuffle
again and keep the same card as before you are taught; and either make shift
then to see it when their suspicion is past, which may be done by letting some
cards fall, or else lay down all the cards in heaps, remembering where you laid
your bottom card. Then spy how many cards lie in some one heap, and lay the
heap where your bottom card is upon that heap, and all the other heaps upon
the same: and so, if there were five cards in the heap whereon you laid your
card, then the same must be the sixth card, which now you may throw out, or look
upon without suspicion; and tell them the card they saw.

To tell one without confederacy what card he thinks*
LAy three cards on a table, The eye bewraieth the thought.
a little way distant, and bid a stander by be true and not waver, but think
one them of three; and by his eye you shall assuredly perceive which he both
sees and thinks. And you shall do the like, if you cast down a whole pair of
cards with the faces upward, whereof there will be few or none plainly
perceived, and they also co^ cards. But as you cast them down suddenly, so must
you take them up presently, marking both his eye and the card whereon he
looks.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How to tell what card any man thinks, how to convey the same into ^ kernel
of a nut or cheristone, etc. and the same again into ones pocket, how to make
one draw the same or any card you list, and all under one devise.

Tricks with cards, etc. which must be done with confederacy.
TAk a nut; or a cheristone, and burn a hole through the side of the top of the
shell, and also through the kernel (if you will) with a hot bodkin, or boar it
with an awll; and with the eye of a needle pull out some of the kernel, so as
the same may be as wide as the hole of the shell. Then write the number or name
of the card in a piece of some paper one inch or half an inch in length, and
half so much in breadth, and roll it up hard; then put it into a nut, or
cheristone, and close the hole with a little red wax, and rub the same with a
little dust, and it will not be perceived, if the nut or cheristone be brown
or old. Then let your confederate think that card which you have in your (...),
etc. and either convey the same nut or cheristone into some bodies pocket, or
lay it in some strange place: then make one draw the same out of the stock held
in your hand, which by use you may well do. But say not; I will make you
perforce draw such a card: but require some stander by to draw a card, saying
that it skils not what card he draw. And if your hand serve you to use the
cards well, you shall prefer unto him, and he shall receive (even though he
snatch at another) the very card which you kept, and your confederate thought,
and is written in the nut, and hidden in the pocket, etc. You must (while you
hold the stock in your hands, tossing the cards to and fro) remember always to
keep your card in your eyes and not to loose the sight thereof. Which feat,
till you be perfect in, you may have the same privily marked and when you
perceive his hand ready to draw, put it a little out toward his hand, nimbly
turning over the cards, as though you numbered them, holding the same more loose
and open than the rest, in no wise suffering him to draw any other; which if he
should do, you must let three or four fall, that you may begin again. This
will seem most strange, in your said paper be enclosed in a button, and by
confederacy sowed upon the doublet or coat of any body. A merry conceit the
like whereof you shall find in page 228. and 232.
This trick they commonly end with a nut full of ink, in which case some wag or
unhappy boy is to be required to think a card; and having so done, let the nut
be delivered him to crack, which he will not refuse to do, if he have seen the
other feat played before.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of fast or loose, how to knit a hard knot upon a handkercher, and to undo the
same with words.

THe Egyptians juggling witchcraft or sortilegie stands much in fast or
loose, whereof though I have written somewhat generally already, yet having
such opportunity I will here show some of their particular feats; not treating
of their common tricks which is so tedious, nor of their fortunetelling which
is so impious; and yet both of them mere cousenage. Fast and loose with a
handkerchief.
Make one plain loose knot, with the two corner ends of a handkercher, and
seeming to draw the same very hard, hold fast the body of the said handkercher
(near to the knot) with your right hand, pulling the contrary end with the left
hand, which is the corner of that which you hold. Then c^^se up handsomely the
knot, which will be yet somewhat loose, and pull the handkercher so with your
right hand, as the left hand end may be near to the knot: then will it seem a
true and a firm knot. And to make it appear more assuredly to be so indeed, let
a stranger pull at the end which you hold in your left hand, whilst you hold
fast the other in your right hand: and then holding the knot with your
forefinger and thumb, and the neither part of your handkercher with your other
fingers, as you hold a bridle when you would with one hand slip up the knot and
lengthen your reins. This done, turn your handkercher over the knot with the
left hand, in doing whereof you must suddenly slip out the end or corner,
putting up the knot of your handkercher with your forefinger and thumb, as you
would put up the foresaid knot of your bridle. Then deliver the same (covered
and wrapped in the midst of your handkercher) to one, to hold fast, and so after
some words used, and wagers laid, take the handkercher and shake it, and it
will be loose.

A notable seat of fast or loose; namely, to pull three beadstones from off a
cord, while you hold fast the ends thereof, without removing of your hand.
TAke two little whipcords of two foot long a piece, Fast or loose with
whipcords and beads.
double them equally so as there may appear four ends. Then take three great
bead-stones, the hole of one of them being bigger than the rest; and put one
beadstone upon the eye or bowt of the one cord, and another on the other cord.
Then take the stone with the greatest hole, and let both the bowts be hidden
therein: which may be the better done, if you put the eye of the one into the
eye or bowt of the other. Then pull the middle bead upon the same, being
doubled over his fellow, and so will the beads seem to be put over the two
cords without partition. For holding fast in each hand the two ends of the two
cords, you may toss them as you list, and make it seem manifest to the
beholders, which may not see how you have done it, that the beadstones are put
upon the two cords without any fraud. Then must you seem to add more
effectual binding of those beadstones to the string, and make one half of a
knot with one of the ends of each side; which is for no other purpose, This
conveyance must be closely done; Ergo it must be no bunglers work.
but that when the bead-stones be taken away, the cords may be seen in the case
which the beholders suppose them to be in before. For when you have made your
half knot (which in any wise you may not double to make a perfect knot) you
must deliver into the hands of some standers by those two cords; namely, two
ends evenly set in one hand, and two in the other, and then with a wager, etc.
begin to pull off your beadstones, etc. which if you handle nimbly, and in the
end cause him to pull his two ends, the two cords will show to be placed
plainly, and the beadstones to have come through the cords. But these things
are so hard and long to be described, that I will leave them; whereas I could
show great variety.

CHAP. XXX.
Iuggling knacks by confederacy, and how to know whether one ca^ cross or
pile by the ringing.

LAy a wager with your confederate (who must seem simple, or obstinately
opposed against you) that standing behind a door, you will (by the found or
ringing of the money) tell him whether he cast cross or pile; so as when you
are gone, and he has fillipped the money before the witnesses who are to be
cousened, What is it? What is it? signs of confederacy.
he must say; What is it, if it be cross; or What is it, if it be pile: or some
other such sign, as you are agreed upon, and so you need not fail to guess
rightly. By this means (if you have any invention) you may seem to do a
hundredth miracles, and to discover the secrets of a man's thoughts, or words
spoken a far off.

To make a shoal of goslings draw a timber log.
TO make a shoal of goslings, or (as they say) a gaggle of Geese to seem to
draw a timber log, is done by that very means that is used, when a cat does
draw a fool through a pond or river: but handled some what further off from the
beholders.

To make a pot or any such thing standing fast on the cupboard, to fall down
thence by virtue of words.
LEt a cupboard be so placed, as your confederate may hold a black thread
without in the court, behind some window of that room; and at a certain loud
word spoken by you, he may pull the same thread, being wound about the pot,
Eleazers feat of confederacy.
etc. And this was the feat of Eleazer, which Josephus reports to be such a
miracle.

To make one dance naked.
Make a poor boy confederate with you, so as after charms, etc. spoken by you,
he uncloth himself, and stand naked, seeming (whilst he undresseth him) to
shake, stamp, and cry, still hastening to be unclothed; till he be stark
naked; or if you can procure none to go so far, let him only begin to stamp
and shake, etc. and to uncloth him, and then you may (for the reverence of the
company) seem to release him.

To transform or alter the color of ones cap or hat.
TAke a confederates hat, and use certain As, Drech myroch, and senaroth betu
baroch assmaaroth, rounsee, farounsee, hey pass pass, etc. or such like
strange words.
words over it, and deliver it to him again, and let him seem to be wroth, and
cast it back to you again, affirming that his was a good new black hat, but
this is an old blew hat, etc. and then you may seem to counter charm it, and
redeliver it, to his satisfaction.

How to tell where a stolen horse is become.
BY means of confederacy, Steven Tailor, and one Pope abused diverse country
people. For Stephen Tailor would hide away his neighbors horses, Pope and
Tailor confederates.
etc. and send them to Pope, (whom he before had told where they were)
promising to send the parties unto him, whom he described and made known by
diverse signs: so as this Pope would tell them at their first entrance unto the
door. Wherefore they came, and would say that their horses were stolen, but
the thief should be forced to bring back the horses, etc. and leave them within
one mile south and by west, etc. of his house, even as the plot was laid, and
the pack made before by Stephen and him. This Pope is said of some to be a
witch, of others he is accounted a conjurer; but commonly called a wise man,
which is all one with soothsaier or witch.

CHAP. XXXI.
Boxes to alter one grain into another, or to consume the grain or corn to
nothing.

THere be diverse juggling boxes with false bottoms, wherein many false feats
are wrought. First they have a box covered or rather footed alike at each end,
the bottom of the one end being no deeper than as it may contain one lane of
corn or pepper glewed thereupon. Note the manner of this conveyance.
Then use they to put into the hollow end thereof some other kind of grain,
ground or unground; then do they cover it, and put it under a hat or
candlestick: and either in putting it thereinto, or pulling it thence, they
turn the box, and open the contrary end, wherein is showed a contrary grain*
or else they show the glewed end first (which end they suddenly thrust into a
boll or bag such of grain as is glewed already thereupon) and secondly the
empty Box.

How to convey (with words or charms) the corn contained in one box into
another.
THere is another box fashioned like a bell, whereinto they do put so much,
and such corn or spice as the aforesaid hollow box can contain. Then they stop
or cover the same with a piece of leather, as broad as a testor, which being
thrust up hard toward the middle part or waste of the said bell will stick
fast, and bear up the corn. And if the edge of the leather be wet, it will hold
the better. Then take they the other box dipped (as is aforesaid) in corn, and
set down the same upon the table, the empty end upward, saying that they will
convey the grain therein into the other box or bell: You must take heed that
when the corn comes out it cover and hide the leather, etc.
which being set down somewhat hard upon the table, the leather and the corn
therein will fall down, so as the said bell being taken up from the table, you
shall see the corn lying thereon, and the stopple will be hidden therewith, and
covered; and when you uncover the other box, nothing shall remain therein. But
presently the corn must be swept down with one hand into the other, or into
your lap or hat. Many feats may be done with this box, as to put therein a
toad, affirming the same to have been so turned from corn, etc. and then many
beholders will suppose the same to be the jugglers devil, whereby his fears
and miracles are wrought. But in truth, there is more cunning witchcraft used
in transferring of corn after this sort, than is in the transferring of one
man's corn in the grass into another man's field* which the law of the twelve
tables does so forcibly condemn; for the one is a cousening slight, the other
is a false lie.

Of another box to convert wheat into flower with words, etc.
THere is another box usual among Jugglers, with a bottom in the middle
thereof, made for the like purposes. One other also like a tun, wherein is
showed great variety of stuff, as well of liquors as spices, and all by means
of another little tun within the same, wherein and whereon liquor and spices
are showed. But this would ask too long a time of description.

Of diverse petty juggling knacks.
These are such sleights that even a bungler may do them; and yet pretty, etc.
THere are many other beggarly feats able to beguile the simple, as to make an
oat stir by spetting thereon, as though it came to pass by words. Item to
deliver meal, pepper, ginger, or any powder out of the mouth after the eating
of bread, etc. which is done by retaining any of those things stuffed in a
little paper or bladder conveyed into your mouth, and grinding the same with
your teeth. Item, a rish through a piece of a trencher, having three holes, and
at the one side the rish appearing out in the second, at the other side in the
third hole, by reason of a hollow place made betwixt them both, so as the
slight consists in turning the piece of trencher.

CHAP. XXXII.
To burn a thread, and to make it whole again with the ashes thereof.

IT is not one of the worst feats to burn a thread handsomely, Mark the manner of
this conceit and devise.
and to make it whole again; the order whereof is this. Take two threads, or
small laces, of one foot in length a piece: roll up one of them round, which
will be then of the quantity of a pease, bestow the same between your left
forefinger and your thumb. Then take the other thread, and hold it forth at
length, That is, neatly and daintily.
betwixt the forefinger and thumb of each hand, holding all your fingers
daintilie, as young gentlewomen are taught to take up a morsel of meat. Then
let one cut asunder the same thread in the middle. When that is done, put the
tops of your two thumbs together, and so shall you with less suspicion receive
the piece of thread which you hold in your right hand into your left, without
opening of your left finger and thumb; then holding these two pieces as you did
the same before it was cut, let those two be cut also a sunder in the midst,
and they conveyed again as before, until they be cut very short, and then
roll all those ends together, and keep that ball of small threads before the
other in your last hand, and with a knife thrust out the same into a candle,
where you may hold it until the said ball of short threads be burn^ to ashes.
Then pull back the knife with your right hand, and leave the ashes with the
other ball betwixt the forefinger and thumb of your left hand, and with the
two thumbs and two fore-fingers together seem to take pains to frot and rub the
ashes, until your thread be renewed, A thread cut in many pieces and burned to
ashes made whole again.
and draw out that thread at length which you kept all this while betwixt your
left finger and thumb. This is not inferior to any jugglers feat if it be well
handled, for if you have legierdemain to bestow the same ball of thread, and to
change it from place to place betwixt your other fingers (as may easily be
done) then will it seem very strange.

To cut a lace asunder in the midst, and to make it whole again.
BY a devise not much unlike to this, you may seem to cut asunder any lace that
hangs about ones neck, or any point, girdle, or garter, etc. and with
witchcraft or conjuration to make it whole and closed together again. The means
discovered.
For the accomplishment whereof, provide (if you can) a piece of the lace, etc.
which you mean to cut, or at the least a pattern like the same, one inch and a
half long, (and keeping it double privily in your left hand, betwixt some of
your fingers near to the tips thereof) take the other lace which you mean to
cut, still hanging about ones neck, and draw down your said left hand to the
bought thereof; and putting your own piece a little before the other (the end
or rather middle whereof you mus^ hide betwixt your ore-finger and thumb)
making the eye or bought, which shall be seen, of your own pattern, let some
stander by cut the same asunder, and it will be surely thought that the other
lace is cut; which with words and frotting, etc. you shall seem to renew and
make whole again, This, if it be well handled, will seem miraculous.

How to pull laces innumerable out of your mouth, of what color or length you
list, and never any thing seen to be therein.
A common juggling knack of Hat cousenage played among the simple, etc.
AS for pulling laces out of the mouth, it is somewhat a stale jest, whereby
jugglers gain money among maids, selling lace by the yard, putting into their
mouths one round bottom as fast as they pull out another, and at the just end
of every yard they tie a knot, so as the same rests upon their teeth: then
cut they off the same, and so the beholders are double and treble deceived,
seeing as much lace as will be contained in a hat, and the same of what color
you list to name, to be drawn by so even yards out of his mouth, and yet the
juggler to talk as though there were nothing at all in his mouth.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How to make a book, wherein you shall show every leaf therein to be white,
black, blew, red, yellow, green, etc.

THere are a thousand jugglings, which I am loath to spend time to describe,
whereof some be common, and some rare, and yet nothing else but deceit,
Juggling a kind of witchcraft.

The invention of Claruis.


cousenage, or confederacy* whereby you may plainly see the art to be a kind
of witchcraft. I will end therefore with one devise, which is not common, but
was specially used by Claruis, whom though I never saw to exercise the feat,
yet am I sure I conceive aright of that invention. He had (they say) a book,
whereof he would make you think first, that every leaf was clean white paper:
then by virtue of words he would show you every leaf to be painted with birds,
then with beasts, then with serpents, then with angels, etc. the devise thereof
is this. This knack is sooner learned by demonstrative means, than taught by
words of instruction.
Make a book seven inches long, and five inches broad, or according to that
proportion; and let there be 49 leaves; to wit, seven times seven contained
therein, so as you may cut upon the edge of each leaf six notches, each notch
in de^^ half a quarter of an inch, and one inch distant. Paint every fourteenth
and fifteenth page (which is the end of every sixth leaf, and the beginning of
every seventh) with like color or one kind of picture. Cut off with a pair of
sheers every notch of the first leaf, leaving only one inch of paper in the
uppermost place uncut, which will remain almost half a quarter of an inch
higher than any part of that leaf. Leave another like inch in the second place
of the second leaf, clipping away one inch of paper in the highest place
immediately above it, and all the notches below the same and so orderly to the
third, fourth, etc. so as there shall rest upon each leaf one only inch of
paper above the rest. One high uncut inch of paper (...) answer to the first,
directly, in every seventh leaf of the book; so ^^ when you have cut the first
seven leaves, in such sort as I first described you are to begin in the self
same order at the eight leaf, descending in such wise in the cutting of seven
other leaves, and so again at the fifteenth, to 21, etc. until you have passed
through every leaf, all the thickness of your book.

Now you shall understand, that after the first seven leaves, every seventh
leaf in the book is to be painted, saving one seven leaves, which must remain
white. Howbeit, you must observe, that at each Bumleaf or high inch of paper,
seven leaves distant, opposite one directly and lineally against the other,
through the thickness of the book, the same page with the page precedent so to
be painted with the like color or picture, and so must you pass through the
book with seven several sorts of colors or pictures; so as, This will seem
rare to the beholders.
when you shall rest your thumb upon any of those Bumleaves, or high inches,
and open the book, you shall see in each page one color or picture throughout
the book; in another row, another color, etc. To make that matter more plain
unto you, let this be the description hereof. Hold the book with your left
hand, and (betwixt your forefinger and thumb of your right hand) slip over the
book in what place you list, and your thumb will always rest at the seventh
leaf; to wit, at the bumleaf or high inch of paper from whence when your book
is strained, it will fall or slip to the next, etc. Which when you hold fast,
and open the book, the beholders seeing each leaf to have one color or picture
with so many varieties, all passing continually and directly through the whole
book, will suppose that with words you can discolor the leaves at your
pleasure. But because perhaps you will hardly conceive hereof by this
description, you shall (if you be disposed) see or buy for a small value the
like book, at the shop of W. Brom in Paul's churchyard, for your further
instruction. Where such books may be gotten.
There are certain feats of activity, which beautify this art exceedingly:
howbeit even in these, some are true, and some are counterfeit; to wit, some
done by practice, and some by confederacy. Where such books may be gotten.
There are likewise diverse feats, arithmeticall and geometrical: for them read
Gemma Phrysius, and Record, etc. which being exercised by jugglers, add credit
to their Art. Where such books may be gotten.
There are also (besides them which I have set down in this title of Hartumim)
sundry strange experiments reported by Pliny, Albert, Ioh. Bap. Port. Neap. and
Thomas Lupton, whereof some are true, and some false, which being known to
James and Iambres, or else to our jugglers, their occupation is the more
magnified, and they thereby more reverenced. See more hereof in the II. book of
this discovery, in the title Nahas, cap. 10.
Here is place to discover the particular knaveries of casting of lots, and
drawing of cuts (as they term it) whereby many cousenages are wrought: so as I
dare not teach the sundry devises thereof, left the ungodly make a practice of
it in the commonwealth, where many things are decided by those means, which
being honestly meant may be lawfully used. But I have said already somewhat
hereof in general, and therefore also the rather have suppressed the
particularities, which (in truth) are mere juggling knacks: whereof I could
discover a great number.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Desperate or dangerous juggling knacks, wherein the simple are made to think,
that a silly juggler with words can hurt and help, kill and revive any creature
at his pleasure: and first to kill any kind of pullen, and to give it life
again.

TAke a hen, a chick, or a capon, and thrust a nail or a fine sharp pointed
knife through the midst of the head thereof, the edge toward the bill, so as
it may seem impossible for her to escape death: then use words, and pulling out
the knife, lay oats before her, etc. and she will ea^ and live, The natural
cause why a hen thrust thorough the head with a bodkin does live
notwithstanding.
being nothing at all grieved or hurt with the wound; because the brain lies
so far behind in the head as it is not touched, though you thrust your knife
between the comb and it; and after you have done this, you may convert your
speech and actions to the grievous wounding and present recovering of your own
self.

To eat a knife, and to fetch it out of any other place.
TAke a knife, and contain the same within your two hands, so as no part be
seen there of but a little of the point, which you must so bite at the first,
as noise may be made therewith. Then seem to put a great part thereof into your
mouth, and letting your hand slip down, there will appear to have been more in
your mouth then is possible to be contained therein. Then send for drink, or
use some other delay, until you have let the said knife slip into your lap, It
must be cleanly conveyed in any case.
holding both your fists close together as before, and then raise them so from
the edge of the table where you sit (for from thence the knife may most privily
slip down into your lap) and instead of biting the knife, knable a little upon
your nail, and the^ seem to thrust the knife into your mouth, opening the hand
next unto ^, and thrust up the other, so as it may appear to the standers by,
that you have delivered your hands thereof, and thrust it into your mouth; the^
call for drink, after countenance made of pricking and danger, etc. Lastly, put
your hand into your lap, and taking that knife in your hand, you may seem to
bring it out from behind you, or from whence you list. * But if you have
another like knife and confederate, you may do twenty notable wonders hereby;
as to send a stander by into some garden or orchard, describing to him some
tree or herb, under which it sticked or else some strangers sheath or pocket,
etc.

To thrust a Bodkin into your head without hurt.
The manner and means of this action.
TAke a bodkin so made, as the have being hollow, the blade thereof may slip
thereinto as soon as you hold the point upward; and let the same to your
forehead, and seem to thrust it into your head, and so (with a lime sponge in
your hand) you may bring out blood or wine, making the beholders think the
blood or the wine (whereof you may say you have drunk very much) runs out of
your forehead. Then, after countenance of pain and grief, pull away your hand
suddenly, holding the point downward; and it will fall so out, as it will seem
never to have been thrust into the have; but immediately thrust that bodkin
into your lap or pocket, and pull out another plain bodkin like the the same,
saving in that conceit.

To thrust a Bodkin through your tongue, and a knife through your arm; a
pitiful sight, without hurt or danger.
MAke a bodkin, the blade thereof being sundred in the middle, so as the one
part be not near to the other almost by 3. quarters of an inch, each part being
kept asunder with one small bought or crooked piece of iron, of the fashion
described hereafter in place convenient. Then thrust your tongue betwixt the
foresaid space; to wit, into the bought left in the bodkin blade, thrusting the
said bought behind your teeth, and biting the same: and then shall it seem to
stick so fast in and through your tongue, that one can hardly pull it out. A
form or pattern of this bodkin and knife you shall see described if you turn
over a few l^aves forward.
Also the very like may be done with a knife so made, and put upon your arm:
and the wound will appear the more terrible, if a little blood be powered
thereupon.

To thrust a piece of lead into one eye, and to drive it about (with a flick)
between the skin and flesh of the forehead, until it be brought to the other
eye, and there thrust out.
PUt a piece of lead into one of the nether lids of your eye, as big as a tag
of a point, but not so long (which you may do without danger) and with a little
juggling stick (one end thereof being hollow) seem to thrust the like piece of
lead under the other eye lid; but convey the same indeed into the hollownesse
of the stick, the stopple or peg thereof may be privily kept in your hand
until this fe^t be done. Then seem to drive the said piece of lead, with the
hollow end of the said stick, from the same eye: and so with the end of the
said stick, being brought along upon your forehead to the other eye, you may
thrust out the piece of lead, which before you had put thereinto; to the
admiration of the beholders. * Some eat the lead, and then shove it out of the
eye: and some put it into both, but the first is best.

To cut half your nose asunder, and to heal it again presently without any
salve.
TAke a knife having a round hollow gap in the middle, This is easily done,
howbeit being cleanly handled it will deceive the sight of the beholders.
and lay it upon your nose, and so shall you seem to have cut your nose half
asunder. Provided always, that in all these you have another like knife
without a gap, to be showed upon the pulling out of the same, and words of
enchantment to speak, blood also to bewray the wound, and nimble conveyance.

To put a ring through your cheek.
THere is another old knack, which seems dangerous to the cheek. For the
accomplishing whereof you must have two rings, of like color and quantity: the
one filed asunder, so as you may thrust it upon your cheek; the other must be
whole and conveyed upon a stick, holding your hand thereupon in the middle of
the stick, delivering each end of the same stick to be holden fast by a stander
by. Then conveying the same cleanly into your hand, or (for lack of good
conveyance) into your lap or pocket, pull away your hand from the stick: and in
pulling it away, whirle about the ring, and so will it be thought that you have
put thereon the ring which was in your check.

To cut off ones head, and to lay it in a platter, etc. which the jugglers call
the decollation of John Baptist.
This was done by one Kingsfield of London, at a Bartholomewtide, An. 1582. in
the sight of diverse that came to view this spectacle.
TO show a most notable execution by this art, you must cause a board, a cloth,
and a platter to be purposely made, and in each of them holes fit for-a bodies
neck. The board must be made of two planks, the longer and broader the better:
there must be left within half a yard of the end of each plank half a hole; so
as both the planks being thrust together, there may remain two holes, like to
the holes in a pair of stocks; there must be made likewise a hole in the
tablecloth or carpet. A platter also must be set directly over or upon one of
them, having a hole in the middle thereof, of the like quantity, and also a
piece cut out of the same, so big as his neck, through which his head may be
conveyed into the midst of the platter; and then sitting or kneeling under the
board, let the head only remain upon the board in the same. Then to make the
sight more dreadful) put a little brimstone into a chasing dish of coals,
setting is before the head of the boie, who must gasp two or three times, so
as the smoke enter a little into his nosthrils and mouth (which is not
unwholesome) and the head presently will appear stark dead; if the boie set his
countenance accordingly; and if a little blood be sprinkled on his face, the
sight will be the stranger.

This is commonly practiced with a boie instructed for that purpose, who being
familiar and conversant with the company, may be known as well by his face, as
by his apparel. In the other end of the table, where the like hole is made,
another boie of the bigness of the known boie must be placed, having upon him
his usual apparel; he must lean or lie upon the board, and must put his head
under the board through the said hole, so as his body shall seem to lie on the
one end of the board, and his head shall lie in a platter on the other end.
Necessary observations to astonish the beholders.
There are other things which might be performed in this action, the more to
astonish the beholders, which because they offer long descriptions, I omit; as
to put about his neck a little dough kneaded with bullocks blood, which being
cold will appear like dead flesh; and being pricked with a sharp round hollow
quill, will bleed, and seem very strange, etc. Necessary observations to
astonish the beholders.
Many rules are to be observed herein, as to have the table cloth so long and
wide as it may almost touch the ground. Necessary observations to astonish the
beholders.
Not to suffer the company to stay too long in the place, etc.

To thrust a dagger or bodkin into your guts very strangely, and to recover
immediately.
ANother miracle may be showed touching counterfeit executions; namele, that
with a bodkin or a dagger you shall seem to kill your self, or at the least
make an unrecoverable wound in your belly: as (in truth) not long since a
juggler caused himself to be killed at a tavern in Cheapside, from whence he
presently went into Paul's churchyard and dyed. Of a juggler that failing in the
feats of his art lost his life.
Which misfortune fell upon him through his own folly, as being then drunken,
and having forgotten his plate, which he should have had for his defense. The
devise is this. Of a juggler that failing in the feats of his art lost his life.
You must prepare a paste board, to be made according to the fashion of your
belly and breast: the same must by a painter be colored cunningly, not only
like to your flesh, but with paps, navill, hair, etc. so as the same (being
handsomely trussed unto you) may show to be your natural belly. Then next to
your true belly you may put a linen cloth, and thereupon a double plate (which
the juggler that killed himself forgot, or wilfully omitted) over and upon the
which you may place the false belly. Provided always, that betwixt the plate
and the false belly you place a gut or bladder of blood, which blood must be of
a calf or of a sheep; but in no wise of an ox or a cow, for that will be too
thick. But herein see you be circumspect.
Then thrust, or cause to be thrust into your breast a round bodkin, or the
point of a dagger, so far as it may pearse through your gut or bladder: which
being pulled ou again, the said blood will spin or spirt out a good distance
from you, especially if you strain your body to swell, and thrust therewith
against the plate. You must ever remember to use (with words, countenance and
gesture) such a grace; as may give a grace to the action, and move admiration
in the beholders.

To draw a cord through your nose, mouth or hand, so sensible as is wonderful
to see.
THere is another juggling knack, A form or pattern of this bridle you shall see
described if you turn over a few leaves.
which they call the bridle, being made of two elder sticks, through the
hollownesse thereof is placed a cord, the same being put on the nose like a
pair of tongs or pinsers; and the cord, which goes round about the same, being
drawn to and fro, the beholders will think the cord to go through your nose
very dangerously. The knots at the end of the cord, which do stay the same
from being drawn out of the stick, may not be put out at the very top (for
that must be stopped up) but half an inch beneath each end: and so I say, when
it is pulled, it will seem to pass through the nose; and then may you take a
knife, and seem to cut the cord asunder, and pull the bridle from your nose.

The conclusion, wherein the reader is referred to certain patterns of
instruments wherewith diverse feats here specified are to be executed.
Herein I might wade infinitely, but I hope it suffices, that I have delivered
unto you the principles, and also the principal feats belonging to this art of
juggling, so as any man conceiving thoroughly hereof may not only do all these
things, but also may devise other as strange, and vary every of these devises
into other forms as he can best conceive. And so long as the power of almighty
God is not transposed to the juggler, nor offense ministered by his uncomely
speech and behavior, but the action performed in pastime, to the delight of
the beholders, so as always the juggler confess in the end that these are no
supernatural actions, but devices of men, and nimble conveyances, let all such
curious conceited, men as cannot afford their neighbors any comfort or
commodity, but such as pleases their melancholic dispositions say what they
list, for this will not only be found among indifferent actions, but such as
greatly advance the power and glory of God, discovering their pride and
falsehood that (...) upon them to work miracles, and to be the mighty power of
God, as Iannes and Iambres and also Simon Magnus did. Among what actions
jaggling is to be counted.

A matchless fellow for legierdemain.




If any man doubt of these things, as whether they be not as strange to behold
as I have reported, or think with Bodin that these matters are performed by
familiars or devils; let him go into S. Martins, and inquire for one John
Cautares ( a French man by birth, in conversation an honest man) and he will
show as much and as strange actions as these, who gets not his living
hereby, but labors for the same with the sweat of his brows, and
nevertheless has the best hand and conveyance (I think) of any man that
lives this day.

Neither do I speak (as they say) without book herein. For if time, place, and
occasion serve, I can show so much herein, that I am sure Bodin, Spinaeus, and
Vairus, would swear I were a witch, and had a familiar devil at commandment.
But truly my study and travel herein has only been employed to the end I
might prove them fools, and find out the fraud of them that make them fools,
as whereby they may become wiser, and God may have that which to him belongs.

Touching the patterns of diverse juggling instruments.
And because the manner of these juggling conveyances are not easily conceived
by discourse of words; I have caused to be set down diverse forms of
instruments used in this art; which may serve for patterns to them that would
thoroughly see the secrets thereof, and make them for their own private
practices, to try the event of such devices, as in this tr^ct of legierdemain
are showed. Where note, that you shall find every instrument that is most
necessarily occupied in the working of these strange feats, to bear the just
and true number of the page, where the use thereof is in ample words declared.

Now will I proceed with another cousening point of witchcraft, apt for the
place, necessary for the time, and in mine opinion meet to be discovered, or at
the least to be defaced among deceitful arts. And because many are abused
hereby to their utter undoing, for that it has had passage under the
protection of learning, whereby they pretend to accomplish their works, it has
gone freely without general controlment through all ages, nations, and people.

Here follow patterns of certain instruments to be used in the former juggling
knacks. To pull three beadstones from off a cord, while you hold fast the ends
thereof, without removing of your hand.
To draw a cord through your nose, mouth or hand which is called the bridle.
TO be instructed in the right use of the said beadstones, read page 237. and
238. As for the bridle, read page 247.

Place this after 248. fol.

To thrust a Bodkin into your head, and through your tongue, etc. The
hithermost is the bodkin with the bowt, the middlemost is the bodkin with the
hollow bast; the furthermost is the plain bodkin serving for show.
TO be instructed and taught in the right use and ready practice of these
bodkins, read page 244.245.

To thrust a knife through your arm, and to cut half your nose asunder, etc.
The middlemost knife is to serve for show; the other two be the knives of
device.
TO be ready in the use and perfect in the practice of these knives here
portraied, see page 245.246.

To cut off ones head, and to lay it in a platter, which the jugglers call the
decollation of John Baptist. The form of the planks, etc.
The order of the action, as it is to beshewed.
WHat order is to be observed for the practicing hereof with great admiration,
read page 246.247.

The xiiii. Book.
Of the Art of Alchimistry, of their words of Art and devices to blear men's
eyes, and to procure credit to their profession.

CHAP. I.
HEre I thought it not impertinent to say somewhat of the Art or rather the
craft of Alchimistry, Alchymistry a craft, not an art.
otherwise called Multiplication; which Chaucer, of all other men, most lively
deciphereth. In the bowels hereof does both witchcraft and conjuration lie
hidden, as whereby some cosen others, and some are cousened themselves. For by
this mystery (as it is said in the Chanons man's prologue) They take upon them
to turn upside down, G. Chaucer in the Chanons man's prolog.

All the earth between Southwark and Canterbury town,
And to pav^e it all of silver and gold, etc.
But ever they lack of their conclusion,
And to much folk they do illusion.
For their stuff slides away so fast,
That it makes them beggars at the last,
And by this craft they do never win,
But make their purse empty, and their wits thin.


And because the practisers hereof would be thought wise, learned, ^^ing, and
their crafts masters, they have devised words of art, sen^ces and epithers
obscure, and confections so innumerable (which are (...) compounded of strange
and rare simples) as confound the capacity of them that are either set on work
herein, or be brought to behold (...) expect their conclusions. For what plain
man would not believe, that they are learned and jolly fellows, that have in
such readiness (...) many mystical terms of art: The terms of the art
alchymisticall devised of purpose to bring credit to cousenage.
as (for a taste) their subliming, amal^^ming, englutting, imbibing,
incorporating, cementing, retrination, terminations, mollifications, and
indurations of bodies, matters (...) and coagulat, ingots, tests, etc. Or who
is able to conceive (by ^eason of the abrupt confusion, contrariety, and
multitudes of drugs, ^^mples, and confections) the operation and mystery of
their stuff and ^orkmanship. For these things and many more, are of necessity
to (...) prepared and used in the execution of this endeavor; namely orpi^ent,
sublimed Mercury, iron squames, Mercury crude, groundly large, (...) armoniack,
verdegrece, borace, holes, gall, arsenick, sal armoniack, brimstone, salt,
paper, burnt bones, un^^aked lime, clay, saltpeter, (...) trial, saltartre,
alcalie, sal preparat, clay made with horse dung (...) hair, oil of tartre,
alum; glass, woort, yest, argoll, resagor, gleir o^ an eye, powders, ashes,
dung, piss, etc. Then have they waters consive and lincall, waters of
albification, and water, rubifying, etc. Also oiles, ablusion, and metals
fusible. Also their lamps, their urinals (...) censories, sublimatories,
alembecks, viols, croslets, cucurbin, still^^tories, and their furnace of
calcination: also their soft and subtle (...) some of wood, some of coal,
composed specially of beech, etc. And because they will not seem to want any
point of cousenage to astonish the simple, or to move admiration to their
enterprises, they have (^ they affirm) four spirits to work withal, whereof
the first is orpimen; the second, quicksilver; the third, sal armoniack; the
fourth, brimstone. Then have they seven celestial bodies; namely, Sol, Luna,
Mars, Mercury, Saturn, Jupiter, and Venus; to whom they apply seven
terrestrial bodies; to wit, gold, silver, iron, quicksilver, lead, tinno, and
copper attributing unto these the operation of the other; specially if the
terrestrial bodies be qualified, tempered, and wrought in the house (...) day
according to the feats of the celestial bodies: with more life unity.

CHAP. II.
The Alchymisters drift, the Chanons yeomans tale, of Alchymicall stones and
waters.

NOw you must understand that the end and drift of all their work, to attain
unto the composition of the philosophers stone, called (...) and to the stone
called Titanus; and to Magnatia, which is a (...) made of the four elements,
which (they say) the philosophers (...) sworn neither to discover, nor to
write of. And by these they m^^ quicksilver, and make it malleable, and to hold
touch: hereby also to convert any other, metal (but specially copper) into
gold. This ^ ence (forsooth) is the secret of secrets; even as Solomon's conjure
is said among the conjurors to be so likewise, And thus, when the chance to
meet with young men, or simple people, they boast (...) brag, and say with
Simon Magus, that they can work miracles, (...) bring mighty things to pass.
Acts 8.
In which respect Chaucer truly hereof (...) G* Chaucer in the Chanons man's
tale.
Each man is as wise as Solomon,
When they are together everichone:
But he that seems wisest, is most fool in preef,
And he that is truest, is a very cheef.
They seem friendly to them that know naught,
But they are fiendly both in word and thought,
Yet many men ride and seek their acquaintance,
Not knowing of their false governance.


He also says, and experience verifieth his assertion, that they look ill
favoaredly, and are always beggarly attired: his words are these: These
fellows look ill favouredly, Idem. ibid.

And are always tired beggarly,
So as by smelling and thread bare array.
These folk are known and discerned always.
But so long as they have a street to wrap them in by night,
Or a rag to hang about them in the day light,
They will it spend in this craft,
They cannot stint till nothing be laft.
Here one may learn if he have ought,
To multiply and bring his good to naught.
But if a man ask them privily,
Why they are clothed so unthriftily,
They will round him in the ear and say.
If they espied were, men would them slay,
And all because of this noble science:
Lo thus these folk betraien innocence.


The tale of the chanons yeoman published by Chaucer, The points or parts of
the art Alchymisticall which may be called the mystic or smoky science.
does make (by way of example) a perfect demonstration of the art of
Alchymistry or multiplication the effect whereof is this. A chanon being an
Alchymister or cousener, espied a covetous priest, whose purse he knew to be
well lined, whom he assaulted with flattery and subtle speech, two principal
points belonging to this art. At the length he borrowed money of the priest,
which is the third part of the Art, without which the professors can do no
good, nor endure in good estate. Then he at his day repayed the money, which is
the most difficult point in this art, and a rare experiment. Finally, to
requite the priests courtesy, he promised into him such instructions, as
whereby with expedition he should become infinitely rich, and all through this
art of multiplication. And this is the most common point in this science; for
herein they must be skillful before they can be famous, or attain to any
credit. The priest disliked not his proffer; specially because it tended to his
profit, and embraced his courtesy. Then the chanon willed him forthwith to
send for three ounces of quicksilver, which he said he would transubstantiate
(by his art) into perfect silver. The priest thought that a man of his
profession could not dissemble, and therefore with great joy and hope
accomplished his request.

And now (forsoeth) goes this jolly Alchymist about his business and work of
multiplication, and causes the priest to make a fire of coals, in the bottom
whereof he places a croslet; and pretending only to help the priest to lay the
coals handsomely, he foisteth into the middle ward of lane of coals, a beechen
coal, within the which was conveyed an ingot of perfect silver; The Alchymists
bait to catch a fool.
which (when the coal was consumed) slipped down into the croslet, that was (I
say) directly under it. The priest perceived not the fraud, but received the
ingot of silver, and was not a little joyful to see such certain success
proceed from his own handy (...) wherein could be no fraud (as he surely
conceived) and therefore ^oy willingly gave the chanon forty pounds for the
receipt of this experiment, who for that sum of money taught him a lesson in
Alchymistry, but he never returned to hear repetitions, or to see how he
profited.

CHAP. III.
Of a yeoman of the country cousened by an Alchymist.

I Could cite many Alchymisticall cousenages wrought by Doctor ^^^cot, Feats,
and such other; but I will pass them over, and only repeat three experiments
of that art; the one practiced upon an honest yeoman in the country of Kent,
the other upon a mighty prince, the child upon a covetous priest. And first
touching the yeoman, he was o^^^aken and used in manner and form following, by
a notable cousening varlet, who professed Alchymistry, juggling, witchcraft,
and conjuration: and by means of his companions and confederates discussed the
simplicity and ability of the said yeoman, and found out his estate and humor
to be convenient in this purpose; and finally came a wooing (as they say) to
his daughter, to whom he made love cunningly in words, though his purpose
tended to another matter. And among other illusions and tales concerning his
own commendation, for wealth, parents inheritance, alliance, activity,
learning, pregnancy, and cunning, he boasted of his knowledge and experience in
Alchymistry, making the simple man believe that he could multiply, and of one
angel make two or three. Which seemed strange to the poor man, insomuch as he
because willing enough to see that conclusion: whereby the Alchymister had more
hope and comfort to attain his desire, than if his daughter had yielded to have
married him. Note the cousening conveyance of this alchymisticall practitioner.
To be short, he in the presence of the said yeoman, did include within a
little ball of virgin wax, a couple of angels; and after certain ceremonies
and conjuring words he seemed to deliver the same unto him: but in truth
(through legierdemain) he conveyed into the yeomans hand another ball of the
same scantling, wherein were enclosed many more angels than were in the ball
which he thought he had received. Now (forsooth) the Alchymister ^ad him lay up
the same ball of wax, and also use certain ceremonies (which I thought good
here to omit.) And after certain days, hours, and minutes, they returned
together, according to the appointment, and found great gains by the
multiplication of the angels. Insomuch as he, being a plain man, was hereby
persuaded, that he should not only have a rare and notable good son in law;
but a companion that might help to add unto his wealth much treasure, and to
his estate great fortune and felicity. And to increase this opinion in him, as
also to win his further favor; but especially to bring his cunnnig
Alchymistry, or rather his lewd purpose to pass; he told him that it were
folly to multiply a pound of gold, when as easily they might multiply a
million: and therefore counseled him to produce all the money he had, or could
borrow of his neighbors and friends; and did put him out of doubt, that he
would multiply the same, and redouble it exceedingly, even as he saw by
experience how he dealt with the small sum before his face. A notable fool.
This yeoman in hope, of gains and preferment, etc. consented to this sweet
motion; and brought out and laid before his feet, not the one half of his
goods, but all that he had, or could make or borrow any manner of way. Then
this juggling Alchymister, having obtained his purpose, folded the same in a
ball, in quantity far bigger then the other, and conveying the same into his
bosom or pocket, delivered another ball (as before) of the like quantity unto
the yeoman, to be reserved and safely kept in his chest; whereof (because the
matter was of importance) either of them must have a key, and a several lock,
that no interruption might be made to the ceremony, nor abuse by either of
them; A cousening devise by running away to save the credit of the art.
in defranding each other. Now (forsooth) these circumstances and ceremonies
being ended, and the Alchymisters purpose thereby performed; he told the yeoman
that (until a certain day and hour limited to return) either of them might
employ themselves about their business and necessary affairs; the yeoman to
the plough, and he to the city of London, and in the mean time the gold should
multiply, etc. But the Alchymister (belike) having other matters of more
importance came not just at the hour appointed, nor yet at the day, nor within
the year: so as, although it were somewhat against the yeomans conscience to
violate his promise, or break the league; yet partly by the longing he had to
see, and partly the desire he had to enjoy the fruit of that excellent
experiment, having (for his own security) and the others satisfaction, some
testimony at the opening thereof, to witness his sincere dealing, he brake up
the coffer, and lo he soon espied the ball of wax, which he himself had laid
up there with his own hand. So as he thought (if the hardest should fall) he
should find his principal: and why not as good increase hereof now, as of the
other before? But alas! when the wax was broken, and the metal discovered,
the gold was much based, and became perfect lead.

Now who so list to utter his folly, G. Chaucer in the tale of the Chanons
yeoman.

Let him come forth and learn to multiply;
And every man that has ought in his cofer,
Let him appear, and wax a Philosopher,
In learning of his elvish nice lore,
All is in vain, and pardee much more
Is to learn a lewd man (his sutreltee,)
Fie, speak not thereof it woll not be:
For he that has learning, and he that has none,
Conclude alike in multiplicatione,
CHAP. IV.
A certain King abused by an Alchymist, and of the Kings souls a pretty jest.

A King cousened by Alchymistry.
THe second example is of another Alchymist that came to a certain King,
promising to work by his art many great things, as well in compounding and
transubstantiating of metals, as in executing of other exploites of no less
admiration. But before he began, he found the means to receive by virtue of the
kings warrant, a great sum of money in pressed, assuring the King and his
council, that he would shortly return, and accomplish his promise, etc. Soon
after, the Kings fool among other jests, fell into a discourse and discovery
of fools, and handled that common place so pleasantly, that the King began to
take delight therein, and to like his merry vein. Whereupon he would needs have
the fool deliver unto him a schedull or scroll, containing the names of all
the most excellent fools in the land.

So he caused the Kings name to be first set down, and next him all the names
of his privy council. The King seeing him so saucy and malepert, meant to have
had him punished: but some of his council, knowing him to be a fellow
pleasantly conceipted, besought his Majesty rather to demand of him a reason of
his libell, A wise fool.
etc. than to proceed in extremity against him. Then the fool being asked why
he so sawcily accused the King and his council of principal folly, answered;
Because he saw one foolish knave beguile them all, and to cosen them of so
great a mass of money, and finally to be gone out of their reach. Why (says
one of the council) he may return and perform his promise, etc. Then (quoth
the fool) I can help all the matter easily. How (said the King) can thou do
that? Marry sir (said he) then I will blot out your name and put in his, as the
most fool in the world. Many other practices of the like nature might be
hereunto annexed, for the detection of the knavery and deceipts whereupon this
art depends, whereby the reader may be more delighted in reading, than the
practisers benefited in simply using the same. For it is an art consisting
wholly of subtlety and deceit, whereby the ignorant and plain minded man
through this too much credulity is circumvented, and the humor of the other
slye cousener satisfied.

CHAP. V.
A notable story written by Erasmus of two Alchymists, also of longation and
curtation.

THe third example is reported by Erasmus, whose excellent learning and wit is
^ad to this day in admiration. Eras. in colloq. de art Alchymistica.
He in a certain dialogue entitled Alchymistica does finely bewray the knavery
of this crafty art; wherein he proposes one Balbine, a very wise, learned, and
devout priest, howbeit such a one as was bewitched, and mad upon the art of
Alchymistry. Which thing another cousening priest perceived, and dealt with him
in manner and form following.

M. Doctor Balbine (said he) I being a stranger unto you may seem very saucy to
trouble your worship with my bold suit, who always are busied in great and
divine studies. A flattering and clawing preamble.
To whom Balbine, being a man of few words, gave a nodde: which was more then
he used to every man. But the priest knowing his humor, said; I am sure sir,
if you knew my suit, you would pardon my importunity. I pray thee good sir John
(said Balbine) show my thy mind, and be brief. That shall I do sir (said he)
with a good will, You know M. Doctor, through your skill in Philosophy, that
every man's destiny it not alike; and I for my part am at this point, that I
cannot tell whether I may be counted happy or infortunnate. For when I weigh
mine own case, or rather my state, in part I seem fortunate, and in part
miserable. But Balbine being a man of some surlinesse, always willed him to
draw his matter to a more compendious form: which thing the priest said he
would do, and could the better perform, because Balbine himself was so
learned and expert in the very matter he had to repeat, and thus he began.

I have had, even from my childhood, a great felicity in the art of
Alchymistry, which is the very marrow of all Philosophy. Balbine at the naming
of the word Alchymistry, inclined and yielded himself more attentively to
hearken unto him: marry it was only in gesture of body; for he was spare of
speech, and yet he bad him proceed with his tale. Then said the priest, wretch
that I am, it was not my luck to light on the best way: for you M. Balbine know
(being so universally learned) that in this art there are two ways, the one
called Longation, the other Curtation; and it was miue ill hap to fall upon
Longation. Longation and Curtation in Alchymistry.
When Balbine asked him the difference of those two ways; Oh sir said the
Priest, you might coun^ me impudent to take upon me to tell you, that of all
other are best learned in this art, to whom I come, most humbly to beseech you
to teach me that lucky way of curtation. The cunninger you are, the more easily
you may teach it me: and therefore hide not the gift that God has given you,
from your brother, who may perish for want of his desire in this behalf; and
doubtless Jesus Christ will enrich you with greater blessings and endowments.

Balbine being abashed partly with his importunity, and partly with the strange
circumstance, told him that (in truth) he neither knew what Longation or
Curtation meant; and therefore required him to expound the nature of these
words. Well (quoth the priest) since it is your pleasure, I will do it, though
I shall thereby take upon me to teach him that is indeed much cunninger than my
self. Note how the cousener circumventeth Balbine.
And thus he began: Oh sir, they that have spent all the days of their life in
this divine faculty, do turn one nature and form: into another, two ways,
the one is very brief, but somewhat dangerous; the other much longer, marry
very safe, sure, and commodious. Howbeit, I think my self most unhappy that
have spent my time and travel in that way which utterly misliketh me, and never
could get any one to show me the other that I so earnestly desire. And now I
come to your worship, whom I know to be wholly learned and expert herein,
hoping that you will (for charities sake) comfort your brother, whose felicity
and well doing now rests only in your hands; and therefore I beseech you
relieve me with your counsel.

By these and such other words when this cousening varlot had avoided suspicion
of guile, and assured Balbine that he was perfect and cunning in the other way:
Balbine his fingers itched, and his heart tickled; so as he could hold no
longer, but burst out with these words: Let this Curtation go to the devil,
whose name I did never so much as once hear of before, and therefore do much
less understand it. But tell me in good faith, do you exactly understand
longation? Yea said the priest, doubt you not hereof: but I have no fancy to
that way, it is so tedious. Why (quoth Balbine) what time is required in the
accomplishment of this work by way of longation? Too too much said the
Alchymister, even almost a whole year: but this is the best, the surest and
safest way, Fair words make fools feign, and large offers blind the wise.
though it be for so many months prolonged, before it yield advantange for
cost and charges expended thereabouts. Set your heart at rest (said Balbine) it
is no matter, though it were two years, so as you be well assured to bring it
then to pass.

Finally, it was there and then concluded, that presently the priest should go
in hand with the work, and the other should bear the charge, the gains to be
indifferently divided betwixt them both, and the work to be done privily in
Balbine's house. And after the mutual oath was taken for silence, which is
usual and requisite always in the beginning of this mystery; Balbine
delivered money to the Alchymister for bellows glasses, coals, etc. which
should serve for the erection and furniture of the forge. Which money the
Alchymister had no sooner fingered, but he ran merrily to the dice, to the
alebouse, and to the stews, and who there so lusty as cousening sir John: who
indeed this way made a kind of alchymisticall transformation of money. Now
Balbine urged him to go about his business, but the other told him, that if
the matter were once begun, it were half ended: for therein consisted the
greatest difficulty.

Well, at length he began to furnish the furnace, but now forsoeth ^ new supply
of gold must be made, as the seed and spawn of that which must be engendered and
grow out of this work of Alchymistry. For even as a fish is not caught without
a bait, no more is gold multiplied without some parcels of gold: and therefore
gold must be the foundation and groundwork of that art, or else all the fat is
in the fire. But all this while Balbine was occupied in calculating, and musing
upon his account; casting by arithmetic, how that if one ownce yielded
fifteen, then how much gains two thousand ownces might yield: for so much he
determined to employ that way.

When the Alchymist had also consumed this money, showing great travel a month
or twain, in placing the bellows, the coals, and such other stuff, and no
whit of profit proceeding or coming thereof. Balbine demanded how the world
went, our Alchymist was as a man amazed. Howbeit he said at length; forsooth
even as such matters of importance commonly do go forward, whereunto there is
always very difficult access. There was (says he) a fault (which I have now
found out) in the choice of the coals, which were of oak, and should have
been of beech. One hundredth ducats were spent that way, so as the dicing house
and the stews were partakers of Balbines charges. But after a new supply of
money, better coals were provided, and matters more circumspectly handled.
Howbeit, when the forge had traveled long, and brought forth nothing, Balbine
was bewitched with desire of gold, etc.
there was was another excuse found out; to wit that the glasses were not
tempered as they ought to have been. But the more money was disbursed
hereabouts, the worse willing was Balbine to give over, according to the dicers
vein, whom fruitless hope brings into a fools paradise.

The Alchymist, to cast a good color upon his knavery, took on like a man
moonsick, and protested with great words full of forgery and lies, that he
never had such luck before. But having found the error, he would be sure
enough never hereafter to fall into the like oversight, and that hence forward
all should be safe and sure, and thoroughly recompensed in the end, with large
increase. Hereupon the workhouse is now the third time repaired, and a new
supply yet once again put into the Alchymists hand; so as the glasses were
changed. And now at length the Alchymist uttered annother point of his art and
cunning to Balbine; Notable ^ousenage.
to wit, that those matters would proceed much better, if he sent our Lady a
few french crowns in reward; for the art being holy, the matter cannot
prosperously proceed, without the favor of the saints. Which counsel
exceedingly pleased Balbine, who was so devout and religious, that no ^ay
escaped him but he said our Lady mattens.

Now our Alchymister having received the offering of money, The Alchymister
brings Balbine into a fools paradise.
goes on his holy pilgrimage, even to the next village, and there consumes it
very penny, among bawds and knawes: and at his return, he told Balbine that he
had great hope of good luck in his business; the holy virgin have such
favorable countenance, and such attentive ear unto his prayers and vows. But
after this, when there had been great travel bestowed, and not a dram of gold
yielded nor levied from the forge; Balbine began to expostulate, and reason
somewhat roundly with the cousening fellow; who still said he never had such
filthy luck in all his life before, and could not devise by what means it came
to pass, that things sent so overthwartly. But after much debating betwixt
them upon the matter, at length it came into Balbine's head to ask him if he
had not ^reslowed to hear mass, or to say his hours: which if he had done,
nothing could prosper under his hand. Without doubt (said the cousener) you
have hit the nail of the head. Wretch that I am! I remember once or twice being
at a long feast, I omitted to say mine Ave Mary after dinner. So so (said
Balbine) no marvel then that a matter of such importance has had so ill
success. The Alchymister promised to do penance; to hear twelve masses for two
that he had foreslowed; and for every (...) overslipped, to render and repeat
twelve to our Lady.

Soon after this, when all our Alchymisters money was spent, and also his
shifts failed how to come by any more, he came home with this advice, as a man
wonderfully fraied and amazed, piteously crying and lamenting his misfortune.
Here the Alchymister utters notorious point of cousening knavery.
Whereat Balbine being astonished, desired to know the cause of his complaint.
Oh (said the Alchymister) the coutiers have spied our enterprise; so as I for
my part look for nothing ^^ present imprisonment. Whereat Balbine was abashed,
because it was ^^ felony to go about that matter, without special license.
But (quoth the Alchymister) I fear not to be put to death, I would it would
fall our ^^ marry I fear lest I should be shut up in some castle or tower, and
then shall be forced to tug about this work and broile in this business all
the days of my life.

Now the matter-being brought to consultation, Balbine, because ^^ was cunning
in the art of Rhetoric, and not altogether ignorant in la^ beat his brains in
devising how the accusation might be answered, and the danger avoided. Alas
(said the Alchymister) you trouble your s^^ all in vain, for you see the crime
is not to be denied, it is so general bruited in court: neither can the fact be
defended, because of the manifest law published against it. To be short, when
many ways were der^^ and diverse excuses alleged by Balbine, and no sure
ground to (...) on for their security; at length the Alchymister having present
want (...) need of money, Mark how this Alchymister goes from one degree of
cousenage to another.
framed his speech in this sort; Sir, said he to Balbine, use slow counsel,
and yet the matter requires have. For I think they are coming for me yet this
time to hale me away to prison; and I (...) no remedy: but to die valiantly in
the cause. In good faith (said Balbine) I know not what to say to the matter.
No more do I, said the Alchymister, but that I see these courtiers are hungry
for money, and so (...) the readier to be corrupted and framed to silence. And
though it be a (...) matter to give those rakehels till they be satisfied, yet
I see no better (...) sell or advice at this time. No more could Balbine, who
gave him that ducats of gold to stop their mouths, who in an honest cause
would ^^ther have given so many teeth out of his head, then one of those point
out of his pouch. This coin had the Alchymister, who for all his pretenses and
gay gloses was in no danger, other than for lack of money ^ leese his leman or
concubine, whose acquaintance he would not gi^ver, nor forbear her company, for
all the goods that he was able to ^^ were it by never so much indirect dealing
and unlawful means.

Well, yet now once again does Balbine newly furnish the forge, a (...) being
made before to our Lady to bless the enterprise, and all these being provided
and made ready according to the Alchymisters own (...) king, and all
necessaries largely ministered after his own liking; a wh^^ year being likewise
now consumed about this bootlesse business, and anything brought to pass;
there fell out a strange chance, and that by the means ensuing, as you shall
hear.

Our Alchimister forsooth used a little extraordinary lewd compared with a
courtiers wife, while he was from home, who suspecting (...) matter, came to
the door unlooked for, and called to come in, threatened them that he would
break open the doors upon them: Some present advice (you see) was now
requisite, and there was none other to be (...) such as the opportunity
offered; to wit, to leap out at a back window; which he did, The mildest and
softest nature is commonly soonest abused.
not without great hazard, and some hurt. But this was soon blazed abroad, so
as it came to Balbines ear, who showed in countenance that he had heard hereof,
though he said nothing. But the Alchymister knew him to be devout, and somewhat
superstitious; and such men are easy to be entreated to forgive, how great
soever the fault be, and devised to open the matter in manner and form
following.

O Lord (says he before Balbine) how infortunately goes our business
forward! I marvel what should be the cause. Whereat Balbine, being one
otherwise that seemed to have vowed silence, took occasion to speak, saying; it
is not hard to know the impediment and stop hereof: for it is sin that
hinders this matter; which is not to be dealt in but with pure hands. Whereat
the Alchymister fell upon hisknees, beating his breast, and lamentably cried,
saying; Oh master Balbine, you say most truly, it is sin that has done us
all this displeasure, not your sin sir, but mine own, good master Balbine.
Neither will I be ashamed to discover my filthiness unto you, as unto a must
holy and ghostly father. The infirmity of the flesh had overcome me, and the
Devil had caught me in his snare. Oh wretch that I am! Of a Priest I am become
an adulterer. Howbeit, the money that erst while was sent to our Lady, was not
utterly lost; for if she had not been, I had certainly been slain. For the good
man of the house brake open the door, and the window was less than I could get
out thereat. And in that extremity of danger it came into my mind to fall down
prostrate to the virgin; beseeching her (if our gift were acceptable in her
sight) that she would, in consideration thereof, assist me with her help. And
to be short, I ran to the window, En immensae cavi sperant mendacia solles.
and found it big enough to leap out at. Which thing Balbine did not only
believe to be true, but in respect thereof forgave him, religiously admonishing
him to show himself thankful to that pitiful and blessed Lady.

Now once again more is made a new supply of money, and mutual promise made to
handle this divine matter hence forward purely and holily. To be short, after a
great number of such parts played by the Alchymister; one of Balbine's
acquaintance espied him, that knew him from his childehood to be but a
cousening merchant; and told Balbine what he was, and that he would handle him
in the end, even as he had used many others; for a knave he ever was, and so he
would prove. But what did Balbine, Balbine is ashamed that he should be
overshot and overseen in a case of flat cousenage.
^hink you? Did he complain of this counterfeit, or cause him to be punished?
No, but he gave him money in his purse, and sent him away; desiring him, of all
courtesy, not to bla^ abroad how he had cousened him. And as for the knave
Alchymister, he need not care who knew it, or what came of it; for he had
nothing in goods or fame to be lost. And as for his cunning in Alchymistry, he
had as much as an ass. By this discourse Erasmus would give us to note, that
under the golden name of Alchymistry there lies lurking no small calamity;
wherein there be such several shifts and suits of rare subtleties and
deceipts, as that not only wealthy men are thereby many times impoverished, and
that with the sweet allurement of this art, through their own covetousness;
as also by the flattering baits of hoped gain: but even wise and learned men
hereby are shamefully overshot, partly for want of due experience in the wiles
and subtleties of the world, and partly through the softness and pliablenesse
of their good nature, which cousening knaves do commonly abuse to their own
lust and commodity, and to the others utter undoing.

CHAP. VI.
The opinion of diverse learned men touching the folly of Alchymistry.

The substances of things are not transmutable.
ALbert in his book of Minerals reports, that Avicenna treating of
Alchymistry, says; Let the dealers in Alchymistry understand, that the very
nature and kind of things cannot be changed, but rather made by art to
resemble the same in show and likeness; so that they are not the very things
indeed, but seem so to be in appearance; as castles and towers do seem to be
built in the clouds, whereas the representations there showed, are nothing else
but the resemblance of certain objects below, caused in some bright and clear
cloud, when the air is void of thickness and grossnesse. A sufficient proof
hereof may be the looking glass. And we see (says he) that yellow or orrenge
color laid upon red, seems to be gold. Franc. Petrarch. lib. de remed. utr.
fort. 1. cap. 10.
Francis Petrarch treating of the same matter in form of a dialogue,
introduces a disciple of his, who fansied the foresaid fond profession and
practice, saying; I hope for prosperous success in Alchymistry. Petrach
answers him; It is a wonder from whence that hope should spring, since the
fruit thereof did never yet fall to thy lot, nor yet at any time chance to any
other; as the report commonly goes, that many rich men, by this vanity and
madness have been brought to beggary, whiles they have wearied themselves
therewith, weakened their bodies, and wasted their wealth in trying the means to
make gold engender gold. I hope for gold according to the workmans promise,
says the disciple. He that has promised the gold, will run away with thy
gold, and thou never the wiser, says Petrarch. He promises me great good,
says the disciple. He will first serve his own turn, and relieve his private
poverty, says Petrarch; for Alchymisters are a beggarly kind of people, who
though they confess themselves bare and needy, yet will they make others rich
and wealthy; as though others poverty did more molest and pity them then their
own. These be the words of Petrarch, a man of great learning and no less
experience; who as in his time he saw the fraudulent fetches of this compassing
craft; so has there been no age, since the same has been broached, wherein
foam few wise men have not smelt out the evil meaning of these shifting
merchants, Goschalcus Boll. ordinis S. August. in suo praeceptorio, fol. 244.
col, b, c, d. and 1.
and bewrayed them to the world.

An ancient writer of a religious order, who lived above a thousand years
since, discovering the diversities of thefts, after a long enumeration, in
Alchymisters, whom he calls Falsificantes metallorum and mineralium, witches
and counterfeiters of metals and minerals; and sets them as deep in the
degree of thieves, as any of the rest, whose injurious dealings are brought to
open arreignment. It is demanded (says he) why the art of Alchymistry does
never prove that in effect, which it pretends in precept and promise. The
answer is ready; that if by art gold might be made, then were it behoovefull to
know the manner and proceeding of nature in generation; since art is said to
imitate and counterfeit nature. No certain ground in the art Alchymisticall.
Again, it is because of the lamenesse and unperfectness of philosophy,
specially concerning minerals no such manner of proceeding being set down by
consent and agreement of philosophers in writing, touching the true and
undoubted effect of the same. Whereupon one supposes that gold is made of one
kind of stuff this way, others of another kind of stuff that way. And
therefore it is a chance if any attain to the artificial applying of the
actives and passives of gold and silver. Moreover, it is certain, that
quicksilver and sulphur are the materials (as they term them) of metals, and
the agent is heat, which directs; howbeit it is very hard to know the due
proportion of the mixture of the materials; which proportion the generation of
gold does require. And admit that by chance they attain to such proportion;
yet can they not readily resume or do it again in another work, because of the
hidden diversities of materials, and the uncertainty of applying the actives
and passives.

The same ancient author concluding against this vain art, Idem ibid.
says, that of all christian lawmakers it is forbidden, and in no case
tolerable in any commonwealth; first because it presumes to forge Idols for
covetousness, which are gold and silver; whereupon says the apostle,
Covetousness is idolworship; secondly, for that (as Aristotle says) coin
should be skant and rare, A varitia idolorum cultus.
that it might be dear; but the same would wax vile, and of small estimation,
if by the art of Alchymistry gold and silver might be multiplied; thirdly,
because (as experience proves) wise men are thereby bewitched, couseners
increased, princes abused, the rich impoverished, the poor beggered, the
multitude made fools, and yet the craft and craftmasters (oh madness!)
credited. Thus far he. Whereby in few words he discountenanceth that
profession, not by the imaginations of his own brain, but by manifold
circumstances of manifest proof. Touching the which practice I think enough
has been spoken, and more a great deal than needed; since so plain and
demonstrable a matter requires the less travel in confutation.

CHAP. VII.
That vain and deceitful hope is a great cause why men are seduced by this
alluring art, and that their labors therein are bootlesse, etc.

HItherto somewhat at large I have detected the knavery of the art
Alchymisticall, partly by reasons, and partly by examples: so that the thing it
self may no less appear to the judicial eye of the considerers, than the
bones and sinews of a body anatomized, to the corporal eye of the beholders.
Now it shall not be amiss nor impertinent, to treat somewhat of the nature of
that vain and fruitless hope, which induces and draws men forward as it
were with chords, not only to the admiration, but also to the approbation of
the same: in such sort that some are compelled rufully to sing (as one in old
time did, Of vain hope.
whether in token of good or ill luck, I do not now well remember) Spes ^
fortuna valete; Hope and good hap adieu.

No marvel then though Alchymistry allure men so sweetly, and entangle them in
snares of folly; since the baits which it uses is the hope of gold, the hunger
whereof is by the poet termed Sacra, which some do English, Holy; not
understanding that it is rather to be interpreted, I. Col. in comment. upon
Deuteronomy. sermon. 127. pa. 781. col. 1. number. 40.
Cursed or detestable, by the figure Acy^on, when a word of an unproper
signification is cast in a clause as it were a cloud: or by the figure
Antiphrasis, when a word imports a contrary meaning to that which it commonly
has. For what reason can there be, that the hunger of gold should be counted
holy, the same having (as depending upon it) so many milions of mischiefs and
miseries: as treasons, thefts, adulteries, manslaughters, trucebreakings,
perjuries, cousenages, and a great troop of other enormities, which were here
too long to rehearse. And if the nature of every action be determinable by the
end thereof, A maxim.
then cannot this hunger be holy, but rather accursed, which pulls after it
as it were with iron chains such a band of outrages and enormities, as of all
their labor, charge, care, and cost, etc. they have nothing else left them in
lien of lucre, but only some few burned bricks of a ruinous furnace, a peck or
two of ashes, and such light stuff, which they are forced peradventure in fine
to sell when beggary has arrested and laid his mace on their shoulders. As for
all their gold, it is resolved In primam materiam, or rather In levem quendam
fumulum, into a light smoke or fumigation of vapors, than the which nothing is
more light, nothing less substantial, spirits only excepted, out of whose
nature and number these are not to be exempted.

CHAP. VIII.
A continuation of the former matter, with a conclusion of the same.

THat which I have declared before, by reasons, examples, and authorities, I
will now prosecute and conclude by one other example; Erasmus in colloq. cui
titulus Convivium fabulosum.
to the end that we, as others in former ages, may judge of vain hope
accordingly, and be no less circumspect to avoid the inconveniences thereof,
than Ulysses was wary to escape the incantations of Circes that old
transforming witch. Which example of mine is drawn from Jews the French King,
the eleventh of that name, who being on a time at Burgundy, fell acquainted by
occasion of hunting with one Conon, a clownish but yet an honest and hearty
good fellow. For princes and great men delight much in such plain clubhutchens.
The king oftentimes, by means of his game, used the countrymans house for his
refreshing; and as noble men sometimes take pleasure in homely and course
things, so the King did not refuse to eat turnips and rape roots in Conons
cotage. Shortly after King Jews being at his palace, void of troubles and
disquietnesse, Conons wife willed him to repair to the court, to show himse^f
to the King, to put him in mind of the old entertainment which he had at his
house, and to present him with some of the fairest and choisew rape roots that
she had in store. Conon seemed loath, alleging that he should but lose his
labor: for princes (says he) have other matters in hand, than to intend to
think of such trifling courtesies. But Conons wife overcame him, and persuaded
him in the end, choosing a certain number of the best and goodliest rape roots
that she had: which when she had given her husband to carry to the court, he
set forward on his journey a good trudging pace. But Conon being tempted by the
way, partly with the desire of eating, A hungry belly will not be bridled.
and partly with the toothsomenesse of the meat which he bare, that by little
and little he devoured up all the roots saving one, which was a very fair and a
goodly great one indeed. Now when Conon was come to the court, it was his luck
to stand in such a place, as the King passing by, and spying the man, did well
remember him, and commanded that he should be brought in. Conon v^ry cheerily
followed his guide hard at the heels, and no sooner saw the King, but bluntly
coming to him, reached out his hand, and presented the gift to his Majesty.
The King received it with more cheerfulness than it was offered, and bad one
of those that stood next him, to take it, and lay it up among those things
which he esteemed most, and had in greatest account. Then he bad Canon to dine
with him, and after dinner gave the countryman great thanks for his rape root;
who made no bones of the matter, A princely largess.
but boldly made challenge and claim to the Kings promised courtesy. Whereupon
the King commanded, that a thousand crowns should be given him in recompense
for his root.

The report of this bountifulness was spread in short space over all the kings
household: in so much as one of his courtiers, in hope of the like or a larger
reward gave the king a very proper gennet. Whose drift the King perceiving, and
judging that his former liberality to the clown, provoked the courtier to this
covetous attempt, took the gennet very thankfully: and calling some of his
noblemen about him, began to consult with them, what mends he might make his
servant for his horse. Whiles this was a doing, the courtier conceived passing
good hope of some princely largess, calculating and casting his cards in this
manner; If his majesty rewarded a silly clown so bountifully for a simple rape
root, what will he do to a jolly courtier for a gallant gennet? Whiles the King
was debating the matter, and one said this, another that, and the courtier
traveled all the while in vain hope, at last says the King, even upon the
sudden; I have now bethought me what to bestow upon him: and calling one of his
nobles to him, whispered him in the ear, and willed him to fetch a thing, Sic
ars deluditur art.
which he should find in his chamber wrapped up in silk. The root is brought
wrapped in silk, which the King with his own hands gave to the courtier, using
these words therewithal, that he sped well, insomuch as it was his good hap to
have for his horse a jewel that cost him a thousand crowns. The courtier was
a glad man, and at his departing longed to be looking what it was, and his
heart danced for joy. In due time therefore he unwrapped the silk (a sort of
his fellow courtiers flocking about him to testify his good luck) and having
unfolded it, he found therein a dry and withered rape root. Which spectacle
though it set the standers about in a loud laughter, yet it quailed the
courtiers courage, and cast him into a shrewd fit of pensiveness. Thus was the
confidence of this courtier turned to vanity, who upon hope of good speed was
willing to part from his horse for had I wist.

The moral of the premises.
This story does teach us into what folly and madness vain hope may drive
undiscreet and unexpert men. And therefore no marvel though Alchymisters dream
and dote after double advantage, faring like Aesops dog, who greedily coveting
to catch and snatch at the shadow of the flesh which he carried in his mouth
over the water, lost both the one and the other: as they do their increase and
their principal. But to break off abruptly from this matter, and to leave
these hypocrites (for why may they not be so named, who as Homer, speaking in
detestation of such rakehels, says very divinely and truly; Homer.
Odi etenim ceu claustra Erebi, quicunque loquuntur
Ore aliud, tacitoque aliud sub pectore claudunt:
Englished by Abraham Fleming.
I hate even even as the gates of hell,
Those that one thing with tongue do tell,
And notwithstanding closely keep
Another thing in heart full deep)


To leave these hypocrites (I say) in the dregs of their dishonesty, I will
conclude against them peremptorily, that they, with the rabble above rehearsed,
and the rout hereafter to be mentioned, are rank couseners, and consuming
cankers to the common wealth, and therefore to be rejected and excommunicated
from the fellowship of all honest men. For now their art, which turns all
kind of metals that they can come by into mist and smoke, is no less apparent
to the world, than the clear sunny rays at noon sted; in so much that I may
say with the poet.

Aul. Persius, satyr. 3.
Hos populus videt, multumque torosa juventus
Ingeminat tremulos naso crispante cachinnos:
Englished by Abraham Fleming.
All people laugh them now to scorn,
each strong and lusty blood
Redoubleth quavering laughters loud
with wrinkled nose a good.
So that, if any be so addicted unto the vanity of the art Alchymisticall as
every fool will have his fancy) and that (beside so many experimented examples
of diverse, whose wealth has vanished like a vapor, whiles they have been over
rash in the practice hereof) this discourse will not move to desist from such
extreme dotage, I say to him or them and that aptly, -- dicitque facitque
quod ipse
Non sani esse hominis non juret Orestes: Idem ibid.

He says and does that every thing, By Ab. Fleming.

which mad Orestes might
With oath aver became a man
bereft of reason right.


The xv. Book.
The exposition of Iidoni, and where it is found, whereby the whole Art of
conjuration is deciphered.

CHAP. I.
THis word Iidoni is derived of Iada, which properly signifies to know: it is
sometimes translated, Divinus, which is a diviner or soothsaier, as in Deuteronomy.
18. Levit. 20. sometimes Ariolus, which is one that also takes upon him to
foretell things to come, and is found Levit. 19. 2 Kings 23. Esai. 19. The
large signification of the word Iidoni.
To be short, the opinion of them that are most skillful in the tongues, is,
that it comprehends all them, which take upon them to know all things past
and to come and to give answers accordingly. It always follows the word Ob,
and in the scriptures is not named severally from it, and differs little from
the same in sense, and do both concern oracles uttered by spirits, possessed
people, or couseners. What will not couseners or witches take upon them to do?
Wherein will they profess ignorance? Ask them any question, they will
undertake to resolve you, even of that which none but God knows. And to bring
their purposes the better to pass, as also to win further credit unto the
counterfeit art which they profess, they procure confederates, whereby they
work wonders. And when they have either learning, eloquence, or nimblenesse of
hands to accompany their confederacy, or rather knaverie, then (forsooth) they
pass the degree of witches, and entitle themselves to the name of conjurors.
Vide Philast. Brix. episc. haerefeon catal. de phitonissa.
And these deal with no inferior causes: these fetch devils out of hell, and
angels out of heaven; these raise up what bodies they lift, though they were
dead, buried, and rotten long before; and fetch souls out of heaven or hell
with much more expedition than the pope brings them out of purgatory. These I
say (among the simple, and where they fear no law nor accusation) take upon
them also the raising of tempests, and earthquakes, L. Wierus in
Pseudomonarchia daemonum.
and to do as much as God himself can do. These are no small fools, they go
not to work with a baggage tode, or a cat, as witches do; but with a kind of
majesty, and with authority they call up by name, and have at their
commandment seventy and nine principal and princely devils, who have under
them as their ministers, a great multitude of legions of petty devils; as for
example.

CHAP. II.
An inventarie of the names, shapes, powers, government, and effects of devils
and spirits, of their several segniories and degrees: a strange discourse
worth the reading.

Solomon's notes of conjuration. Baell.
THeir first and principal king (which is of the power of the east) is called
Baell; who when he is conjured up, appears with three heads; the first, like
a tode; the second like a man; the third like a ca^. He speaks with a hoarse
voice, he makes a man go invisible, he has under his obedience and rule sixty
and six legions of devils.

Agares.
The first duke under the power of the east, is named Agares, he comes up
mildly in the likeness of a fair old man, riding upon a crocodile, and carrying
a hawk on his fist; he teaches presently all manner of tongues, he fetches
back all such as run away, and makes them run that stand still; he
overthrows all dignities supernatural and temporal, he makes earthquakes,
and is of the order of virtues, having under his regiment thirty one legions.

Marbas.
Marbas, alias Barbas, is a great president, and appears in the form of a
mighty lion; but at the commandment of a conjuror comes up in the likeness of
a man, and answers fully as touching any thing which is hidden or secret; he
brings diseases and cures them, be promoteth wisdom; and the knowledge of
mechanical arts, or handicrafts; he changes men into other shapes: and under
his presidency or govenment are thirty six legions of devils contained.

Amon.
Amon, or Aamon, is a great and mighty marquis, and comes abroad in the
likeness of wolf, having a serpents tail, spetting out and breathing flames
of fire; when he patteth on the shape of a man, he shows out dogs teeth, and
a great head like to a mighty raven, he is the strongest prince of all other,
and understands all things past and to come, he procures favor, and
reconcileth both friends and foes, and rules forty legions of devils.

Barbatos, Barbatos.
a great county or earl, and also a duke, he appears in Signo sagittarii
sylvestris, with four kings, which bring companies and great troops. He
understands the singing of birds, the barking of dogs, the lowing of
bullocks, and the voice of all living creatures. He detecteth treasures hidden
by magicians and inchanters, and is of the order of virtues, which in part
bear rule: he knows all things past and to come, and reconcileth friends and
powers; and governs thirty legions of devils by his authority.

Buer is a great president, Buer.
and is seen in this sign; he absolutely teaches philosophy moral and
natural, and also logic, and the virtue of herbs: he gives the best
familiars, he can heal all diseases, specially of men, and reigns over fifty
legions.

Gusoin is a great duke, Gusoin.
and a strong, appearing in the form of a Xenophilus, he answers all things,
present, past, and to come, expounding all questions. He reconcileth
friendship, and distributeth honors and dignities, and rules over forty
legions of devils.

Botis, Botis.
otherwise Otis, a great president and an earl, he comes forth in the shape
of an uglie viper, and if he put on humane shape, he shows great teeth, and
two horns, carrying a sharp sword in his hand; he gives answers of things
present past, and to come, and reconcileth friends and foes, ruling sixty
legions.

Bathin, Bathin.
sometimes called Mathim, a great duke and a strong, he is seen in the shape
of a very strong man, with a serpents tail, sitting on a pale horse,
understanding the virtues of herbs and precious stones, transfferring men
suddenly from country to country, and rules thirty legions of devils.

Purson, alias Curson, Purson.
a great king, he comes forth like a man with a lions face, carrying a most
cruel viper, and riding on a bear; and before him go always trumpets, he
knows things hidden, and can tell all things present, past, and to come; he
beraieth treasure, he can take a body either humane or ajerie, he answers
truly of all things earthly and secret, of the divinity and creation of the
world, and brings forth the best familiars; and there obey him two and twenty
legions of devils, partly of the order of virtues, and partly of the order of
thrones.

Eligor, Eligor.
alias Abigor, is a great duke, and appears as a goodly knight, carrying a
lance, an ensign, and a scepter; he answers fully of things hidden, and of
wars, and how soldiers should mee^^^he knows things to come, and procures
the favor of lords and knights, governing sixty legions of devils.

Leraje, Leraie.
alias Oray, a great marquess, showing himself in the likeness of a gallant
archer, carrying a bow and a quiver, he is author of all battles, he does
putrify all such wounds as are made with arrows by archers, Quos optimos
objicit tribus diebus dicbus, and he has regiment over thirty legions.

Valesar.
Valesar, alias Malephar, is a strong duke, coming forth in the shape of a
lion, and the head of a thief, he is very familiar with them to whom he makes
himself acquainted, till he has brought them to the gallows, and rules ten
legions.

Morax.
Morax, alias Furaji, a great earl and a president, he is seen like a bull,
and if he take unto him a man's face, he makes men wonderful cunning in
astronomy, and in all the liberal sciences: he gives good familiars and wiie,
knowing the power and virtue of herbs and stones which are precious, and
rules thirty six legions.

Ipos.
Ipos, alias Ayporos, is a great earl and a prince, appearing in the shape of
an angel, and yet indeed more obscure and filthy than a lion, with a lions
head, a gooses feet, and a hares tail; he knows things to come and past, he
makes a man witty, and bold, and has under his jurisdiction thirty six
legions.

Naberius.
Naberius, alias Carberus, is a valiant marquess, showing himself in the form
of a crow, when he speaks with a hoarse voice; he makes a man amiable and
cunning in all arts, and specially in rhetoric, he procures the loss of
prelacies and dignities, ninteene legions hear and obey him.

Glasya Labolas.
Glasya Labolas, alias Caacrinolaas, or Caassimolar, is a great president, who
comes forth like a dog, and has wings like a griffin, he gives the
knowledge of arts, and is the captain of all manslayers: he understands
things present and to come, he gains the minds and love of friends and foes,
he makes a man go invisible, and has the rule of six and thirty legions.

Zepar.
Zepar is great duke, appearing as a soldier, inflaming women with the love of
men, and when he is hidden he changes their shape, until they may enjoy their
beloved, he also makes them barren, and six and twenty legions are at his obey
and commandment.

Bileth.
Bileth is a great king and a terrible, riding on a pale horse, before whom go
trumpets, and all kind of melodious music. When he is called up by an
exorcist, he appears rough and furious, to deceive him. Then let the exorcist
or conjuror take heed to himself, and to allay his courage, let him hold a
hazell bat in his hand, wherewithal he must reach out toward the east and
south, and make a triangle without besides the circle; but if he hold not our
his hand unto him, and he bid him come in; and be still refuse the bond or
chain of spirits; let the conjuror proceed to reading, and by and by he will
submit himself, and come in, and do whatsoever the exorcist commands him,
and he shall be safe. If Bileth the king be more stubborn, and refuse to enter
into the circle at the first call, and the conjuror show himself fearful, or
if he have not the chain of spirits, certainly he will never fear nor regard
him after. Also if the place be unapt for a triangle to be made without the
circle, then set there a boll of wine, and the exorcist shall certainly know
when he comes out of his house, with his fellows, and that the aforesaid
Bileth will be his helper, his friend, and obedient unto him when he comes
forth. And when be comes, let the exorcist receive him courteously, and
glorify him in his pride, and therefore he shall adore him as other kings do,
because he says nothing without other princes. Also, if he be cited by an
exorcist, always a silver ring of the middle finger of the left hand must be
held against the exorcists face, Vide Amaimon.
as they do for Amaimon. And the dominion and power of so great a prince is not
to be determined; for there (...) under the power and dominion of the conjuror,
but he that detaineth both men and women in doting love, till the exorcist has
had his pleasure. He is of the orders of powers, hoping to return to the
seventh throne, which is not altogether credible, and he rules eighty five
legions.

Sitri, Sitri a baudy devil.
alias Bitru, is a great prince, appearing with the face of a leopard, and
having wings as a griffin: when he takes humane shape, he is very beautiful,
he inflameth a man with a woman's love, and also stirs up women to love men,
being commanded he willingly deteineth secrets of women, laughing at them and
mocking them, to make them luxuriously naked, and there obey him sixty legions.

Paimon is more obedient to Lucifer than other kings are. Paimon.
Lucifer is here to be understood he that was drowned in the depth of his
knowledge: he would needs be like God, and for his arrogance was thrown out
into destruction, of whom it is said; Every prtious stone is thy covering.
Paimon is constrained by divine virtue to stand before the exorcist where he
puts on the likeness of a man: Ezech. 88.
he sits on a beast called; a dromedary, which is a swift runner, and
wears a glorious crown, and has an effeminate countenance. There goes
before him an host of men with trumpets and well sounding cimbals, and all
musical instruments. At the first he appears with a great cry and roaring, as
in Circulo Salomonis, and in the art is declared. And if this Paimon speak
sometime that the conjuror understand him nor, let him not therefore be
dismayed. But when he has delivered him the first obligation, to observe his
desire, he must bid him also answer him distinctly and plainly to the
questions he shall ask you, of all philosophy, wisdom, and science, and of
all other secret things. And if you will know the disposition of the world, and
what the earth is, or what holds it up in the water, or any other thing, or
what is Abyssus, or where the wind is, or from whence it comes, he will teach
you abundantly. Consecrations also as well of sacrifices as otherwise may be
reckoned. He gives dignities and confirmations; he binds them that resist
him in his own chains, and subjecteth them to the conjuror; he prepares good
familiars, and has the understanding of all arts. Cations for the Exorcist or
conjuror.
Note, that at the calling up of him, the exorcist must look toward the
northwest, because there is his house. When he is called up, let the exorcist
receive him constantly without fear, let him ask what questions or demands he
lift, and no doubt he shall obtain the same of him. And the exorcist must
beware he forget not the creator, for those things, which have been rehearsed
before of Paimon, some say, he is of the order of dominations; others say, of
the order of cherubim. There follow him two hundred legions, partly of the
order of angels, and partly of potestates. Note that if Paimon be cited alone
by an offering or sacrifice, two kings follow him; to wit, Beball and Abalam,
and other potentares: in his host are twenty five legions, because the spirits
subject to them are not always with them, except they be compelled to appear
by divine virtue.

The f^ll of Beliall.
Some say that the king Beliall was created immediately after (...) and therefore
they think that he was father and seducer of them (...) fell being of the
orders. For he fell first among the worthier and wiser sort, which went before
Michael and other heavenly angels, which were lacking. Although Beliall went
before all them that were thrown down to the earth, yet he went not before
them that tarrieth in heaven. This Beliall is constrained by divine virtue,
when he takes sacrifices, gifts, and offerings, that he again may give unto
the offenses true answers. But he tarrieth not one hour in the truth, except
he be constrained by the divine power, as is said. He takes the form of a
beautiful angel, fitting in a fiery chariot; he speaks fair, he
distributeth preferments of senatorship, and the favor of friends, and
excellent familiars: he has rule over eighty legions, partly of the order of
virtues, partly of angels; he is found in the form of an exorcist in the bonds
of spirits. The exorcist must consider, that this Beliall does in every thing
assist his subjects. If he will not submit himself, let the bond of spirits be
read: Solomon gathered all the devils together in a brazen vessel.
the spirits chain is sent for him, wherewith wise Solomon gathered them
together with their legions in a brazen vessel, where were enclosed among all
the legions seventy two kings, of whom the chief was Bileth, the second was
Beliall, the third Asmoday, and above a thousand thousand legions. Without
doubt (I must confess) I learned this of my master Solomon; but he told me not
why he gathered them together, and shut them up so but I believe it was for the
pride of this Beliall. Certain ^ig romancers do say, that Solomon being on a
certain day seduced by the craft of a certain woman, inclined himself to
pray before the same idol, Beliall by name: which is not credible. And
therefore we must rather think (as it is said) that they were gathered
together in that great brazen vessel for pride and arrogance, and thrown into
a deep lake or hole in Babylon. For wise Salamon did accomplish his works by
the divine power, which never forsook him. And therefore we must think he
worshipped not the image Beliall; for then he could not have constrained the
spirits by divine virtue: for this Beliall, with three kings were in the lake.
But the Babylonians wondering at the matter, The Babylonians disappointed of
their hope.
supposed that they should find therein a great quantity of treasure, and
therefore with one consent went down into the lake, and uncovered and brake
the vessel, out of the which immediately flew the captain devils, and were
delivered to their former and proper places. But this Beliall entered into a
certain image, and there gave answer to them that offered and sacrificed unto
him: as Toex. in his sentences reports, and the Babylonians did worship and
sacrifice thereunto.

Bune is a great and a strong duke, Bune.
he appears as a dragon with three heads, the third whereof is like a man, he
speaks with a divine voice, he makes the dead to change their place, and
devils to assemble upon the sepulchers of the dead: he greatly inricheth a man,
and makes him eloquent and wise, answers truly to all demands, and thirty
legions obey him.

Forneus is a great marquess, Forneus.
like unto a monster of the sea, he makes men wonderful in rhetoric, he
adorneth a man with a good name, and the knowledge of tongues, and makes one
beloved as well of foes as friends; there are under him nine and twenty
legions, of the order partly of thrones, and partly of angels.

Ronove a marquess and an earl, Ronove.
he is resembled to a monster, he brings singular understanding in rhetoric,
faithful servants, knowledge of tongues, favor of friends and foes; and
nineteen legions obey him.

Berith is a great and a terrible duke, Berith a golden devil.
and has three names. Of some he is called Beall; of the Jews Berith; of
Nigromancers Belfry: he comes forth as a red soldier, with red clothing, and
upon a horse of that color, and a crown on his head. He answers truly of
things present, past, and to come. He is compelled to a certain hour, through
divine virtue, by a ring of art magic. He is also a lier, he turns all
metals into gold, he adorneth a man with dignities, and confirms them, he
speaks with a clear and subtle voice, and six and twenty legions are under
him.

Astaroth is a great and a strong duke, coming forth in the shape of a foul
angel, Astaroth.
sitting upon an infernal dragon, and carrying on his right hand a viper: he
answers truly to matters present, past, and to come, and also of all secrets.
He talks willingly of the creator of spirits, and of their fall, and how they
sinned and fell: he says he fell not of his own accord. He makes a man
wonderful learned in the liberal sciences, he rules forty legions. Let
every exorcist take heed, that he admit him not too near him, because of his
stinking breath. And therefore let the conjuror hold near to his face a
magical ring, and that shall defend him.

For As, For As.
alias Forcas is a great president, and is seen in the form of a strong man,
and in humane shape, he understands the virtue of herbs and precious stones:
he teaches fully logic, ethick, and their parts: he makes a man invisible,
witty, eloquent, and to live long; he recovereth things lost, and dicovereth
treasures, and is lord over nine and twenty legions.

Fursur is a great earl, Fursur.
appearing as an heart, with a fiery tail, he lies in every thing, except he
be brought up within a triangle: being bidden, he takes angelical form, he
speaks with a hoarse voice, and willingly makes love between man and wife;
he raises thunders and lightnings, and blasts. Where he is commanded, he
answers well, both of secret and also of divine things, and has rule and
dominion over six and twenty legions.

Marchosias is a great marquess, Marchosias.
he shows himself in the shape of a cruel she wolf, with a griphens wings,
with a serpents tail, and (...) I cannot tell what out of his mouth. When he
is in a man's shape^ is an excellent fighter, he answers all questions truly,
he is faithful (...) all the conjurors business; he was of the order of
dominations, (...) him are thirty legions: he hops after 1200. years to
return to the ^venth throne, but he is deceived in that hope.

Malphas.
Malphas is a great president, he is seen like a crow, but being cloth with
humane image, speaks with a hoarse voice, he builds (...) and high towers
wonderfully, and quickly brings artificers together, (...) throws down
also the enemies edifications, he helps to good (...), he receives
sacrifices willingly, but he deceives all the sacrifices there obey him forty
legions.

Vepar.
Vepar, alias Separ, a great duke and a strong, he is like a mermaid, he is the
guide of the waters, and of ships laden with armor; he brings to p^sse (at
the commandment of his master) that the sea shall be roug^ and stormy, and
shall appear full of ships; he kills men in three days with purrefying their
wounds, and producing maggots into them; (...), they may be all healed with
diligence, he rules nine and (...) legions.

Sabnacke.
Sabnack, alias Salmack, is a great marquess and a strong, he comes forth as
an armed soldier with a lions head, sitting on a pale horse, ^e does
marvellously change man's form and favor, he builds high to^ers full of
weapons, and also castles and cities; he inflicteth men (...) days with wounds
both rotten and full of maggots, at the exorcists commandment, he provideth
good familiars, and has dominion over (...) legions.

Sidonay.
Sidonay, alias Asmoday, a great King, strong and mighty, he is (...) with
three heads, whereof the first is like a bull, the second like a (...) the
third like a ram, he has a serpents tail, he belcheth flames out of (...)
mouth, he has feet like a goose, he sits on an infernal dragon (...)
carries a lance and a flag in his hand, he goes before others, (...) are
under the power of Amaymon. When the conjuror exercises (...) office, let him
be abroad, let him be wary and standing on his feet (...) his cap be on his
head, he will cause all his doings to be bewrayed, (...) if he do not, the
exorcist shall be deceived by Amaymon in every thing* But so soon as he sees
him in the form aforesaid, he shall call him by his name, saying; Thou art
Asmoday; he will not deny it, and by and by he boweth down to the ground; he
gives the ring of virtues, he absolutely teaches geometry, arithmetic,
astronomy, and handicrafts. (...) all demands he answers fully and truly, he
makes a man (...), he shows the places where treasure lies, and gardeth
it* (...) be among the legions of Amaymon, he has under his power sey (...)
two legions.

Gaap.
Gaap, alias Tap, a great president and a prince, he appears in a (...)
ridionall sign, and when he takes humane shape he is the guide of (...) four
principal Kings, as mighty as Bileth. There were certain ne^^mancers that
offered sacrifices and burnt offerings unto him; and (...) call him up, they
excercised on art, saying that Solomon the wise made it which is false: Who was
the first necromancer.
for it was rather Cham, the son of Noah, who after the flood began first to
invocate wicked spirits. He invocated Bil^th, and made an art in his name, and
a book which is known to many mathema^^^ians. There were burnt offerings and
sacrifices made, and gifts-gi^^n and much wickedness wrought by the exorcists,
who mingled therewithal the holy names of God, the which in that art are every
where exp^ssed. Marry there is an Epistle of those names written by Solomon, as
also write Helids Hierosolymitanus and Helisaeus. It is to be noted, that if
any exorcist have the art of Bileth, and cannot make him stand before him, nor
see him, I may not bewray how and declare the means to contain him, because it
is an abomination, and for that I have learned nothing from Solomon of his
dignity and office, But yet I will not hide this; to wit, that he makes a man
wonderful in philosophy and all the liberal sciences: he makes love, hatred;
insensibility, consecration, and consecration of those things that are
belonging unto the domination of Amaymon, and delivers familiar (...) of the
possession of other conjurors, answering truly and perfectly of things present,
past, and to come, and transferreth men most speedily into other nations, he
rules sixty six legions, and was of the order of potestates.

Shax alias Scox, Shax.
is a dark and great marquess, like unto a stork, with a hoarse and subtle
voice he does marvellously take away the sight, hearing, and understanding of
any man, at the commandment of the (...) he takes away money out of every
Kings house, and carries it back after 1200. years, if he be commanded, he is
a horsestealer, he is thought to be faithful in all commandments; and
although he promise to be obedient to the conjuror in all things; yet is he not
so, he is a lier, except he be brought into a triangle, and there he speaks
divinely, and tells of things which are hidden, and not kept of wicked
spirits, he promises good familiars, which are accepted if they be not
deceivers, he has thirty legions.

Procell is a great and a strong duke, Procell.
appearing in the shape of an (...) but speaks darkly of things hidden, he
teaches geometry and all the liberal arts, he makes great noises, and
causes the waters to rore, there are none; he warmeth waters, and distemporeth
bathes at certain times, as the exorcist appoints him, he was of the order of
potestates, and has forty eight legions under his power.

Eurcas is a Knight and comes forth in the similitude of a cruel man, Furcas.
with a long beard and a boary head, he sits on a pale horse, carrying in
his hand a sharp weapon, he perfectly teaches practick philosophy, rhetoric,
logic, astronomy, chiromancy, pyromancy, and their parts: there obey him
twenty legions.

Murmur is a great duke and an earl, Murmur.
appearing in a shape of a soldier, riding on a griphen, with a dukes crown on
his head; there go before him two of his ministers, with great trumpets, he
teaches philosopy absolutely, he constrains souls to come before the
exorcist, to answer what he shall ask them, he was of the order partly of
thrones, and partly of angels, and rules thirty legions.

Caim is a great president, Caim.
taking the form of a thrush, but when he puts on man's shape, he answers
in burning ashes, carrying in his hand a most sharp sword, he makes the best
disputers, he gives men the understanding of all birds, of the lowing of
bullocks, and barking of dog^ and also of the sound and noise of waters, he
answers best things to come; he was of the order of angels, and rules thirty
legio^^ of devils.

Raum.
Raum, or Raim is a great earl, he is seen as a crow, but when puts on
humane shape, at the commandment of the exorcist, he (...) wonderfully out of
the Kings house, and carries it whither he (...) assigned, he destroys
cities, and has great despite unto dignities* he knows things present, past,
and to come, and reconcileth friends and foes; he was of the order of thrones,
and governs thirty legions.

Halphas.
Halphas is a great earl, and comes abroad like a stork, with a hoarse
voice, he notably builds up towns full of munition and weapons, he sends
men of war to places appointed, and has under him (...) and twenty legions.

Focalor.
Focalor is a great duke comes forth as a man, with wings like a gript (...)
he kills men, and drowneth them in the waters, and overturneth (...) of war,
commanding and ruling both winds and seas. And let the Conjuror note, that if
he bid him hurt no man, he willingly conseneth thereto: he hops after 1000.
years to return to the seventh throne, (...) he is deceived, he has three
legions.

Vine.
Vine is a great king and an earl, he shows himself as a lion, riding black
horse, and carries a viper in his hand, he gladly builds (...) towers, he
throws down stone walls, and makes waters rough. (...) commandment of the
exorcist he answers of things hidden, of (...), and of things present, past,
and to come.

Bisrons.
Bisrons is seen in the similitude of a monster, when he takes the (...) of
man, he makes one wonderful eunning in astrology, absolutely ^^claring the
mansions of the planets, he does the like in geomet^y, and (...)
admeasurements, he perfectly understands the strength and virtue herbs,
precious stones, and woods, he changes dead bodies from (...) place; he
seems to light candles upon the sepulchers of the dead, and (...) under him
six and twenty legions.

Gamigin.
Gamigin is a great marquess, and is seen in the form of a little (...) when
he takes humane shape he speaks with a hoarse voice, (...) of all liberal
sciences; he brings also to pass, that the souls, (...) are drowned in the
sea, or which dwell in purgatoy (which is called Ca^tagra, that is, affliction
of souls) shall take airy bodies, and evidently appear and answer to
interrogatories at the conjurors commandment (...) tarrieth with the exorcist,
until he have accomplished his desire, and has thirty legions under him.

Zagan.
Zagan is a great King and a president, he comes abroad like a bull, with
griphens wings, but when he takes humane shape, he makes men witty, he
turns all metals into the coin of that dominion, and turned water into wine,
and wine into water, he also turns blood into wine* and wine into blood, and
a fool into a wise man, he is head of thirty and three legions.

Orias is a great marquess, Orias.
and is seen as a lion riding on a strong horse, with a serpents tail, and
carries in his right hand two great serpents hissing, he knows the mansion
of planets, and perfectly teaches the virtues of the stars, he transformeth
men, he gives dignities, prelacles; and confirmations, and also the favor of
friends and foes, and has under him thirty legions.

Valac is a great president, Valac.
and comes abroad with angels wings like a boy, riding on a two headed
dragon, he perfectly answers of treasure hidden, and where serpents may be
seen, which he delivers into the conjurors hands, void of any force or
strength, and has dominion over thirty legions of devils.

Gemory a strong and mighty duke, Gemory.
he appears like a fair woman with a duchess crownet about her middle,
riding on a camel, he answers well and truly of things present, past, and to
come, and of treasure hid, and where it lies: he procures the love of women,
especially of maids, and has six and twenty legions.

Decarabia or Carabia, he comes like a Decarabia.
and knows the force of herbos and precious stones, and makes all birds fly
before the exorcist, and to tarry with him, as though they were tame, and that
they shall drink and sing, as their manner is, and has thirty legions.

Amduscias a great and a strong duke, Amduscias.
he comes forth as an unicorne, when he stands before his master in humane
shape, being commanded, he easily brings to pass, that trumpets and all
musical instruments may be heard and not seen, and also that trees shall bend
and incline, according to the conjurors will, he is excellent among familiars,
and has nine and twenty legions.

Andras is a great marquess, Andras.
and is seen in an angels shape with a head like a black night raven, riding
upon a black and a very strong wolf, flourishing with a sharp sword in his
hand; he can kill the master, the servant, and all assistants, he is author of
discords, and rules thirty legions.

Andrealphus is a great marquess, Andrealphus.
appearing as a peacock, he raises great noises, and in humane shape perfectly
teaches geometry, and all things belonging to admeasurements, he makes a man
to be a subtle disputer, and cunning in astronomy, and transformeth a man into
the likeness of a bird; and there are under him thirty legions.

Ose is a great president, Ose.
and comes forth like a leopard, and counterfeiting to be a man, he makes one
cunning in the liberal sciences, he answers truly of divine and secret
things, he transformeth a man's shape, and brings a man to that madness, that
he thinks himself to be that which he is not; as he that is a king or a
pope, or that he wears a crown on his head, Duralque id regnum ad horam.

Aim or Haborim is a great duke and a strong, he comes forth with three
heads, the first like a serpent, the second like a man having two Aim.
, the third like a cat, he rides on a viper, carrying in his hand a light fire
brand, with the flame whereof castles and cities are fired, he makes one witty
every kind of way, he answers truly of privy matters, and reigns over
twenty six legions.

Orobus.
Orobas is a great prince, he comes forth like a horse, but when he puts on
him a man's idol, he talks of divine virtue, he gives true answers of things
present, past and to come, and of the divinity, and of the creation, he
deceives none, nor ^uffereth any to be tempted, he gives dignities and
prelacies, and the favor of friends and foes, and has rule over twenty
legions.

Vapula.
Vapula is a great duke and a strong, he is seen like a lion with griphens
wings, he makes a man subtle and wonderful in handicrafts, philosophy, and
in sciences contained in books, and is ruler (...) thirty six legions.

Cimeries.
Cimeries is a great marquess and a strong, ruling in the parts of Aph^^ca; he
teaches perfectly grammar, logic, and rhetoric, he discovers treasures and
things hidden, he brings to pass, that a man shall seem with expedition to
be turned into a soldier, he rides upon a (...) black horse, and rules
twenty legions.

Amy.
Amy is a great president, and appears in a flame of fire, but having taken
man's shape, he makes one mavelous in astrology, and in all the liberal
sciences, he procures excellect familiars, he bewrays treasure preserved by
spirits, he has the government of thirty six legions, (...) is partly of the
order of angels, partly of potestates, he hops after a thousand two hundredth
years to return to the seventh throne: which is not credible.

Flauros.
Flauros is a strong duke, is seen in the form of a terrible strong leopard in
humane shape, he shows a terrible countenance, and fiery eye^^ (...)
answers truly and fully of things present, past, and to come; if he (...) in
a triangle, he lies in all things and deceives in other things, and beguileth
in other businesses, he gladly talks of divinity, and of the creation of the
world, and of the fall; he is constrained by divine ^^^tue, and so are all
devils or spirits, to burn and destroy all the con^^^rors adversaries. And if
he be commanded, he suffers the conjuro^^ to be tempted, and he has legions
under him.

Balam.
Balam is a great and a terrible king, he comes forth with the heads, the
first of a bull, the second of a man, the third of a ram, he ha^^ a serpents
tail, and flaming eyes, riding upon a furious bear, and carrying a hawke on
his fist, he speaks with a hoarse voice, answering perfectly of things
present, past, and to come, he makes man invisible and wise, he governs
forty legions, and was of the order of dominitions.

Allocer.
Allocer is a strong duke and a great, he comes forth like a soldier, riding
on a great horse, he has a lions face, very red, and with flaming eyes, he
speaks with a big voice, he makes a man wonderful in astronomy, and in all
the liberal sciences, he brings good familiars, and rules thirty six
legions.

Saleos*
Saleos is a great earl, he appears as a gallant soldier, riding on a
crocodile, and wears a dukes crown, peaceable, etc.

Vuall.
Vuall is great duke and a strong, he is seen as a great and terrible
dromedary, but in humane form, he sounds out in a base voice the Egyptian
tongue. This man above all other procures the especial love of women, and
knows things present, past, and to come, precuring the love of friends and
foes, he was of the order of potestates, and governs thirty seven legions.

Haagenti is a great president, Haagenti.
appearing like a great bull, having the wings of a griphen, but when he takes
humane shape, he makes a man wise in every thing, he changes all metals into
gold, and changes wine and water the one into the other, and commands as
many legions as Zagan.

Phoenix is a great marquess, appearing like the bird Phoenix, Phoenix.
having a child's voice: but before he stands still before the conjuror, he
sings many sweet notes. Then the exorcist with his companions must beware he
give no ear to the melody, but must by and by bid him put on humane shape;
then will he speak marvellously of all wonderful sciences. He is an excellent
poet, and obedient, he hops to return to the seventh throne after a thousand
two hundredth years, and governs twenty legions.

S^olas is a great prince, S^olas.
appearing in the form of a night-raven, before the exorcist, he takes the
image and shape of a man, and teaches astronomy, absolutely understanding the
vertu^s of herbs and precious stones; there are under him twenty six legions.

Note that a legion is 6666. and now by Multiplication count how many legions
d^e arise out of every particular. Secretum secretorum, This was the work of
one T.R. written in fair letters of red and black upon parchment, and made by
him, Ann. 1570. to the maintenance of his living, the edifying of the poor,
and the glory of gods holy name: as he himself says.

The secret of secrets;
Tu operus sis secretus horum,
Thou that workst them, be secret in them.
CHAP. III.
The hours wherein principal devils may be bound, to wit, raised and
restrained from doing of hurt.

A Maymon king of the east, Corson king of the south, Zimimar king of the
north, Goap king and prince of the west, may be bound from the third hour,
till noone, and from the ninth hour till evening. Marquesses may be bound from
the ninth hour till compline, and from compline till the end of the day. Dukes
may be bound from the first hour till noone; and clear weather is to be
observed. Prelates may be bound in any hour of the day. Knights from day
dawning, till sun rising; or from evensong, till the sun set. A President
may not be bound in any hour of the day, except the king whom he obayeth, be
invocated; nor in the shutting of the evening. Counties or ear^^ may be bound
at any hour of the day, so it be in the woods or ^el^ where men resort not.

CHAP. IV.
The form of adjuring or citing of the spirits aforesaid to arise (...)
appear.

WHen you will have any spirit, you must know his name and (...) you must also
fast, and be clean from all pollution, three or fo^^ days before; so will the
spirit be the more obedient unto you. (...) make a circle, and call up the
spirit with great intention, and bo^^ a ring in your hand, rehearse in your
own name, and your company (for one must always be with you) this prayer
following, and ^o spirit shall annoy you, and your purpose shall take effect.
And note (...) this agrees with popish charms and conjurations.

In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ the father and the sone and the Holy
ghost holy trinity and unseparable unity, I call upon them that thou may be
my salvation and defense, and the protection of the body and soul, and of all
my goods through the virtue of thy holy cross and through the virtue of thy
passion, I beseech thee O Lord Jesus Christ by the merits of thy blessed mother
S. Mary, and of all thy saints, thou give me grace and divine power over all
the wicked spirits, (...) which of them soever I do call by name* they may come
by and by (...) every coast, and accomplish my will, that they neither be
hurtful nor (...) full unto me, but rather obedient and diligent about me. And
through virtue straightly commanding them, let them fulfill my commandment*
Amen. Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of sabbath, which wilt come to (...) the
quick and the dead, thou which art A and O, first and last, King of kings and
Lord of lords, Note what names are attributed unto Christ by the Conjuror in
this his exorcising exercise.
Ioth, Aglanabrath, El, Abiel, Anathiel (...), Sedonel, Grayes, Heli, Messiah,
Tolimi, Elias, Ischeros, (...) Imas. By these thy holy names, and by all other
I do call upon thee, ^^ beseech thee O Lord Jesus Christ, by thy nativity and
baptism, thy cross and passion, by thine ascension, and by the coming of the
(...) ghost, by the bitterness of thy soul when it departed from the body, thy
five wounds, by the blood and water which went out of thy body, thy virtue, by
the sacrament which thou gave thy disciples the day before thou sufferedst,
by the holy trinity, and the inseparable unity, by blessed Mary thy mother, by
thine angels, archangels, prophets, patriarchs, and by all thy saints, and by
all the sacraments which are made in thine honor I do worship and beseech
thee, to accept these prayers, conjurations, and words of my mouth, which I
will use. I require thee O Lord Jesus Christ, that thou give me thy virtue and
power over all thine ange^^ (which were thrown down from heaven to deceive
mankind) to draw them to me, to tie and bind them, and also to loose them, to
gather them together before me, and to command them to do all that they can,
and that by no means they contemn my voice, or the words of my mouth but that
they obey me and my sayings, and fear me. I beseech thee by thine humanity,
mercy and grace, and I require thee Adony, Amay, Horia, Vege dova, Mita^, Hell,
Suranat, Ysion, Ysesy, and by all thy holy names, and by all thine holy he
saints and the saints, by all thine angels and archangels, powers, dominations,
and ver^ues, and by that name that Solomon did bind the devils, and shut them
up, Elbrach, Ebanher, Agle, Goth, Ioth, Othie, Venoch, Nabrat, and by all thine
holy names which are written in this book, and by the virtue of them all, that
thou enable me to congrerate all thy spirits thrown down from heaven, What
wonderful force conjurers do believe consists in these forged names of
Christ.
that they may give me a true answer of all my demands, and that they satisfy
all my requests, without the hurt of my body or soul, or any thing else that
of mine through our Lord Jesus Christ thy son, which lives and reigns with
thee in the unity of the Holy ghost, one God world without end.

Oh father omnipotent, oh wise son, oh Holy ghost, the searcher of hearts, oh
you three in persons, one true Godhead in substance, which drift spare Adam and
Eve in their sins, and oh though son, which diedst for their sins a most
filthy death, sustaining it upon the holy (...); oh thou most merciful, when I
fly unto thy mercy, and beseech thee by all the means I can, by these thy holy
names of thy son; to (...), A and Q, and all other his names, grant me thy
virtue and power, that I may be able to cite before me, thy spirits which where
thrown down from heaven, and that they may speak with me, and dispatch by and
by without delay, and with a good will, and without the hurt of my body, soul,
or goods, etc. as is contained in the book called Annulus S. Lomonis.

Oh great and eternal virtue of the highest, which through disposition, these
being called to judgment, Vaich^on, Stimulamaton, Esphares, Tetragrammaton,
Oliora^, Cryon, Esytion, Existion, E^iona, Onela* Brasim, Noym, Messiah, Soter,
Emanuel, Sabbath, Adonay, I worship thee, I invocate thee, I employ thee with
all the strength of my mind, that by thee, my present prayers consecrations,
and conjurations be hollowed: and wheresoever wicked spirits are called in the
virtue of thy names, they may come together from every coast, and diligently
fulfill the will of me the exorcist Fiat, fiato, fiat, Amen.

CHAP. V.
A confutation of the manifold vanities contained in the precedent chapters,
specially of commanding of devils.

HE that can be persuaded that these things are true, or wrought indeed
according to the assertion of conseners, or according to the supposition of
witch mongers and papists, may soon be brought to believe that the moon is
made of green cheese. You see in this which is called Salomons conjuration,
there is a perfect inventary registered of the number of devils, of their names,
of their offices, of their personages, of their qualities, of their powers, of
their properties, of their kingdoms, of their govern^rs, of their orders, of
their dispositions, of their (...), of their submission, and of the ways to
bind or loose them with a note what wealth, This is contrary the scripture,
which says that every good gift comes from the father of light, etc.
learning, office, commodity, pleasure, (...) they can give, and may be forced
to yield in spite of their hearts, to (...) (forsooth) as are cunning in this
art: of whom yet was never seen (...) rich man, or at least that gained any
thing that way; or any (...) man, that became learned by that means; or any
happy man* (...) could with the help of this art either deliver himself, or
his (...) from adversity, or add unto his estate any point of felicity: yet
(...) men, in all worldly happine^se, must need exceed all others; (...) things
could be by them accomplished, according as it is presupposed. (...) if they
may learn of Marbas, A breviary of the inventary of spirits.
all secrets, and to cure all diseases; and Furcas, wisdom, and to be cunning
in all mechanical arts; and change any man's shape, of Zepar: if Bune can make
them rich and eloquent, if Bero^h can tell them of all things present, past,
and to (...) if Asmodie can make them go invisible and show them all hidden
treasure if Salmacke will afflict whom they list, and Allocer can procure the
(...) of any woman; if Amy can provide them excellent familiars; if (...) can
make them understand the voice of all birds and beasts, and (...) and Bifrons
can make them live long; and finally, if Orias could pro^^ unto them great
friends, and reconcile their enemies, and they (...) end had all these at
commandment; should they not live in all world honor and felicity? whereas
contrariwise they lead there lives in all o^^quy, misery, and beggary, and in
fine come to the gallows; as thou they had chosen unto themselves the spirit
Valefer, who they say, (...) all them with whom he enters into familiarity,
to no better end* than the gibbet or gallows. The authors further purpose in
the detection of conjuring.
But before I proceed further to the confu^^tion of this stuff, I will show
other conjurations, devised more lately and of more authority; whe^ein you
shall see how fools are trained to believe these absurdities, being won by
little and little to such credulity. For the author hereof begins, as though
all the cunning of conjurors were de^^ved and fetched from the planetary
motions, and true course of the (...) celestial bodies, etc.

CHAP. VI.
The names of the Planets, their characters, together with the twelve signs of
the zodiake, their dispositions, aspects, and government, with other
observations.



The disposition of the Planets.


The aspects of the Planets.
The five planetary aspects. Conjunct. Sextil. Trine. Quartil. Opposite.
Is the best aspect, with good planets, and the worst with evil. Is a mean
aspect in goodnese or badnesse. Is very good in aspect to good planets, and
h^rteth not in evil. This aspect is of enimity not full perfect. This aspect
is of enimity most perfect.
How the day is divided or distinguished.
A day natural is the space of four and twenty hours, accounting the night
withal, and begins at one of the clock after midnight.

An artificial day is that space of time, which is betwixt the rising and
falling of the etc. All the rest is night (...) begins at the rising*

Hereafter follows a table, showing how the day and the night is divided by
hours, and reduced to the regiment of the planets.

The division of the day, and the planetary regiment.


The division of the night, and the planetary regiment.


CHAP. VII.
The characters of the angels of the seven days, with their names: of figures,
scales and periapts.



These figures are called the scales of the earth, without the which no spirit
will appear, except thou have them with thee.



CHAP. VIII.
An experiment of the dead.

FIrst fast and pray three days, Conjuring for a dead spirit.
and abstain thee from all filthynesse; go to one that is new buried, such a
one as killed himself, or destroyed himself wilfully: or else get thee
promise of one that shall be hanged, and let him swear an oath to thee, after
his body is dead, that his spirit shall come to thee, and do thee true service,
at thy commandments, in all days, hours, and minutes. And let no persons see
thy doings, but For the cousenor (the conjuror I should say) can do nothing to
any purpose without his consederate.

Note that numerus ternarius, which is counted mystical, be observed.


thy fellow. And about eleven a clock in the night, go to the place where he
was buried, and say with a bold faith, and hearty desire, to have the spirit
come that thou do call for, thy fellow having a candle in his left hand, and
in his right hand a crystal stone, and say these words following, the master
having a hazell wand in his right hand, and these names of God written
thereupon, Tetragrammaton Adonay Agla Craton * Then strike three strokes on the
ground, and say; Arise N. Arise N. Arise N. I conjure thee spirit N. by the
resurrection of our Lord Jesu Christ, that thou do obey to my words, and come
unto me this night verily and truly, as thou beleevest to be saved at the day
of judgment. And I will swear to the an oath, by the peril of my soul, that
if thou will come to me, and appear to me this night, and show me true visions
in this crystal stone, and fetch me the fairie Sibylia, that I may talk with
her visibly, and she may come before me, as the conjuration leads: and in so
doing, I will give thee an alms deed, Ex inferno nulla redemptio, says the
scripture: Ergo you lie quoth Nota.
and pray for thee N. to my Lord God, whereby thou may be restored to thy
salvation at the resurrection day, to be received as one of the elect of God,
to the everlasting glory, Amen.

The master standing at the head of the grave, his fellow having in his hands
the candle and the stone, must begin the conjuration as follows, and the
spirit will appear to you in the crystal stone, in a fair form of a child
of twelve years of age. And when he is in, feel the stone, and it will be
hot; and fear nothing, for he or she will show many delusions, to drive you
from your work. Fear God, but fear him not. This is to constrain him, as
follows.

I conjure thee spirit N. by the living God, the true God, and by the holy God,
and by their virtues and powers which have created both thee and me, and all
the world. I conjure thee N. by these holy names of God, Note what these great
words may do.
Tetragrammaton Adonay Algramay Saday Sabbath Pla^^both Panthon Craton
Neupuraton Deus Homo Omnipotens Simpiternus Ysus Terra Vnigeniius Salvator Via
Vita Manus Fons Origo Filius. And by their virtues and powers, and by all their
names, by the which God gave power to man, both to speak or think; so by their
virtues and powers I conjure thee spirit N. that now immediately thou do
appear in this crystal stone visibly to me and to my fellow, without any
tarrying or deceit. I conjure thee N. by the excellent name of Jesus Christ A
and O the first and the last. For this holy name of Jesus is above all names;
for in this name of Jesus every knee does bow and obey, both of heavenly
things, earthly things, and infernal. And every tongue does confess that our
Lord Jesus Christ is in the glory of the Father: neither is there any other
name given to man, whereby he must be saved. Therefore in the name of Jesus of
Nazareth, and by his nativity, resurrection, and ascension, and by all that
appertains unto his passion, and by their virtues and powers I conjure the
spirit N. that thou do appear visible in this crystal stone to me, and to my
fellow, without any dissimulation, I conjure thee N. by the blood of the
innocent lamb Jesus Christ, which was shed for us upon the cross; for all
those that Dae mones credendo contremisciunt.
do believe in the virtue of his blood, shall be saved. I conjure thee N. by
the virtues and powers of all the royal names and words of the living God of
me pronounced, that thou be obedient unto me and to my words rehearsed. If thou
refuse this to do, I by the holy trinity, and by their virtues and powers do
condemn thee thou spirit N. into the place where there is no hope of remedy or
rest, A heavy sentence denounced of the conjuror against the spirit in case of
disobedience, contempt, or negligence.
but everlasting horror of pain there dwelling, and a place where there is
pain upon pain, daily, horribly, and lamentably, thy pain to be there augmented
as the stars in the heaven, and as the gravel or sand in the Sea: except
thou spirit N. do appear to me and to my fellow visibly, immediately in this
crystal stone, and in a fair form and shape of a child of twelve years of
age, and that thou alter not thy shape, I charge thee upon pain of everlasting
condemnation. I conjure thee spirit N. by the golden girdle, which girdeth the
loins of our Lord Jesus Christ; so thou spirit N. be thou bound into the
perpetual pains of hell fire, for thy disobedience and unreverent regard,
that thou have to the holy names and words, and his precepts. I conjure thee N.
by the two edged sword, which John saw proceed out of the mouth of the
Almighty; and so thou spirit N. be torn and How can that be, when a spirit
has neither flesh, blood, not bones?
cut in pieces with that sword, and to be condemned into everlasting pain,
where the fire goes not out, and where the worm dies not. I conjure thee N.
by the heavens, and by the celestial city of Jerusalem, and by the earth and
the sea, and by all things contained in them, and by their virtues and powers;
I conjure thee spirit N. by the obedience that thou do owe unto the
principal prince. And except thou spirit N do come and appear visibly in this
crystal stone in my presence, here immediately as it is aforesaid. Let the
great curse of God, the anger of God, the shadow and darkness of death, and of
eternal condemnation be upon thee spirit N. for ever and ever; because thou
have denied thy faith, thy health, and salvation. For thy great disobedience,
thou art worthy to be condemned. Therefore let the divine trinity, thrones,
dominions, principats, potestats, virtutes, cherubim and seraphim; and all the
souls of saints, both of men and women, condemn thee for ever, and be a
witness against thee at the day of judgment, because of thy disobedience. And
let all creatures of our Lord Jesus Christ, say thereunto; Fiat, fiat, fiat.
Amen.

And when he is appeared in the crystal stone, as is said before, bind him
with this bond as follows; to wit, I conjure thee spirit N. that an appeared
to me in this crystal stone, to me and to my fellow; I conjure thee by The
conjuror imputes the appearing of a spirits by constraint unto words quoth
Nota.
all the royal words aforesaid, the which did constrain thee to appear
therein, and their virtues; I charge thee by them all, that thou shall not
depart out of this crystal stone, until my will being fulfilled, thou be
licensed to depart. I conjure and bind thee spirit N. by that omnipotent God,
which commanded the angel S. Micha^ll, to drive Lucifer out of the heavens
with a sword of vengeance, and to fall from joy to pain; and for dread of such
pain as he is in, I charge thee spirit N. that thou shall not go out of the
crystal stone; nor yet to alter thy shape at this time, except I command thee
otherwise; but to come unto me at all places and in all hours and minutes,
when and wheresoever I shall call thee, by the virtue of our Lord Jesus Christ,
or by any conjuration of words that is written in this book, and to show me and
my friends true visions in this crystal stone, of any thing or things that we
would see, at any time or times; and also to go and fetch me the fairy
Sibylla, that I may talk with her in all kind of talk, as I shall call her by
any conjuration of words contained in this book. I conjure thee spirit N. by
the great wisdom and divinity of his Godhead, my will to fulfill as is
aforesaid; I charge thee upon pain of condemnation, both in this world, and in
the world to come; Fiat, fiat, fiat, Amen.

This done go to a place fast by, and in a fair parlor or chamber, make a
circle with chalk, as hereafter follows: and make another circle for the
fairie Sibylla to appear in four foot from the circle thou art (...) and make
no names therein; or cast any holy thing therein; but make a circle round with
chalk; and let the master and his fellow sit down in the first circle, the
master having the book in his hand, his fellow having the crystal stone in his
right hand, looking in the stone when the fairie does appear. The master also
must have upon his breast this figure here written in parchment, and begin to
work in the new of the and in the hour of the and the to be in one of
inhabiters signs, as. This bond as follows, is to cause the spirit in the
crystal stone, to fetch unto thee the fairy Sibylia. All things fulfilled,
begin this bond as follows, and be bold, for doubtless they will come before
thee, before the conjuration be read seven times.

I conjure thee spirit N. in this crystal stone, by God the father, by God the
son Jesus Christ, and by God the Holy Ghost, three persons and one God, And why
might not he do it himself, as well as madam Sibylia?
and by their virtues. I conjure thee spirit, that thou do go in peace, and
also to come again to me quickly, and to bring with thee into that circle
appointed, Sibylia fairie, that I may talk with her in those matters that shall
be to her honor and glory; and so I change thee declare unto her. I conjure
thee spirit N. by the blood of the innocent lamb, the which redeemed all the
world, by the virtue thereof. I charge thee thou spirit in the crystal stone,
that thou do declare unto her this message. Also I conjure thee spirit N. by
all angels and archangels, thrones, dominations, principats, potestates,
virtues, cherubim and seraphim, and by their virtues and powers. I conjure thee
N. that thou do depart with speed, and also to come again with speed, and to
bring with thee the fairie Sibylia, to appear in that circle, before I do
read the conjuration in this book seven times. Thus I charge thee my will to
be fulfilled, upon pain of everlasting condemnation: Fiat, fiat, fiat, Amen.

Then the figure aforesaid pinned on thy breast, rehearse the words therein, and
say, Sorthie Sorthia Sorthios then begin your conjuration as follows here,
and say; I conjure thee Sibylia, O gentle virgin of fairies, by the mercy of
the Holy Ghost; and by the dreadful day of doom; and by their virtues and
powers; I conjure thee Sibylia, The fairie Sibylia conjured to appear, etc.
O gentle virgin of fairies, and by all the angels of and their characters and
virtues, and by all the spirits of and and their characters and virtues, and by
all the characters that be in the firmanent and by the king and queen of
fairies, and their virtues, and by the faith and obedience that thou bear
unto them. I conjure thee Sibylia, by the blood that ran out of the side of our
Lord Jesus Christ crucified, and by the opening of heaven, and by the renting
of the Temple, and by the darkness of the Sun in the time of his death, and
by the rising, up of the dead in the time of his resurrection, and by the
Virgin Mary, Mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the unspeakable name of
God Tetragrammaton. I conjure thee O Sibylia; O blessed and beautiful Virgin,
by all the riall words aforesaid, I conjure thee Sibylia by all their virtues
to appear in that circle before me visible, in the form and shape of a
beautiful woman in a bright and white vesture, adorned and garnished most
fair, and to appear to me quickly without deceit or tarrying; and that thou
fail not to fulfill my will and desire effectually. For I will choose thee to
be my blessed virgin, and will have common copulation with thee. Therefore make
have and speed to come unto me, and to appear as I have said before. To whom be
honor and glory for ever ever; Amen.

The which done and ended, if thee come not, repeat the conjuration till they
do come: for doubtless they will come. And when she is appeared, take your
censers, and incense her with frankincense; then bind her with the bond as
follows. The manner of binding the fairie Sibylia at her appearing.
I do conjure thee Sibylia, by God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy
Ghost, three persons and one God, and by the blessed virgin Mary mother of our
Lord Jesus Christ; and by all the whole and holy company of heaven, and by the
dreadful day of doom, and by all angels and archangels, thrones, dominations,
principates, potestates, virtutes, cherubim and seraphim, and their virtues and
powers. I conjure thee and bind thee Sibylia, that thou shall not depart out
of the circle wherein thou art appeared, nor yet to alter thy shape; except I
give thee license to depart. I conjure thee Sibylia by the blood that ran out
of the side of our Lord Jesus Christ crucified, and by the virtue hereof I
conjure thee Sibylia to come to me, and to appear to me at all times visibly,
as the conjuration of words leads, written in this book. I conjure thee
Sibylia, O blessed Virgin of fairies, by the opening of heaven, and by the
renting of the Temple, and by the darkness of the Sun at the time of his
death, and by the rising of the dead in the time of his glorious resurrection,
and by the unspeakable name of God Tetragrammaton and by the king and queen of
fairies, If all this will not fetch her ^ up, the devil is a knave.
and by their virtues I conjure thee Sibylia to appear, before the conjuration
be read over four times, and that visibly to appear, as the conjuration
leads written in this book, and to give me good counsel at all times, and
to come by treasures hidden in the earth, and all other things that is to do me
pleasure, and to fulfill my will without any deceit or tarrying; nor yet that
thou shall have any power of my body or soul, earthly or ghostly; nor yet to
perish so much of my body as one hair of my head. I conjure thee Sibylia by
all the riall words aforesaid, and by their virtues and powers, I charge and
bind thee by the virtue thereof, to be obedient unto me, and to all the words
aforesaid, and this bond to stand between thee and me, upon pain of everlasting
condemnation, Fiat, fiat, fiat; Amen.

CHAP. IX.
A license for Sibylia to go and come by at all times.

I Conjure thee Sibyliae, which art come hither before me, by the commandment
of thy Lord and mine, that thou shall have no powers is thy going or coming
unto me, imagining any evil in any manner of ways, in the earth or under the
earth, of evil doings, to any person or persons. I conjure and command thee
Sibylia by all the riall work and virtues that be written in this Book, that
thou shall not go to the place from whence thou came, but shall remain
peaceably, invisibly and look thou be ready to come unto me, when thou are
called by any conjuration of words that be written in this book, to come (I
say) at my commandment, and to answer unto me truly and duly of all things, my
will quickly to be fulfilled. Vade in pace, in nomine patris, and filii, and
spirtus sancti. And the holy cross be between thee and me, or between us and
you, and the Lion of Judah, the root of Iesse, the kindred of David, be between
thee and me Christ comes Christ commands Christ gives power Christ defend
me and his innocent blood from all perils of body and soul, sleeping or waking:
Fiat, fiat, Amen.

CHAP. X.
To know of treasure hidden in the earth.

This would be much practiced if it were not a cousening knack.
WRite in paper these characters following, on the saturday, in the (...) of,
and lay it where thou think treasure to be: if there be any the paper will
burn, else not. And these be the characters.



This is the way to go invisible by these three sisters of Fairies.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. First go to
a fair parlor or chamber, and an even ground, and in no lost, and from people
nine days; for it is the better: and let all thy clothing be clean and sweet.
Then make a candle of Virgin wax, and light it, and make a fair fire of
charcoles, in a fair place, in the middle of the parlour or chamber. Then take
fair clean water, that runs against the east, and set it upon the fire: and
yet thou wathest thy self, say these words, going about the fire three times
holding the candle in the right hand Panthon Craton Muriton Lisecognaton Seston
Diaton Maton Tet^agrammaton Agla Agarion Tegra Pentessaron Tendicata Then
rehearse these names So thie Sorthia Sortheos Milia Achilia Sibylia In nomine
patris, and filii, and spiritus sancti; The three sisters of the fairies,
Milia, Achilia, and Sibylia.
Amen. I conjure you three sisters of fairies, Milia, Achilia, Sibylia; by the
Father, by the Son, and by the Holy Ghost, and by their virtues and powers, and
by the most merciful and living God, that will command his angel to blow the
trump at the day of Judgment; and he shall say, Come, come, come to judgment;
and by all angels, archangels, thrones, dominations, principats, potesta^es,
virtutes, cherubim and seraphim, and by their virtues and powers. I conjure you
three sisters, by the virtue of all the riall words aforesaid: I charge you
that you do appear before me visibly, in form and shape of fair women, in
white vestures, and to bring with you to me, the ring of invisibility, by the
which I may go invisible at mine own will and pleasure, and that in all
hours and minutes: In nomine patris, and filii, and spiritus sancti, Amen.

* Being appeared, say this bond following.

O blessed virgins Milia Achili^ I conjure you in the name of the Father, in
the name of the Son, and in the name of the Holy Ghost, and by their virtues I
charge you to depart from me in peace for a time. And Sibylia I conjure thee,
by the virtue of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the virtue of his flesh and
precious blood, that he took of our blessed Lady the Virgin, and by all the
holy company in heaven I charge thee Sibylia, by all the virtues aforesaid,
that thou be obedient unto me, in the name of God; that when, and in what time
and place I shall call thee by this foresaid conjuration written in this book,
look thou be ready to come unto me, The ring of invisibility.
at all hours and minutes, and to bring unto me the ring of invisibility,
whereby I may go invisible at my will and pleasure, and that at all hours and
minutes; Fiat, fiat. Amen.

And if he come not the first night, then do the same the second night and so
the third night, until they do come, for doubtless they will come, and lie
thou in thy bed, in the same parlor or chamber. And lay thy right hand out of
the bed, and look thou have a fair silken kercher bound abound thy head, and
be not afraid, they will do thee no harm. For there will come before thee
three fair women, and all in white clothing: and one of them will put Such a
ring it was that advanced Giges to the kingdom of Ly^ia, Plato lib. 2. de justo.
a ring upon thy finger, wherewith thou shall go invisible. Then with speed
bind them with the bond aforesaid. When thou have this ring on thy finger,
look in a glass, and thou shall not see thy self. And when thou will go
invisible, put in on thy finger, the same finger that they did put it on, and
every new renew it again* For after the first time thou shall ever have it, and
ever begin this work in the new of the and in the hour of and the in.

CHAP. XI.
An experiment following, of Citrael, etc. angeli diei dominici.

Say first the prayers of the angels every day, for the space of seven days.
O Ye glorious angels written in this square, be you my coadjutors and helpers
in all q^estions and demands, in all my business, and other causes, by him
which shall ^ome to judge both the quick and the dead, and the world by fire. O
angeli gloriosi in hac quadra scripti, estote c^adjutores and auxiliatores in
omnibus quaestionibus and intervogationibus, in omnibus negotiis, caeterisque
causis per eum qui venturus est judicare vivos and mortuos and mumdum per ignem.

Say this prayer fasting, called O queen or governesse of the tongue.
Regina linguae.
Lemae solma ac elmay gezagra raamaasin ezierego mial egziephiaz Iosamin sabach
ha aem re be esepha sephar ^^mar semoit lemajo pheralon amic phin gergoin le^o^
Amin amin

In the name of the most pitifullest and and mercifullest God of Is^^^^ and of
paradise, of heaven and of earth, of the seas and of the infernals, by thine
omnipotent help may perform this work, which live and reig^est over one God
world without end, Amen.

O most strongest and mightiest God, without beginning or ending, by thy
clemency and knowledge I desire, that my questions, work, and labor may be
fully and truly accomplished through thy worthiness, good Lord, which live
and reignest, ever one God world without e^^ Amen.

O holy, patient, and merciful great God, and to be worshipped, the Lord of
all wisdom, clear and just; I most heartily desire thy holiness and clemency,
to fulfill, perform and accomplish this my whole work, through thy worthynesse
and blessed power: which live and reignest ever one God; Per omnia saecula
saeculorum; Amen.

CHAP. XII.
How to enclose a spirit in a crystal stone.

THis operation following, is to have a spirit enclosed into a crystal stone
or beryll glass, or into any other like instrument, etc. Observations of
cleanliness, abstinence, and devotion.
First thou in the new of the being clothed with all new, and fresh and clean
array, and shaven, and that day to fast with bread and water; and being clean
confessed, say the seven Psalms, and the Letany for the space of two days,
with this prayer following.

I desire thee O Lord God, my merciful and most loving God, the giver of all
graces, the giver of all sciences; grant that I thy wel-beloved N. (although
unworthy) may know thy grace and power, against all the deceipts and
craftiness of devils. And grant to me thy power good Lord, to constrain them
by this art: for thou art the true, and lively, and eternal God, which live
and reignest ever one God through all worlds; Amen.

Thou must do this five days* and the sixth day have in a readiness, five
bright swords: An observation touching the use of the five swords.
and in some secret place make one circle with one of the said swords. And then
write this name, Sitrael, which done standing in the circle, thrust in thy
sword into that name. And write again Malanthon, with another sword; and
Thamaor, with another; and Falaur, with another; and Sitrami, with another: and
ode as ye did with the first. All this done, turn thee to Sitrael, and kneeling
say thus; having the crystal stone in thine hands.

O Sitrael, Malantha, Thamaor, Falaur, and Sitrami, Written in these circles,
appointed to this work; I do conjure, and I do exorcise you, by the Father,
by the Son, and by the Holy Ghost, by him which cast you out of Paradise, and
by him which spoke the word and it was done, and by him which shall come to
judge the quick and the dead, and the world by fire, that all you five
infernal masters and princes do come unto me, to accomplish and to fulfill
all my desire and request, which I shall command you. A weighty charge of
conjuration upon the five Kings of the nor^h.
Also I conjure you devils, and command you, I bid you, and appoint you, by the
Lord Jesus Christ, the son of the most highest God, and by the blessed and
glorious Virgin Mary, and by all the Saints, both of men and women of God, and
by all the Angels, Archangels, Patriarchs, and prophets, Apostles,
Evangelists, martyrs and confessors, virgins, and widows, and all the elect
of God. Also I conjure you, and every of you, ye infernal Kings by the heaven,
by the stars, by the and by the and by all the planets, by the earth, fire,
air and water, and by the terrestrial paradise, and by all things in them
contained, and by your hell, and by all the devils in it, and dwelling about
it, and by your virtue and power, and by all whatsoever, and with whatsoever it
be, which may constrain and bind you. Therefore by all these foresaid virtues
and powers, I do bind you and constrain you into my will and power; that you
being thus bound, may come unto me in great humility, and to appear in your
circles before me visibly, in fair form and shape of mankind kings, and to obey
unto me all things, whatsoever I shall desire, and that you may not depart from
me without my license. A penalty for not appearing, etc.
And if you do against my precepts, I will promise unto you that you shall
descend into the profound deep^^sse of the Sea, except that you do obey unto
me, in the part of the living son of God, which lives and reigns in the
unity of the Holy Ghost, by all world of worlds, Amen.

Say this true conjuration five courses, and then shall thou see come out of
the Northpart five Kings with a mavelous company: which wh^^ they are come to
the circle, they will alight down off from their hors^ and will kneel down
before thee, saying: Master, command us w^^^ thou will, and we will out of hand
be obedient unto thee. Unto whom thou shall say; see that ye depart not from
me, without my license; and that which I will command you to do, let it be
done truly, su^ely, faithfully, and essentially. And then they all will swear
unto thee to do all thy will; And after they have sworn, say the conjuration
immediately following.

The five spirits of the north: as you shall see in the type expressed in page
287. next following.
I conjure, charge, and command you, and every of you Sirrael, Mal^^than,
Thamaar, Falaur, and Sitrami, you infernal kings, to put into the crystal
stone one spirit learned ^^d expert in all arts and sciences, by the virtue of
this name of God Tetragrammaton, and by the cross of our Lo^^ Jesus Christ,
and by the blood of the innocent lamb, which redeemed all the world, and by
all their virtues and powe^s I charge you, ye ^oble kings, that the said spirit
may teach, show and declare unto me, and to my friends, at all hours and
minutes, both night and day, the m^^ of all things both bodily and ghostly, in
this world, whatsoever I shall request or desire, declaring also to me my very
name. And this I command in your part to do, and to obey thereunto, as unto
your ow^ Lord and Master. That done, they will call a certain spirit, whom th^^
will command to enter into the center of the circled or round crystal. T^^^ put
the crystal between the two circles, and thou shall see the crys^^^^ made
black.

Then command them to command the spirit in the crystal, not (...) depart out
of the stone, till thou give him license, and to fulfill (...) will for ever.
That done, thou shall see them go upon the crystal both to answer your
requests, and to tarry your license. That done the spirits will crave license:
and say; Go ye to your place appoin^^^ of Almighty God, in the name of the
father, etc. And then take up (...) crystal, and look therein, asking what
thou will, and it will show it ^^to thee. Let all your circles be nine foot
every way, and made as fo^loweth. Work this work in or in the hour of the or ^
And when the spirit is enclosed, if thou fear him, bind him with some bond,
in such sort as is elsewhere expressed already in this (...) treatise.

A figure or type proportional, showing what form must be observed and kept,
in making the figure whereby the former secret of enclosing a spirit in
crystal is to be accomplished, etc.
The names written within the five circle do signify t^^ five infernal
kings: See page 292.293.294.


CHAP. XIII.
An experiment of Bealphares.

THis is proved the noblest carrier that ever did serve any man upon the earth,
and here begins the enclosing of the said spirit, and how to have a true
answer of him, without any craft or harm; and he will appear unto thee in the
likeness of a fair man or fair woman; the which spirit will come to thee at
all times. And if thou will command him to tell thee of hidden treasures that
be in any place, he will tell it thee: or if thou will command him to bring to
thee gold or silver, he will bring it thee: or if thou will go from one
country to another, he will bear thee without any harm of body or soul.
Therefore Memorandum with what vices the cousenor (the conjuror I should say)
must not be polluted; therefore he must be no knave, etc.
he that will do this work, shall abstain from leacherousnesse and
drunkenness, and from false swearing, and do all the abstinence that he may
do* and namely three days before he go to work, and in the third day when
the night is come, and when the stars do shine, and the element fair and
clear, he shall bath himself and his fellows (if he have any) all together in
a quick welspring. Then he must be clothed in clean white clothes, and he
must have another privy place, and bear him ink and pen, wherewith he shall
write this holy name of God Almighty in his right hand Agla and in his left
hand this name ^^^ and he must have a dry thong of a lions or of a h^^e skin,
and make thereof a girdle, and write the holy names of God all above and in the
end A and O. And upon his breast he must have this present figure or mark
written in virgin parchment, as it is here showed. The conjurors breast plate.
And it must b^sowed upon a piece of new linen, an^ so made fast upon thy
breast. And if tho^ wilt have a fellow to work with thee, he must be
appointed in the same manner. You must have also a bright knife that was never
occupied, and he must write on the one side of the blade of the knife Agla and
on the other side of the knifes blade ^^^ And with the same knife he must make
a circle, Salomons circle.
as hereafter follows: the which is called Salomons circle. When that he is
made, go into the circle, and close again the place, there where the wentest
in, with the same knife, and say; Per crucis ho^ signum su^ at procui omne
malignum; Et per idem signum salvetur quodque bex^num, By the sign of the
Cross may all evil fly far away, and by the same sign may all that is good
be preserved; and make suffur^gations to thy self, and to thy fellow or
fellows, with frankincense, m^stike, lignum aloes: then put it in wine, and say
with good devotion, in the worship of the high God Almighty, all together, that
he may defend you from all evils. And when he that is master will close the
spirit, he shall say toward the east with meek and devout devotion, these
psalms and prayers as follows here in order.

The two and twentieth Psalm.
O My God my God, look upon me, why have thou forsaken me, and art so far
from my health, and from the words of my complaint? Memorandum that you must
read the 22. and 51 Psalms all over; ^r else rehearse them by heart; for these
are counted necessary, etc.
And so forth to the end of the same psalm, as it is to be found in the book.

This psalm also following, being the fifty one psalm, must be said three
times ever, etc.
HAve mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness, according to the
multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offenses, And so forth to the end of
the same psalm, concluding it with, Glory to the Father and to the Son, and to
the Holy Ghost, As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be world
without end, Amen. Then say this verse: O Lord leave not my soul with the
wicked; nor my life with the bloodthirsty. Then say a Pater noster, an Ave
Maria, and a Credo, and ne nos inducas. O Lord show us thy mercy, and we shall
be saved. Lord hear our prayer, and let our cry come unto thee. Let us pray.

O Lord God almighty, as thou warnedst by thine angel, the three kings of
Cullen, Jasper, M^lchior, and Balthazar, when they came with worshipful
presents toward Bethlehem; Jasper brought myrrh; Melchior, incense, Balthazar,
gold; worshipping the high king of all the world, Jesus Gods son of heaven, the
second person in Trinity, being born of the holy and clean virgin S. Mary
queen of heaven, empress of hell, and lady of all the world: at that time the
holy angel Gabriel warned and had the foresaid three kings, that they should
take another way, for dread of peril, that Herod the king by his ordinance
would have destroyed these Gaspar, Balthazar, and Melchior, who followed the
star, wherein was the image of a little babe bearing a cross; i^ Longa legenda
Coloniae lie not.
three noble kings, that meekly sought out our Lord and Savior. As wittily and
truly as these three Kings turned for dread, and took another way; so wisely
and so truly, O Lord God, of thy mightifull mercy, bless u^ now at this time,
for thy blessed passion save us, and keep us all together from all evil; and
thy holy angel defend us. Let us pray.

O Lord, King of all Kings, which containest the throne of heavens, and
beholdest all deeps, weighest the hills, and shuttest up with thy hand the
earth, hear us most meeke^t God, and grant unto us (being unworthy) according
to thy great mercy, to have the verity and virtue of knowledge of hidden
treasure by this spirit invo^cated, through thy help O Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be all honor and glory, from worlds to worlds everlastingly, Amen. Then
say these names Helic ^ely^ essejero D^us ^^ternus cloy clemen^ ^eloye Deus
sanctus sab^oti Deus exerc^^^ ^donay Deus mirabilis jao verax aneph^neton Deus
ineffabilis sodoy dominator dominus on sortissimus Deus qui, the which would
be prayed unto of sinners receive ( we beseech thee) these sacrifices of
praise, and our meek prayers, which we unworthy do offer unto thy divine
majesty. Deliver us, and have mercy upon us, and prevent with thy holy spirit
this work, and with thy blessed help to follow after; that this our work begun
of thee, may be ended by thy mighty power. Amen. Then say this anon after homo
sacarus Museolameus ^heruborca being the figure upon thy breast aforesaid, the
girdle about thee, the circle made, bless the circle with holy water, and sit
down in the midst and read this conjuration as follows, sitting back to back
at the first time.

I exorcise and conjure Bealphares, the practiser and preceptor of this art, by
the maker of heavens and of earth, and by his virtue and by his unspeakable
name Tetragrammaton, and by all the holy sacraments, and by the holy majesty
and deity of the living God. I conjure and exorcise thee Bealphares by the
virtue of all angels, archangels, thrones, dominations, principa^s, potestats,
virtures, cherubim and seraphim; and by their virtues, and by the most truest
and speciallest name of your master that you do come unto us, in fair form of
man or woman kind, been visibly before this circle; and not terrible by any
manner of ways* This Which must be environed with a goodly company of grosses.
circle being our tuition and protection, by the merciful goodness of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and that you do make answer truly, without
craft or deceit, unto all my demands and questions, by the virtue and power of
our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

CHAP. XIIII.
To bind the spirit Bealphares, and to loose him again.

NOw when he is appeared, bind him with these words which follow On sundays,
festival days, and holy days, none excepted.
I conjure thee Bealphares, by God the father, by God the son and by God the
Holy Ghost, and by all the holy company in heaven; and by their virtues and
powers I charge thee Bealphares, that thou shall not depart out of my sight,
nor yet to alter thy bodily shape, that thou art appeared in, nor any power
shall thou have of our bodies or souls, eartly or ghostly, but to be obedient
to me, and to the words of my conjuration, that be written in this book. I
conjure thee Bealphares, by all angels and archangels, thrones, dominations,
principats, potestates, vertutes, cherubim and seraphim, and by their virtues
and powers. I conjure and charge, bind and constrain thee Bealphares, by all
the (...) words aforesaid, and by their virtues that thou be obedient unto me,
and to come and appear visibly unto me, and that in all days, hours and
minutes, wheresoever I be, being called by the virtue of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the which words are written in this book. Look ready thou be to appear unto
me, and to give me good counsel, how to come by treasures hidden in the
earth, or in the water, and how to come to dignity and knowledge of all things,
that is to say, of the magic art, and of grammar, dialectike, rhetorike,
arithmeticke, music, geometry, and of astromomy, and in all other things my
will quickly to be fulfilled; I charge upon pain of everlasting condemnation,
Fiat, fiat, fiat, Amen.

When he is thus bound, He dares do no other being so conjured I trow.
ask him what thing thou will, and he will tell thee, and give thee all things
that thou will request of him, without any sacrifice doing to him, and without
forsaking thy God, that is, thy maker. And when the spirit has fulfilled thy
will and intent, give him license to depart as follows.

A license for the spirit to depart.
GO unto the place predestined and appointed for thee; where thy Lord God
has appointed thee, until I shall call thee again. Be thou ready unto me and
to my call, as often as I shall call thee, upon pain of everlasting damnation.
And if thou will, thou may recite, two or three times the last conjuration,
until thou do come to this ^earin, In throno, If he will not depart, and then
say In throno, that thou depart from this place, without hurt or damage of any
body, or of any deed to be done; that all creatures may know, that our Lord is
of all power, most mightiest, and that there is none other God but he, which is
three, and one, living for ever and ever. And the malediction of God the father
omnipotent, the son and the holy ghost, descend upon thee, and dwell always
with thee, except thou do depart without damage of us, or of any creature, or
any other evil deed to be done; and thou to go to the place predestined.
And by our Lord Jesus Christ I do else send thee to the great pit of hell,
except (I say) that thou depart to the place, whereas thy Lord God has
appointed thee And see thou be ready to me and to my call, at all times and
places, at mine own will and pleasure, day or night, without damage or hurt of
me, or of any creature; upon pain of everlasting damnation: Fiat, fiat, fiat,
Amen, Amen. The peace of Jesus Christ be between us and you; in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen. Por crucis hoc signum etc.
Say In principio erat verbum, and verbum erat apud Deum; In the beginning was
the word, and the word was with God, and God was the word: and so forward, as
follows in the first chapter of saint John's Gospel, staying at these words,
Full of grace and truth: to whom be all honor and glory world without end,
Amen.

The fashion or form of the conjuring knife, with the names thereon to be
graven or written.


A type or figure of the circle for the master and his fellows to sit in,
showing how, and after what fashion it should be made.



THis is the circle for the master to sit in, and his fellow or fellows, at
the first calling, sit back to back, when he calls the spirit; and for the
fairies make this circle with chalk on the ground, as is said before. This
spirit Bealphares being once called and found, shall never have power to hurt
thee. Call him in the hour of or the increasing.

CHAP. XV.
The making of the holy water.

EXorciso te creaturam salis, Absque exorcis^no sal not sit sanctus.

It is not convenient to English these 4 following Exorcismes, the name and
power of God is so often therein abused to a vain and ridiculous purpose.


per Deum vivum per Deum verum per Deum sanctum per Duem qui te per Elizaeum
prophetam in aquam mitli jussit, ^t^s naretur sterrilitas aquae, ut efficia^is
sal exorcisa^us in saluum credentium; ut sit omnibus te sumentibus sanitas
animae and corporis, and essugiat atque discedat ab co loco qui aspersus st^^at
omnis phantasia and nequitia, vel versutia diabolicae fraudis, omnisque
spiritus, adjuratus per cum, qui venturus est judicare vivos and mo tuos, and
saeculum perignem Amen. Oremus:

Imunsam clementiam tuam, omnipotens aeterne Deus, humiliter imploramus, ut
hanc creaturam salis, quam in usum generis humani tribuisti, been dicere and
sancti ficare tua prelate digneris, ut sit omnibus sumentibus sa^is menlis and
corporis, ut quicquid ex co tactum suerit, vel respersum, careat omni
immundicia, omnique impugnatione spiritualis nequitia, per Dominum nostrum
Iesum Christum filium tuum, qui tecum vivit and regnat in unitate spiritus
sancti, Deus per omnia saecula saeculorum, Amen.

To the water say also as follows.
Exorciso te creaturam aquae in nomine patris and Jesus Christi filii ejus
Domini nostri, and in virtute spiritus sanct ut siat aquae exorcisata, ad
estisgandam omnem potestatem inimici, and ipsum inimicum erodicare and
explantare valeas, cum angelis suis apostatis, per virtutem ejusdem Domini
nostri Jesus Christi, qui venturus est judicare vivos and mortuos, and saeculum
per ignem, Amen. Oremus:

Deus, qui ad salutem humani generis maxima quaeque sacramenta in aquarum
substantia condidisti, adesto propitius invocationibus, nostris, and elemento
buic, m^ltimodis purificationibus praeparato, virtutem tuae been dictionis
insunde, ut creatura tua mysteriis tuis servicas, ad abigendos daemones,
ma^bosque pellendos, divinae gratiae sumat effectum, ut quicquid in domibus,
vel inlocis fidelium haec unda resperserit, careat omni immunditia, liberetur a
noxa, non illic residea^ spiritus, pestilens, non aura corrumpens, discedant
omnes insidi^ latentis inimici, and si quid est, quod aut incolumitati
habitantium invidet aut quieti, asper sione hujus aquae effugiat, ut salubritas
per invocationem sancti tui nominis expetita ab omnibus sit impugnationibus
desensa, per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum filium tuum, qui tecum vivil and
regnat, in unitate spiritus sancti, Deus per omnia saecula saeculorum, Amen.

Then take the salt in thy hand, and say putting it into the water, making in
the manner of a Cross.
Commixtio salis and aquae pariter fiat, in nomine patris, and filii, and
spiritus sancti, Amen. Dom^aus v^biscum, Et cum spiritu tuo Oremus: Oration ad
Deum ^^ sali exor^^sato vires addat.
Deus m^cte virtutis author, and insuperabil^s imperit ^ex, a^ semper
magnificus ritum^ bator, qui ad: ^^^ae dominationis v^^^s rep^^mis, qui inimici
rugi^u^ sa vitiam superas, qui hostiles nequittas potens ^a pugnas; te Domine
trementes and su plices d^p^^^a^u^ a^ potimus, ut hanc ^r^^^t^am salis and
aquae aspi^ias, bemguus (...) es, putails tuae rore sanct. fices, ubicunque
fu^^ll aspersa, per invocationem sancti tui nominis, omnis infestatio in mundi
spiritus ab^^tatur, terrorque venenosi se pantis procul pellatur; and
praesevita sancti spiritus nobis (...) tuam poscentibus ubique adesse dignetur,
per Dominum nostrum Ipsum ^ brisium filium ^^^un, qui ^^cum vivit and regnat in
unitate spiritus sancti Deus per omnia soecula saeculerum, Amen.

Then sprinkle upon any thing, and say as follows.
Oration, in quae dicenda, exorcisia sese sacr^ laticis aspergine debet
pe^rora^e.
Asperges me Domine ^yssopo, and mundabor, lavabis me, and supra niven
dealbabor. Miscrere mei Deus, secundum magnam misericordiaum tuam, and supra
nivem deal^abor. Gloria patri, and filio, and spiritus sancto: Sicut (...) in
principio, and nunc, and semper, and in saecula saeculorum, Amen. Et supra
nivem dealbabor, aspergesme etc. Oslende nobis domine mis^rcordiam tuam, and
salutare tuum da nobis; exaudi nos Domine sancte, pater omnipoteus, aete^^^
Deus, and mittere dignere sanctum angelum tuum de coelis, qui custodiat, so^^^,
visitet, and defendat omnes habitantes in hoc ^abitaculo, per Christum Dominus
nostrum. Amen, Amen.

CHAP. XVI.
To make a spirit to appear in a crystal.

I Do conjure thee N. by the father, and the son, and the Holy ghost, the
which is the beginning and the ending, the first and the last, an by the latter
day of judgment, that thou N. do appear in this crystal stone, or any other
instrument, at my pleasure, to me and my fellow, gently and beautifully, in
fair form of a boy of twelve years of age, without hurt or damage of any of
our bodies or souls; and certainly to inform and to show me, without any
guile or craft, all that we do desire or demand of thee to know, by the virtue
of him, which shall come to judge the quick and the dead, and the world by
fire, Amen.

Mark how consonant this is with popery, etc.
Also I conjured and exorcise thee N. by the sacrament of the altar, and by the
substance thereof, by the wisdom of Christ, by the sea, and by his virtue, by
the earth, and by all things that are above the earth, and by their virtues, by
the and the by and and by their virtues, by the apostles, martyrs, confessors,
and the virgins and widows, and the chaste, and by all saints of men or of
women, and innocents, and by their virtues, by all the angels and archangels,
thrones, dominations, principats, potestats, virtutes, cherubim, and seraphim,
and by their virtues, and by the holy names of God, Tetragrammaton, El O^sion,
A^la, and by all the other holy names of God, and by their virtues, by the
circumcision, passion, and resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, by the
heavines of our lady the virgin, and by the joy which she had when she saw her
son rise from death to life, that thou N. do appear in this crystal stone,
or any other instrument, at my pleasure, to me and to my ^e low, gently, and
beautifully, and visibly, in fair form of a child of twelve years of age,
without hurt or damage of any of our bodies or souls, and truly to inform and
show unto me and to my fellow, without fraud or guile, all things according to
thine oath and promise to me, whatsoever I shall demand or desire of thee,
without any hindrance or ca^rying, and this conjuration be read of me three
times, upon pain of eternal condemnation, to the last day of judgment: Fiat,
fiat, fiat, Amen.

And when he is appeared, bind him with the hand of the dead above written:
then say as follows. For hidden treasure.
I charge thee N. by the father, to show me true visions in this crystal
stone, if there be any treasure hidden in such a place N and wherein it lies,
and how many foot from this piece of earth, east, west, north, or south.

CHAP. XVII.
An experiment of the dead.

FIrst go and get of some person that shall be put to death, a promise, and
swear an oath unto him, that it he will come to thee, after his death, his
spirit to be with thee, and to remain with thee all days of thy life, and
will do thee true service, as it is contained in the oath and promise
following. Promises and oaths interchangeably made between the conjuror and
the spirit.
Then lay thy hand on thy book, and swear this oath unto him. I N. do swear
and promise to thee N. to give for thee an alms every month, and also to
pray for thee once in every week, to say the Lords prayer for thee, and so to
continue all the days of my life, as God me help and holy doom, and by the
contents of this book, Amen.

Then let him make his oath to thee as follows, and let him say after thee,
laying his hand upon the book. * I N. do swear this oath to thee N. by God
the father omnipotent, by God the son Jesus Christ, and by his precious blood
which has redeemed all the world, by the which blood I do trust to be saved at
the general day of judgment, and by the virtues thereof, I N. do swear this
oath to thee N. that my spirit that is within my body now, shall not ascend,
nor descend, nor go to any place of rest, but shall come to thee N. and be very
well pleased to remain with thee N. all the days of thy life, and so to be
bound to thee N. and to appear to thee N. in any crystal stone, glass, or
other mirror, and so to take it for my resting place. And that, so soon as my
spirit is departed out of my body, straightway to be at your commandments, and
that in and at all days, nights, hours, and minutes, to be obedient unto thee
N. being called of the e^by the virtue of our Lord Jesus Christ, and our of
hand to have common talk with thee at all times, and in all hours and
minutes, to open and declare to thee N. the truth of all things present, past
and to come, and how to work the magic art and all other noble sciences,
under the throne of God. If I do not perform this oath and promise to thee N.
but do fly from any part thereof, Note the penalty of breaking promise with
the spirit.
then to be condemned for ever and ever, Amen.

Also I N. do swear to thee by God the Holy ghost, and by the great wisdom
that is in the divine Godhead, and by their virtues, and by all the holy
angels, archangels, thrones, dominations, principats, poteslaus, virtutes,
cherubim and seraphim, and by all their virtues do I N. swear, and promise
thee to be obedient as is rehearsed. And here, for a witness, do I N. give
thee N. my right hand, and do plight thee my faith and troth, as God me help
and holydome. And by the holy contents in this book do I N. swear, that my
spirit shall be thy true servant, all the days of thy life, as is before
rehearsed and here for a witness, that my spirit shall be obedient unto thee N.
and to those bonds of words that be written in this N. before the bonds of
words shall be rehearsed thrice; else to be damned for ever: and thereto say
all faithful souls and spirits, Amen, Amen.

Then let him swear this oath Three times, in reverence (peradventure) of the
Trinity, P. F. SS.
three times, and at every time kiss the book, and at every time make marks to
the bond. Then perceiving the time that he will depart, get away the people
from you, and get or take your stone or glass, or other thing in your hand,
and say the Pater noster, Ave and Credo, and this prayer as follows. And in
all the time of his departing, rehearse the bonds of words; and in the end of
every bond, say oftentimes; Remember thine oath and promise. And bind him
strongly to thee, and to thy stone, and suffer him not to depart, reading thy
bond 24. times And every day when you do call him by your other bond, bind him
strongly by the first bond: by the space of 24. days apply it, and thou shall
be made a man for ever.

Now the Pater noster, Ave, and Credo must be said, and then the prayer
immediately following.
O God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, God of Tobias; ^he which did
deliver the three children from the hot burning oven, Sidrac, Misac, and
Abednago, and Susanna from the false crime, and Daniel from the lions power:
even so O Lord omnipotent, I beseech thee, for thy great mercy sake, to help
me in these my works, and to deliver me this spirit of N. that he may be a true
subject unto me N. all the days of my life, and to remain with me, and with
this N. all the days of my life. O glorious God, Father, Son, and Holy
ghost, I beseech thee to help me at this time, and to give me power by thy holy
name, merits and virtues, whereby I may conjure and constrain this spirit of N.
that he may be obedient unto me, and may fulfill his oath and promise, at all
times, by the power of all thine holiness. This grant O Lord God of hosts, as
thou art righteous and holy, and as thou art the word, and the word God, the
beginning and the end, sitting in the thrones of thine everlasting kingdoms,
and in the divinity of thine everlasting Godhead, to whom be all honor and
glory, now and for ever and ever, Amen, Amen.

CHAP. XVIII.
A bond to bind him to thee, and to thy N. as follows.

IN conjure and constrain the spirit of N. by the living God, Note the sum of
this obligation or bond.
by the true God, and by the holy God, and by their virtues and powers I
conjure and constrain the spirit of thee N. that thou shall not ascend nor
descend out of thy body, to no place of rest, but only to take thy resting
place with N. and with this N. all the days of my life, according to thine
oath and promise I conjure and constrain the spirit of N. by these holy names
of God Tetragrammaton Adonay Agla Saday Sabbath planabothe panthon craton
vcupmaton Deus homo omnipotens sempiternus ysus terra unigenitus salvator via
vila manus sons origo filius and by their virtues and powers I conjure and
constrain the spirit of N. that thou shall not remain in the fire, nor in the
water, in the aier, nor in any privy pla^e of the earth, but only with me N.
and with this N. all the days of my life. I charge the spirit of N. upon pain
of everlasting condemnation, remember thine oath and promise. Also I conjure
the spirit of N. and constrain thee by the excellent name of Jesus Christ, A
and O, the first and the last; for this holy name of Jesus is above all names,
for unto Scripture as well applied of the conjuror, as that of satan in
tempting Christ Matthew. 4.6.
it all knees do bow and obey both of heavenly things, earthly things, and
infernals. Nor is there any other name given to man, whereby we have any
salvation, but by the name of Jesus. Therefore by the name, and in the name of
Jesus of Nazareth, and by his nativity, resurrection and ascension, and by all
that appertains to his passion, and by their virtues and powers, I do conjure
and constrain the spirit of N. that thou shall not take any resting place in
the not in the nor in nor in nor in nor in nor in nor in any of the twelve
signs, nor in the concavity of the clouds, nor in any other privy place, to
rest or stay in, but only with me N. or with this N. all the days of my life.
If thou be not obedient unto me, according to thine oath and promise, I N. do
condemn the spirit of N. into the pit of bell for ever, Amen.

I conjure and constrain the spirit of N. by the blood of the innocent lamb
Jesus Christ, the which was shed upon the cross, for all those that do obey
into it, and believe in it, shall be saved and by virtue thereof, and by all
the aforesaid riall names and words of the living God by me pronounced, I do
conjure and constrain the spirit of N. that thou do be obedient unto me,
according to thine oath and promise. If thou refuse to do as is aforesaid, Note
what sore penalties the spirit is enjoined to suffer for disobedience.
I N by the holy Trinity, and by his virtue and power do condemn the spirit of
N. into the place whereas there is no hope of ^^ehiedy, but everylasting
condemnation, and honor, and pain upon pain daily, horribly, and lamentably,
the pains there to be augmented, so thick as the stars in the firmament, and
as the gravel sand in the sea: except thou spirit of N. obey me N. as is before
rehearsed; else I N. do condemn the spirit of N. into the pit of everlast^ng
condemnation; Fiat, fiat, Amen.

Also I conjure thee, and constrain the spirit of N. by all angels,
archangels, thrones, dominations, principats, porestats, virtutes, cherubim and
seraphim, and by the four evangelist, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, and by
all things contained in the old law and the new, and by their virtues, and by
the twelve apostles, and by all patriarchs, prophets, martyrs, confessors,
virgins, innocents, and by all the elect and chosen, is, and shall be, which
follows the lamb of God; and by their virtues and powers I conjure and
constrain the spirit of N. strongly, to have common talk with me, at all
times, and in all days, nights, hours, and minutes, and to talk in my mother
tongue plainly, that I may hear it, and understand it, declaring the truth
unto me of all things, according to thine oath and promise; else to be
condemned for ever; Fiat, fiat, Amen.

Also I conjure and constrain the spirit of N. by the There is no mention made
in the gospels that Christ was worth a golden girdle.
golden girdle, which girdeth the loins of our Lord Jesus Christ, so thou
spirit of N. be thou bound and cast into the pit of everlasting condemnation,
for thy great disobedience and unreverent regard that thou have to the holy
names and words of God almighty, by me pronounced: Fiat, Amen.

Also I conjure, constrain, command, and bind the spirit of N. by the two
edged sword which John saw proceed out of the mouth of God almighty: except
thou be obedient as is aforesaid, Bugs words.
the sword cut thee in pieces, and condemn thee into the pit of everlasting
pains, where the fire goes not out, and where the worm dies not; Fiat,
fiat, fiat, Amen.

Also I conjure and constrain the spirit of N. by the throne of the Godhead,
and by all the heavens under him, and by the celestial city new Jerusalem, and
by the earth, by the sea, and by all things created and contained therein; and
by their virtues and powers, and by all the infernalls, and by their virtues
and powers, and by all things contained therein, and by their virtues and
powers, I conjure and constrain the spirit of N. that now immediately thou be
obedient unto me, at all times hereafter, and to those words of me pronounced
according to thine oath and promise: Is it possible to be greater than S.
Adelberts curse?
else let the great curse of God, the anger of God, the shadow and darkness
of everlasting condemnation be upon thee thou spirit of N. for ever and ever,
because thou have denied thine health, thy faith, and salvation, for the great
disobedience thou art worthy to be condemned. Therefore let the divine trinity,
angels and archangels, thrones, dominations, principats, ^potesta^es, virtutes,
cherubim and seraphim, and all the souls of the saints, that shall stand on
the right hand of our Lord Jesus Christ, at the general day of judgment,
condemn the spirit of N. for ever and ever, and be a witness against thee,
because of thy great disobedience, in and against thy promises, Fiat, fiat,
Amen.

Being thus bound, he must needs be obedient unto thee, whether he will or no:
prove this* And here follows a bond to call him to your N. and to show you
true visions at all times, as in the hour of to bind or inchant any thing,
These planetary hours must in any case be observed.
and in the hour of for peace and concord, in the hour of to mar, to
destroy, and to make sick, in the hour of the to bind tongues and other bonds
of men in the hour of to increase love, joy, and good will, in the hour of to
put away enimity or hatred, to know of theft, in the hour of the for love,
goodwill and concord, lead tin iron gold copper quicksiver silver, etc.

CHAP. XIX.
This bond as follows, is to call him into your crystal stone, or glass,
etc.

ALso I do conjure thee spirit N. by God the father, by God the son, and by
God the holy ghost, A and O, the first and the last, and by the latter day of
judgment, of them which shall come to judge the quick and the dead, and the
world by fire, and by their virtues and powers I constrain thee spirit N. to
come to him that holds the crystal stone in his hand, and to appear
visibly, as hereafter follows. Also^ I conjure thee spirit N. by these holy
names of God Tetragrammaton Adonay El Ousion Agla Jesus of Nazareth and by the
virtues thereof, and by his nativity, death, burial, resurrection, and
ascension, and by all other things appertaining unto his passion, and by the A
popish supplement.
blessed virgin Mary mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by all the joy which
she had when she saw her son rise from death to life, and by the virtues and
powers thereof I constrain thee spirit N. to come into the crystal stone, and
to appear visibly, as hereafter shall be declared. Also I conjure thee N. thou
spirit, by all angels, archangels, thrones, dominations, principats, potestats,
virtues, cherubim and seraphim, and by the, and by the twelve signs, and by
their virtues and powers, and by all things created and confirmed in the
firmament, and by their virtues and powers I constrain thee spirit N. to
appear visibly in that crystal stone, in fair Belike he had the gift to
appear in sundry shapes, as it is said of P^o^eus in Ovid. lib. natamor. 8.
fab. 10. and of Vertumnus; lib. metamor. 14. fab. 16.
form and ^hape of a white angel, a green angel, a black angel, a man, a
woman, boy, a maiden virgin, a white grayhound, a devil with great horns,
without any hurt or danger of our bodies or souls, and truly to imforme and
show unto us, true visions of all things in that crystal stone, according to
thine oath and promise, and that without any hindrance or tarrying, to appear
visibly, by this bond of words read over by (...) three times, upon pain of
everlasting condemnation* Fiat, fiat, Amen.

Then being appeared, say these words following.
I conjure thee spirit, by God the father, that thou show true visions in that
crystal stone, where there be any N. in such a place or no, upon pain of
everlasting condemnation, Fiat, Amen. Also I conjure thee spirit N. by God the
son Jesus Christ, that thou do show true visions unto us, whether it be gold
or silver, or any other metals, or whether there were any or no, upon pain of
condemnation, Fiat, Amen. Also I conjure thee spirit N. by God the Holy ghost,
the which does sanctify all faithful souls and spirits, and by their virtues
and powers I constrain thee spirit N. to speak, open and to declare the true
way, how we may come by these treasures hidden in N. and how to have it in our
custody, and who are the keepers thereof, and how many there be, and what be
their names, and by whom it was laid there, and to show me true visions of what
sort and similitude they be, and how long they have kept it, and to know in
what days and hours (...) shall call such a spirit, N. to bring unto us these
treasures, into such a plan N. upon pain of everlasting condemnation Also I
constrain thee spirit N. by all angels, archangels, thrones, dominations,
principats, potesta^s virtutes, cherubim and seraphim, that you do show a true
vision in this crystal stone, Note that the spirit is tied to obedience under
pain of condemnation and hell fire.
who did convay or steal away such a N. and where, it is, and who has it, and
how far off, and what is his or her name, and how and when to come unto it,
upon pain of eternal condemnation, Fiat, Amen. Also I conjure thee spirit N.
by the and by all the characters in the firmament, that thou do show unto me a
true vision in this crystal stone, where such N. and in what state he is, and
how long ^e has been there, and what time he will be in such a place, what day
and hour: and this and all other things to declare plainly, in pain of hell
fire; Fiat, Amen.

A license to depart.
Depart out of the sight of this crystal stone in peace for a (...) and ready
to appear therein again at any time or times I shall call thee, by the virtue
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the bonds of words which are written in this
book, and to appear ^^sibly, as the words be rehearsed. I constrain thee
spirit N. by the divinity of the Godhead, to be obedient unto these words
rehearsed, upon pain of everlasting condemnation, both in this world, and in
the world^ come, Fiat, fiat, fiat, Amen.

CHAP. XX.
When to talk with spirits, and to have true answers to find out a theife.

THe days and hours of and the is best to do all crafts of necromancy, and
for to speak with spirits, and for to find theft, and to have true answer
thereof, or of any other such like. This is condemned for rank folly by the
doctors: is by Chysost. sap. Matthew. Gregor. in homil. sap. Epi, hon. Domini;
and others.
And in the days and hours of is best to do all experiments of love, and to
purchase grace, and for to be invisible, and to do any operations whatsoever it
be, for any thing, the being in a convenient sign. This is condemned for rank
folly by the doctors: is by Chysost. sap. Matthew. Gregor. in homil. sap. Epi,
hon. Domini; and others.
As when thou labourest for theft, see the moon be in an earthy sign, as, or
of the air, as, This is condemned for rank folly by the doctors: is by Chysost.
sap. Matthew. Gregor. in homil. sap. Epi, hon. Domini; and others.
And if it be for love, favor or grace, let the be in a sign of the fire, as,
and for hatred, in a sign of the water, as. For any other experiment, let the
be in. This is condemned for rank folly by the doctors: is by Chysost. sap.
Matthew. Gregor. in homil. sap. Epi, hon. Domini; and others.
And if thou find the and the in one sign that is called in even number,
then thou may write, consecrate, conjure, and make ready all manner of things
that thou will do, etc.

To speak with spirits.

Call these names, Orimoth, Belimoth, Lym^ck, and say thus: I conjure you up by
the names of the angels Satur and Azimor, that you intend to me in this hour,
and send unto a me spirit called Sagrigrit, that he do fulfill my commandment
and desire, and that also can understand my words for one or two years, or as
long as I will, etc.

CHAP. XXI.
A confutation of conjuration, especially of the raising, binding and
dismissing of the devil, of going invisible, and other lewd practices.

THus far have we waded in showing at large the vanity of necromancers,
conjurors, All the former practices briefly confuted.
and such as pretend to have real conference and consultation with spirits and
devils: wherein (I trust) you see what notorious blasphemy committed, besides
other blind superstitious ceremonies, a disordered heap, which are so far from
building up the endeavors of these black art practitioners, that they do
altogether ruinate and overthrow them, making them in their follies and
falsehoods as bare and naked as an anatomy. As for these ridiculous
conjurations, last rehearsed, being of no small reputation among the ignorant,
they are for the most part made by T. R. (for so much of his name he bewrays)
and John Cokirs, See the title of the book, with the authors intent, in a
marginall note, page 277.
invented and deviced for the augmentation and maintenance of their living, for
the edifying of the poor, and for the propagating and enlarging of Gods glory,
as in the beginning of their book of conjurations they protest; which in this
place, for the further manifestation of their impiety, and of the witchmongers
folly and credulity, I thought good to insert, whereby the residue of their
proceedings may be judged, or rather detected. For if we seriously behold the
matter of conjuration, and the drift of conjurors, we shall find them, in mine
opinion, more faulty then such as take upon them to be witches, as manifest
offenders against the majesty of God, and his holy law, and as apparent
violators of the laws and quietness of this realm: although indeed they bring
no such thing to pass, as is surmised and urged by c^edulous persons,
cousenors, liars, and witchmongers. For these are always learned, and rather
abusers of others, than they themselves by others abused.

But let us see what appearance of truth or possibility is wrapped within these
mysteries, and let us unfold the deceit. They have made choice of certain
words, whereby they say they can work miracles, etc. And first of all, Luke 6.
etc.
that they call devils and souls out of hell, (though we find in the Scripture
manifest proofs that all passages are stopped concerning the egresse out of
hell) so as they may go thither, but they shall never get out, for Ab inferno
nulla est redemptio, out of hell there is no redemption. Well, when they have
gotten them up, they shut them in a circle made with chalk, which is so
strongly beset and environed with crosses and names, that they cannot for their
lives get out; which is a very probable matter. An ironicall confutation.
Then can they bind them and loose them at their pleasures, and make them that
have been liars from the beginning, to tell the truth, yea they can compel
them to do any thing. And the devils are forced to be obedient unto them, and
yet cannot be brought to due obedience unto God their creator. This done (I
say) they can work all manner of miracles (saving blew miracles) and this is
believed of many to be true; Engli^hed by Abraham Fleming.
Tam credula men's hominis, and arrectae fabulis aures.
So light of belief is the mind of man,
And attentive to tales his ears now and than.


But if Christ (only for a time) left the power of working miracles among his
Apostles and Disciples for the confirmation of his Gospel, and the faith of
his elect: yet I deny altogether that he left that power with these knaves,
which hide their cousening purposes under those lewd and foolish words,
according to that which Peter says; 2 Pet. 2. Ephesians. 5. Psalm. 72 and 78.
With feigned words they make merchandise of you. And therefore the counsel is
good that Paul gives us, when he bids us take heed that no* man deceive us
with vain words. For it is the Lord only that works great wonders, Sap. 16.
Eccles. 43.
and brings mighty things to pass. It is also written, that Gods Word, and
not the words of conjurors, or the charms of witches heals all things, To
deny the subsistence or natural being of a thing material and visible is
impudency.
makes tempests, and stilleth them.

But put case the Devil could be fetched up and fettered, and loosed again at
their pleasure etc. I marvel yet, that any can be so bewitched as to be made
to believe, that by virtue of their words, any earthly creature can be made
invisible. We think it a lie to say that white is black; and black white; but
it is a more shameless assertion to affirm, that white is not, or black is not
at all; and yet more impudency to hold that a man is a horse; but most apparent
impudency to say, that a man is no man, or to be extenuated into such a
quantity, as thereby he may be invisible, and yet remain in life and health,
and that in the clear light of the day, even in the presence of them that are
not blind. But surely he that cannot make one hair white or black, whereof
(on the other side) not one falls from the head without Gods-speciall
providence, can never bring to pass, that the visible creature of God shall
become nothing, or lose the virtue and grace powered thereinto by God the
creator of all things.

If they say that the devil covers them with a cloud or veil, Ezekiel. 8 and 9.
Isa. 6. and 26. and 30.
as M. Mal. Bodin, and many other do affirm; yet (me thinks) we should either
see the cover, or the thing covered. And though perchance they say in their
hearts; Tush, the Lord sees not, who indeed have blinded them, so as seeing,
they see not; yet they shall never be able to persuade the wise, but that both
God and man does see both them and their knavery in this behalf. I have heard
of a fool, who was made believe that he should go invisible and naked; while
he was well whipped by them, who (as he thought) could not see him. Into which
tools paradise they say I^h^ Iareg^i servant to Gasper Anasho both Spianards.
Anno dom. 1582. March 18. after dinner upon a a sunday this mischief was done.
Read the whole discourse hereof printed at London for Tho. Chard, and Will.
Brom booksellers.
he was brought, that enterprised to kill the prince of Orange.

CHAP. XXII.
A compartson betweeen popish exorcis and other conjurors, a popish conjuration
published by a great doctor of the Romish Church, his rules and cautions.

I See no difference, between these and popish conjurations; for they agree in
order, words, and matter, differing in no circumstance, but that the Papists
do it without shame openly, the other do it in hugger mugger secretly. The
papists (I say) have officers in this behalf, which are called exorcists or
conjurors, and they look narrowly to other cousenours, as having gotten the
upper hand over them. And because the papists shall be without excuse in this
behalf, and that the world may see their cousenage, impiety, and folly to be
as great as the others, I will cite one conjuraton (of which sort I might cite
a hundred) published by Iacobus de Chusa, a great doctor of the Romish church,
which serves to find out the cause of noise and spiritual rumbling in houses,
Iac. de Chusa in lib. de appari^^onib. quorundam spirituum.
churches, or chapels, and to conjure walking spirits; which evermore is
knavery and cousenage in the highest degree. Mark the cousening devise hereof,
and confer the impiety with the others.

First (forsooth) he says it is expedient to fast three days, Observations for
the exorcising priest.
and to celebrate a certain number of masses, and to repeat the seven psalms
penitential; then four or five priests must be called to the place where the
haunt or noise is, then a candle hallowed on candlemas day must be lighted, and
in the lighting thereof also must the seven psalms be said, and the Gospel of
St. John. Then there must be a cross and a censer with frankincense, and
therewithal the place must be censed or perfumed, holy water must be
sprinkled, and a holy stoal must be used, and (after diverse other ceremonies) a
prayer to God must be made, in manner and form following.

O Lord Jesus Christ, the knower of all secrets, which always revealest all
wholesome and profitable things to thy faithful children, and which suffer
a spirit to show himself in this place, we beseech thee for thy bitter
passion, etc. vouchsafe to command this spirit, to reveal and signify unto us
thy servants, without our terror or hurt, what he is, to thine honor, and to
his comfort; In nomine patris, etc. And then proceed in these words. We
beseech thee, for Christ's sake, O thou spirit, that if there be any of us, or
among us, whom thou would answer, name him, Memorandum that he must be the
veriest knave or fool in all the company.
or else manifest him by some sign. Is it friar P. or doctor D. or doctor Burc.
or sir Feats, or sir John, or sir Robert; Et sic de caeteris circunslamibus.
For it is well tried (says the gloss) he will not answer every one. If the
spirit make any sound of voice, or knocking, at the naming of any one, he is
the counsenour (the conjuror I would say) that must have the charge of this
conjuration or examination. And these forsooth must be the interrogatories, to
wit? Whose soul art thou? Wherefore came thou? What would thou have?
Want thou any suffrages, masses, or alms? How many masses will serve thy
turn, three, six, ten, twenty, thirty, etc? By what priest? Must he be
religious or secular? Will thou have any fasts? What? How many? How great? And
by what persons? Among Hospitals, Lepers? Or beggars? What shall be the sign
of thy perfect deliverance? Wherefore lie thou in purgatory? and such like.
This must be done in the night.

The spirits are not so cunning by day as by night.
If there appear no sign at this hour, it must be deferred until another hour.
Holy water must be left in the place. There is no fear (they say) that such a
spirit will hurt the conjuror; for he can sin no more, as being in the mean
state between good and evil, and as yet in the (...) of satisfaction. For so
they might be bewrayed. For so the cousenage may be best handlrd.
If the spirit do hurt, then it is damned soul, and not an elect. Every man
may not be present hereat, specially such as be weak of complexion. They appear
in diverse manners, not always in body or bodily shape, (as it is read in the
life of S. Martine, that the devil did) but sometimes invisible, as only by
sound, voice, or noise. Thus (...) Iacobus de Chusa.

But because you shall see that these be not empty words, nor standet^; but
that in truth such things are commonly put in practice in the Romish church, I
will here set down an instance, lately and truly, though lewdly performed; and
the same in effect as follows.

CHAP. XXIII.
A late experiment or cousening conjuration practiced at Orleance by the
Franciscan Friars, how it was detected, and the judgment against the authors
of that comedy.

IN the year of our Lord 1534. at Orleance in France, A cousening conjuration.
the Majors wife dyed, willing and desiring to be buried without any pomp or
noise, etc. Her husband, who reverenced the memorial of her, did even as she
had willed him. And because she was buried in the church of the Of this order
read noble stuff in a book printed at Frankeford under the title of Alcoran.
Franciscanorum.
Franciscans, besides her Father and Grandfather, and gave them in reward only
six crowns, whereas they hoped for a greater prey; shortly after it chanced,
that as he felled certain woods and sold them, they desired to give them some
part thereof freely without money; which he flatly denied. This they took very
grievously. And whereas before they misliked him, now they conceived such
displeasure as they devised this means to be revenged; to wit, that his wife
was damned for ever. The chief workmen and framers of this tragedy were
Colimannus and Stephanus Aterbatensis, both Doctors of Divinity; this
Colimannus was a great Conjuror, and had all his implements in a readiness,
which he was wont to use in such business. And thus they handle the matter.
They place over the arches of the church a young novice; Note how the
Franciscans cannot conjure without a confederate.
who about midnight when they came to mumble their prayers, as they were wont
to do, makes a great rumbling, and noise. Out of hand the Monks began to
conjure and to charm, but he answered nothing. Then being required to give a
sign, whether he were a dum spirit or no, he began to rumble again; which
thing they took as a certain sign. Having laid this foundation, they go unto
certain citizens, chief men, and such as favored them, declaring that a heavy
chance had happened at home in their monastery; not showing what the matter
was, but desiring them to come to their mattens at midnight. O notorious
impudency! with such shameless faces to abuse so worshipful a company.
When these citizens were come, and that prayers were begun, the counterfeit
spirit begins to make a mavelous noise in the top of the church. And being
asked what he meant, and who he was, gave signs that it was not lawful for
him to speak. Therefore they commanded him to make answer by tokens and signs
to certain things they would demand of him. Now was there a hole made in the
vawt, through the which he might hear and understand the voice of a conjuror.
And then had he in his hand a little board, which at every question he struck,
in such sort as he might easily be heard beneath. First they asked him, whether
he were one of them that had been buried in the same place. Afterward they
reckoning many by name, which had been buried there; at the last also they name
the Majors wife: and there by and by the spirit gave a sign that he was her
soul. He was further asked whether he was damned or no; and if he were, for
what cause, for what desert or fault; whether for covetousness, or wanton
lust, for pride or want of charity; or whether it were for heresy, or for the
sect of Luther newly sprung up: also what he meant by that noise and stir he
kept there; whether it were to have the body now buried in holy ground to be
dug up again, and laid in some other place. To all which points he answered
by signs, as he was commanded, by the which he affirmed or denied any thing,
according as he struck the board twice or thrice together. And when he had thus
given them to understand, that the The confederate spirit was taught that
lesson before.
very cause of his damnation was Luthers heresy, and that the body must needs
be dug up again: the monks requested the citizens, whose presence they had
used or rather abused, that they would bear witness of those things which they
had seen with their eye; and that they would subscribe to such things as were
done before. The citizens taking good advice on the matter, lest they should
offend the Mayor, or bring themselves in trouble, refused so to do. But the
monks notwithstanding take from thence the sweet bread, which they called the
host and body of our Lord, with all the relics of saints, and carry them to
another place, and there say their mass. The Bishops substitute judge (whom
they called Official) understanding that matter, comes thither, accompanied
with certain honest men, to the intent he might know the whole circumstance
more exactly: and therefore he commands them to make conjuration in his
presence; and also he requires certain to be chosen to go up into the top of
the vawt, and there to see whether any ghost appeared or not. For so might the
confederate be found.
Stephanus Aterbatensis stifflie denied that to be lawful, and marvellously
persuading the contrary, affirmed that the spirit in no wise ought to be
troubled. And albeit the Official urged them very much, that there might be
some conjuring of the spirit; yet could he nothing prevail.

Whilst these things were doing, the Mayor, when he had showed the other
Justices of the city, what he would have them to do, took his journey to the
king, and opened the whole matter unto him. And because the monks refused
judgment upon plea of their own laws and liberties, the king choosing out
certain of the Aldermen of Paris, gives them absolute and full authority to
make enquiry of the matter. The like does the Chancellor master Anthonius
Pratensis cardinal and Legate for the Pope throughout France. Therefore when
they had no exception to allege, they were co^veyed unto Paris, and there
constrained to make their answer. But yet could nothing be wrung out of them by
confession, An obstinate and wilful persisting in the denying or not
confessing of a fault committed.
whereupon they were put a part into diverse prisons, the novice being kept in
the house of master Fumanus, one of the Aldermen, was oftentime examined, and
earnestly requested to utter the truth, but would notwithstanding confess
nothing; because he feared that the monks would afterward put him to death for
staining their order, and putting it to open shame. But when the Judges had
made him sure promise that he should escape punishment, and that he should
never come into their handling, he opened unto them the whole matter as it was
done: and being brought before his fellows, avouched the same to their faces.
The monks, albeit they were convicted, and by these means almost taken tardy
with the deed doing yet did they refuse the Judges, bragging and themselves
vaunting on their privileges, but all in vain. For sentence passed upon them,
and they were condemned to be carried back again to Orleance, and thereto be
cast inprison, and so should finally be brought forth into the chief church of
the city openly, and from thence to the place of execution, where they should
make open confession of their trespasses.

Surely this was most common among monks and friars, who maintained their
religion, their lust, their liberties, their pomp, their wealth, their
estimation and knavery by such cousening practices. A parecbasis or transition
of of the author to matter further purposed.
Now I will show you more special orders of popish conjurations, that are so
shamelesly admitted into the chuch of Rome, that they are not only suffered,
but commanded to be used, not by night secretly, but by day impudently. And
these forsooth concerning the curing of bewitched persons, and such as are
possessed, to wit, such as have a devil put into them by witches enchantments.
And here withal I will set down certain rules delivered unto us by such popish
doctors, as are of greatest reputation.

CHAP. XXIV.
Who may be conjurors in the Romish Church besides Priests, a ridiculous
definition of superstition, what words are to be used and not used in
exorcismes, rebaptisme allowed, it is lawful to conjure any thing, differences
between holy water and conjuration.

THomas Aquinas says, In 4. dict. 23. sent.
that any body, though he be of an inferior or superior order, yea though of
noue order at all (and as Gulielmus Durendus glossator Raimundi affirms, a
woman, so she bless not the girdle or the garment, but the person of the
bewitched) has power to exercise the order of an exorcist or conjuror, even as
well as any priest may say, mass in a house unconsecrated. But that is (says
M. Mal.) rather through the goodness and license of the Pope, than through the
grace of the Sacrament. Nay, there are examples set down, where some being
bewitched were cured (as M. Mal. takes it) without any conjuration at all.
Marry there were certain Pater nosters, Aves, and Credos said, and crosses
made, but they are charms, they say, and no conjurations. For they say, that
such charms are lawful, because there is no superstition in them, etc.

And it is worthy my labor to show you how papists define superstition, and
how they expound the definition thereof. Et glos. super. i-l ^o ad coll. 2.
Superstition (say they) is a religion observed beyond measure, a religion
practiced with evil and unperfect circumstances. Also, whatsoever usurpeth the
name of religion, through humane tradition, without the Popes authority, is
superstitious: as to add or join any hymns to the mass, to interrupt any
diriges, to abridge any part of the creed in the singing thereof, or to sing
when the organs go, and not when the quier sings, not to have one to help
the priest to mass; Mendaces debent esse memores, multo magis astuti
exorcis^ae.
and such like, etc.

These popish exorcists do many times forget their own rules. For they should
not directly in their conjurations call upon the devil (as they do) with
entreaty, but with authority and commandment. Neither should they have in
their charms and conjurations any unknown names. Neither should there be (as
always there is) any falsehood contained in the matter of the charm of
conjuration, as (say they) old women have in theirs, when they say; the blessed
Virgin passed over Jordan, and then S. Steven met her and asked her, etc.
Neither should they have any other vain characters, but the cross (for those
are the words:) and many other such cautions have they, which they observe not,
for they have made it lawful elsewhere.

Tho. Aquin. super. Marc. ultim. Mark* 16.17.
But Thomas their chief pillar proves their conjuring and charms lawful by S.
Mark who says; Signa cos qui crediderunt; and, In nomine (...) daemonia
ejicient, etc. whereby he also proves that they may conjure serpents. And
there he takes pains to prove, that the words of God are of as great holiness
as relics of saints, whereas (in such respect as they mean) they are both
alike, and indeed nothing worth. And I can tell them further, that so they may
be carried, as either of them may do a man much harm either in body or soul.

A trim consequent.
But they prove this by S. Augustine, saying; Non est minus verbum Dei quam
corpus Christi: whereupon they conclude thus; By all men's opinions it is
lawful to carry about reverently the relics of saints; Ergo it is lawful
against evil spirits, to invocate the name of God every way; by the Pater
noster, the Ave, the nativitie, the passion, the five wounds, the ti^e
triumphant, by the seven words spoken on the cross, by the nails, etc. and
there may be hope reposed in them. Mal. Malef. par. 2. que. 2.
Yea, they say, it is lawful to conjure all things, because the devil may
have power in all things. And first, always the person or thing, wherein the
devil is, must be exorcised, and then the devil must be conjured. Also they
affirm, that it is as expedient to consecrate and conjure porrage and meat, as
water and salt, or such like things.

Rites, ceremonies, and relics of exorcism in rebaptizing of the possessed or
bewitched.
The right order of exorcism in rebaptism of a person possessed or bewitched,
requires that exsufflation and abrenunciation be done toward the west. Item,
there must be erection of hands, confession, profession, oration, benediction,
imposition of hands, denudation and unction, with holy oil after baptism,
communion, and induition of the surplis. But they say that this needs not,
where the bewitched is exorcised: but that the bewitched be first confessed,
and then to hold a candle in his hand, and in steed of a surplise to tie about
his bare body a holy candle of the length of Christ, or of the cross whereupon
he dyed, which for money may be had at Rome. Ergo (says M. Mal.) this may be
said; I conjure thee Peter or Barbara being sick, but regenerate in the holy
water of baptism, by the living God, by the true God, by the holy God, by the
God which redeemed thee with his precious blood, that thou may be made a
conjured man, that every fantasy and wickedness of diabolical deceit do
avoid and depart from thee, and that every unclean spirit be conjured through
him that shall come to judge the quick and the dead, and the world by fire,
Amen. Oremus, etc. And this conjuration with Oremus and a prayer, must be
thrice repeated, and at the end always must be said; Ergo maledicte diabole
recognosce sententiam tuam, etc. Therefore cursed devil know thy sentence,
etc. And this order must always be followed: Memorandum that this is for one
bewitched.
and finally, there must be diligent search made, in every corner, and under
every coverlet and pallet, and under every threshold of the doors, for
instruments of witchcraft. And if any be found, they must straightway be
thrown into the fire. Also they must change all their bedding, their clothing,
and their habitation; and if nothing be found, the party that is to be
exorcised or conjured, must come to the church rath in the morning: and the
holyer the day is, the better, specially our Lady day. And the priest if he be
shriven himself and in perfect state, shall do the better therein. And let him
that is exorcised hold a holy candle in his hand, Note the proviso.
etc. Always provided, that the holy water be thrown upon him, and a stoal
put about his neck, with Deus in adiutorum, and the Letanie, with invocation of
saints: and this order may continue thrice a week, so as (say they) through
multiplication of intercessors, or rather intercessions grace may be obtained,
and favor procured.

There is also some question in the Romish church, whether the sacrament of the
altar is to be received before or after the exorcisme. Item in shrift, the
confessor must learn whether the party be not excommunicate, and so for want
of absolution, Tho. Aquin. supr. did. 6.
endures this vexation. Thomas shows the difference between holy water and
conjuration, saying that holy water drives the devil away from the external
and outward parts; but conjurations from the internal and inward parts; and
therefore unto the bewitched party both are to be applied.

CHAP. XXV.
The seven reasons why some are not rid of the devil with all their popish
conjurations, why there were no conjurors in the primitive Church, and why the
devil is not so soon cast out of the bewitched as of the possessed.

THe reason why some are not remedied for all their conjurations, the papists
say is for seven canses. First, for that the faith of the standers by is
Matthew the 7. and Mark the 4. when one presented his son, and the multitude
Proper proofs of the seven reasons.
and where these words are written; And Jesus rebuked him, etc. That is to say,
say they, the possessed or bewitched for his sins. For by the neglect of due
remedies it appears, that there were not with Christ good and perfect men.
For the pillars of the faith; to wit, Peter, James, and John were absent.
Neither was there fasting and prayer, without the which that kind of devils
could not be cast out. For the fourth point; to wit, the fault of the exorcist
in faith may appear; for that afterward the disciples asked the cause of
their impotency therein. And Jesus answered, it was for their incredulity,
saying that if they had as much faith as a grain of mustard seed, they should
move mountains, etc. The fifth is proved by Vitas patrum, the lives of the
fathers, where it appears that S. Anthony could not do that cure, when his
scholar Paul could do it, and did it. For the proof of the sixth excuse it is
said, that though the fault be taken away thereby; yet it follows not that
always the punishment is released. Last of all it is said, that it is possible
that the devil was not conjured out of the party before baptism by the
exorcist, or the midwife has not baptized him well, but omitted some part of
the sacrament. If any object that there were no exorcists in the primitive
church, it is answered, that the church cannot now err. And saint Gregory
would never have instituted it in vain. Why there were no conjurors in the
primitive church with other subtle points.
And it is a general rule, that who or whatsoever is newly exorcised, must be
rebaptized, as also such as walk or talk in their sleep; for (say they) call
them by their names, and presently they wake, or fall if they clime; whereby it
is gathered, that they are not truly named in baptism. Item they say, it is
somewhat more difficult to conjure the devil out of one bewitched then out of
one possessed; because in the bewitched, he is double; in the other single.
They have a hundred such beggarly, foolish, and frivolous notes in this behalf.

CHAP. XXVI.
Other gross absurdities of witchmongers in this matter of conjurations.

SUrely I cannot see what difference or distinction the witchmongers do put
between the knowledge and power of God and the devil; but that they think, if
they pray or rather talk to God, till their heartsake, he never hears them;
but that the devil does know every thought and imagination of their minds, and
both can and also will do any thing for them. For if any that means good
faith with the devil read certain conjurations, he comes up (they say) at a
trice. Marry if another that has no intent to raise him, read or pronounce
the words, be will not stir. A conjuror then belike must not be timorous or
fearful.
And yet 1. Bodin confesses, that he is afraid to read such conjurations, as
John Wierus recites; lest (belike) the devil would come up, and scratch him
with his foul long nails. In which sort I wonder that the devil deals with
none other, then witches and conjurors. I for my part have read a number of
their conjurations, but never could see any devils of theirs, except it were in
a play. But the devil (belike) knows my mind; to wit, that I would be loath
to come within the compass of his claws. Where a witch cures by incantation,
and the conjuror by conjuration.
But lo what reason such people have. Bodin, Bartholomeus, Spineus, Sprenger,
and Institor, etc: do constantly affirm, that witches are to be punished with
more extremity than conjurors; and sometimes with death, when the other are to
be pardoned doing the same offense: because (say they) the witches make a
league with the devil, and so do not conjurors. Now if conjurors make no
league by their own confession, and devils indeed know not our cogitations (as
I have sufficiently proved) then would I weet of our witchmongers the reason,
(if I read the conjuration and perform the ceremony) why the devil will not
come at my call? But oh absurd credulity! Even in this point many wise and
learned men have been and are abused: whereas, if they would make experience,
or duly expend the cause, they might be soon resolved; specially when the
whole art and circumstance is so contrary to Gods word, as it must be false, if
the other be true. So as you may understand, that the papists do not only by
their doctrine, in books and sermons teach and publish conjurations, and the
order thereof, whereby they may induce men to bestow, or rather cast away their
money upon masses and suffrages for their souls, but they make it also a
parcel of their sacrament or orders (of the which number a conjuror is one)
and insert many forms of conjurations into their divine service, and not only
into their pontificals, but into their mass books; yea into the very canon of
the mass.

CHAP. XXVII.
Certain conjurations taken out of the pontifical and out of the missall.

BUt see yet a little more of popish conjurations, and confer them with the
other. In the Tu. de ecclesiae dedicatione.
Pontifical you shall find this conjuration, which the other conjurours use as
solemnly as they: I conjure thee thou creature of water in the name of the
father, of the son, and of the Holyghost, that thou drive away the devil
from the bounds of the just, that he remain not in the dark corners of this
church and altar. * You shall find in the same title, these words following, to
be used at the hallowing of churches. There must a cross of ashes be made upon
the pavement, from one end of the church to the other, one handful broad: and
one of the priests must write on the one side thereof the Greek alphabet, and
one the other side the Latin alphabet. Durandus yields this reason thereof;
to wit, It represents the union in faith of the Jews and Gentiles. And yet
well agreeing to himself he says even there, that the cross reaching from
the one end to the other, signifies that the people, which were in the head,
shall be made the tail.

A conjuration written in the mass book. Fol. 1.
I conjure thee O creature of salt by God, In Missali. fol. 1.

The manner of conjuring salt.


by the God that lives, by the true God, by the holy God, which by Elizaeus
the prophet commanded, that thou should be thrown into the water, that it
thereby might be made whole and sound, that thou salt [here let the priest
look upon the salt] may be conjured for the health of all believers, and
that thou be to all that take thee, health both of body and soul: and let all
fantasies and wickedness, or diabolical craft or deceit, depart from the
place whereon it is sprinkled; as also every unclean spirit, being conjured by
him that judges both the quick and the dead by fire. Resp. Amen. Then
follows a prayer to be said, without Dominus vobiscum; bet yet with Oremus;
as follows:

Oremus.
A prayer to be applied to the former exorcisme.
Almighty and everlasting God, we humbly desire thy clemency [here let the
p^eist look upon the salt] that thou would vouchsafe, through thy piety, to
bless and sanctify this creature of salt, which thou have given for the use
of mankind, that it may be to all that receive it, health of mind and body; so
as whatsoever shall be touched thereby, or sprinkled therewith, may be void of
all uncleanness, and all resistance of spiritual iniquity, through our Lord,
Amen.

What can be made but a conjuration of these words also, which are written in
the canon, or rather in the saccaring of mass? This holy commixtion of the
body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, let it be made to me, and to all the
receivers thereof, health of mind and body, and a wholesome preparative for the
deserving and receiving of everlasting life, through our Lord Jesus, Amen.

CHAP. XXVIII.
That popish priests leave nothing unconjured, a fomre of exorcisme for incense.

ALthough the papists have many conjurations, so as neither water, nor fire,
nor bread, nor wine, nor wax, nor tallow, nor church, nor churchyard, nor
altar, nor altar cloth, nor ashes, nor coals, nor bells, nor bell ropes, nor
copes, nor vestmen^s, nor oil, nor salt, nor candle, nor candlestick, nor
beds, nor bedstaves, etc; are without their form of conjuration: yet I will
for brevity let all pass, and end here with incense, which they do conjure in
this sort. A conjuration ^f frankincense set forth in form.
I conjure thee most filthy and horible spirit, and every vision of our enemy,
etc: that thou go and depart from out of this creature of frankincense, with
all thy deceit and wickedness that this creature may be sanctified, and in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ that all they that taste, touch, or smell the
same, may receive the virtue and assistance of the Holy ghost; so as
wheresoever this incense or frankincense shall remain, that there thou in no
wise be so bold as to approach or once presume or attempt to hurt: but what
unclean spirit so ever thou be, that thou with all thy crast and subtilty
avoid and depart, being conjured by the name of God the father almighty, etc.
And that wheresoever the sum or smoke thereof shall come, every kind and sort
of devils may be driven away, and expelled; ^^ they were at the increase of the
liver of fish, which the archangell Raphael made, etc.

CHAP. XXIX.
The rules and laws of popish Exorcists and other conjurors all one, with a
confutation of their whole power, how S. Martine conjured the devil.

THe papists you see, Papists and conjurors cousening compeers.
have their certain general rules and laws, as to abstain from sin, and
to fast, as also otherwise to be clean from all pollutions, etc: and even so
likewise have the other conjurors. Some will say that papists use divine
service, and prayers; even so do common conjurors (as you see) even in the same
papisticall form, no whit swarving from theirs in faith and doctrine, nor yet
in ungodly and unreasonable kinds of petitions. Me thinks it may be a
sufficient argument to overthrow the calling up and miraculous works of
spirits, that it is written; God only knows and s^a^cheth the hearts, and
only works great wonders. The which argument being prosecuted to the end, can
never be answered: 1 Samuel 16.7. 1 Reg. 8.39. Jere. 17.10. Psalm. 44.21. Psalm.
72.18.
in so much as that divine power is required in that action.

And if it be said, that in this conjuration we speak to the spirits, and they
hear us, and therefore need not know our thoughts and imaginations: I first
ask them whether king Baell, or Amoimon, which are spirits reigning in the
furthest regions of the east (as they say) may hear a conjurors voice, which
calls for them, being in the extremest parts of the west, there being such
noises interposed, where perhaps also they may be busy, and set to work on
the like affairs. Secondly, whether those spirits be of the same power that
God is, who is every where, filling all places, and able to hear all men at
one instant, etc. Thirdly, whence comes the force of such words as raise the
dead, and command devils. If sounds do it, then may it be done by a taber and a
pipe, or any other instrument that has no life. If the voice do it, then may
it be done by any beasts or birds. If words, then a parret may do it. If in
man's words only, where is the force, in the the first, second, or third
syllable? If in syllables, then not in words. If in imaginations, then the
devil knows our thoughts. But all this stuff is vain and fabulous.

It is written; Sap. 1.14. Ecclesi. 9. Genesis 1. Act. 19.
All the generations of the earth were healthful, and there is no poison of
destruction in them. Why then do they conjure wholesome creatures; as salt,
water, etc: where no devils are? God looked upon all his works, and saw they
were all good. What effect (I pray you) had the 7. sons of Sceva; which is
the great objection of witchmongers? They would needs take upon them to conjure
devils out of the possessed. But what brought they to pass? Yet that was in
the time, whilst God suffered miracles commonly to be wrought. By that, you
may see what conjurors can do.

Where is such a promise to conjurors or witches, Mark. 16.17.
as is made in the Gospel to the faithful? where it is written; In my name
they shall cast out devils, speak with new tongues: if they shall drink any
deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall take away serpents, they shall
lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover. According to the promise, this
grant of miraculous working was performed in the primitive church, for the
confirmation of Christ's doctrine, and the establishing of the Gospel.

But as in another place I have proved, the gift thereof was but for a time,
and is now ceased; neither was it ever made to papist, witch, or conjuror. They
take upon them to call up and cast out devils; and to undo with one devil,
that which another devil has done. If one devil could cast out another, it
were a kingdom divided, and could not stand. Which argument Christ himself
makes: and therefore I may the m^re boldly say even with Christ, that they
have no such power. For Isa 43.11.
besides him, there is no savior, verse. 13. cap. 44. ver 7. verse 25. Isai.
46.10. cap 47. verse 12, 13, etc. Luke 11.20, Matt. 12.28. Acts, 8.49.
none can deliver out of his hand. Who but he can declare, set in order,
appoint, and tell what is to come? He destroys the the tokens of foothsayers
and makes the conjecturers fools, etc. He declares things to come, and so
cannot witches.

There is no help in inchanters and soothsayers, and other such vain
sciences. For devils are cast out by the finger of God, which Matthew calls
the spirit of God, which is the mighty power of God, and not by the virtue of
the bare name only, being spoken or pronounced; for then might every wicked man
do it. And Simon Magus needed not then to have proffered money to have brought
the power to do miracles and wonders: for he could speak and pronounce the
name of God, as well as the apostles. Indeed they may soon throw out all the
devils that are in frankincense, and such like creatures, wherein no devils
are: but neither they, nor all their holy water can indeed cure a man possessed
with a devil, either in body and mind; as Christ did. Nay, why do they not
cast out the devil that possesses their own souls?

Let me hear any of them all speak with new tongues; let them drink but one
dram of a potion which I will prepare for them, let them cure the sick by
laying on of hands (though witches take it upon them, and witchmongers believe
it) and then I will subscribe unto them. But if they which repose such
certainety in the actions of witches and conjurors, would diligently note their
deceit, and how the scope whereat they shoot is money (I mean not such
witches as are falsely accused, Money is the mark whereat all witches and
conjurors do aim.
but such as take upon them to give answers; etc: as mother Bungie did) they
should apparently see the cousenage. For they are abused, as are many beholders
of jugglers, which suppose they do miraculously, that which is done by sleight
and subtilty.

But in this matter of witchcrafts and conjurations, if men would rather trust
their own eyes, than old wives tales and lies, I dare undertake this matter
would soon be at a perfect point; as being easier to be perceived than
juggling. But I must needs confess, that it is no great marvel, though the
simple be abused therein, when such lies concerning those matters are
maintained by such persons of account, and thrust into their divine service. As
for example: It is written that S. Martine thrust his fingers into ones mouth
that had a devil within him, S. Martins conjuration: In die sancti Martini,
lect. 1.
and used to bite folk; and then did bid him devour them if he could. And
because the devil could not get out at his mouth, being stopped with S. Martins
fingers, he was fain to run out at his fundament. O stinking lie!

CHAP. XXX.
That it is a shame for papists to believe other conjurors doings, their own
being of so little force, Hippocrates his opinion herein.

ANd still me thinks papists (of all others) which indeed are most credulous,
and do most maintain the force of witches charms, and of conjurors
cousenages should perceive and judge conjurors doings to be void of effect. For
when they see their own stuff, as holy water, salt, candles, etc. conjured by
their holy bishop and priests; and that in the words of consecration or
conjuration (for so To wit, Vincent Dominica in albis, in octa.pasch.sermon
25. Durand. de exorcist.
their own Doctors term them) they adjure the water, etc. to heal, not only
the souls infirmity, but also every malady, hurt, or ach of the body; and do
also command the candles, with the force of all their authority and power, and
by the effect of all their holy words, not to consume: and yet neither soul nor
body any thing recover, nor the candles last one minute the longer: with what
face can they defend the others miraculous workes^, as though the witches and
conjurors actions were more effectual than their own? Hippocrates being but a
heathen, and not having the perfect knowledge of God, could see and perceive
their cousenage and knavery well enough, who says; They which boast so, that
they can remove or help the infections of diseases, with sacrifices,
conjurations, or other magical instruments or means, are but needy fellows,
wanting living; and therefore refer their words to the devil: because they
would seem to know somewhat more then the common people. It is marvel that
papists do affirm, that their holy water, crosses, or bugges words have such
virtue and violence, as to drive away devils; so as they dare not approach to
any place or person besmeared with such stuff; when as it appears in the
Gospel, that the devil presumed to assault and tempt Christ himself. For the
devil indeed most earnestly busieth himself to seduce the godly: as for the
wicked, he makes reckoning and just account of them, as of his own already.
But let us go forward in our refutation.

CHAP. XXXI.
How conjurors have beguiled witches, what books they carry about to procure
credit to their art, wicked assertions against Moses and Joseph.

THus you see that conjurors are no small fools. For whereas witches being
poor and needy, go from door to door for relief, have they never so many
todes or cats at home, or never so much hogs dung and charvill about them, or
never so many charms in store; these conjurors (I say) have gotten them
offices in the church of Rome, whereby they have obtained authority and great
estimation. A foul offense to backbite the absent, and to belie the dead. Acts
19.
And further to add credit to that art, these conjurors carry about at this
day, books entitled under the names of Adam, Abel, Tobie, and Enoch; which
Enoch they repute the most divine fellow in such matters. They have also among
them books that they say Abraham, Aaron and Solomon made. Item they have books
of Zachary, Paul, Honorius, Cyprian, Jerome, Jeremy, Albert, and Thomas: also
of the angels, Riziel, Razael, and Raphael; and doubtless these were such books
as were said to have been burnt in the lesser Asia. And for their further
credit they boast, that they must be and are skillful and learned in these
arts; to wit, ars Almadell, ars Notoria, ars Bulaphiae, ars Arthephii, ars
Pomena, ars Revelationis, etc. Yea, these conjurors in corners stick not (with
Iustine) to report and affirm, Just. lib. 16.
that Joseph who was a true figure of Christ that delivered and redeemed us,
was learned in these arts, and thereby prophesied and expounded dreams; and
that those arts came to him from Moses, and finally from Moses to them: which
thing both Pliny and Tacitus affirm of Moses. Also Strabo in his cosmographi^
makes the very like blasphemous report; Plin. lib. 30. cap. 2. Strab. lib. 16.
and likewise Apollonius Molon, Possidonius, Lisimachus, and Appian term Moses
both a magician and a conjuror, whom Eusebius confuteth with many notable
arguments, For Moses differed as much from a magician, as truth from falsehood,
and piety from vanity: for in truth, he confounded all magic, and made the
world see, and the cunningest magicians of the earth confess, that their own
doings were but illusions, and that his miracles were wrought by the finger of
God. But that the poor old witches knowledge reaches thus far, Dan. in
dialog. desortiariis.
(as Danaus affirms it does) is untrue; for their furthest fetches that I can
comprehend, are but to fetch a pot of milk, etc. from their neighbor house
half a mile distant from them.

CHAP. XXXII.
All magical arts confuted by an argument concerning Nero, what Cornelius
Agrippa and Carolus Gallus have left written thereof, and proved by experience.

SUrely Nero proved all these magical arts to be vain and fabulous lies, and
nothing but cousenage and knavery. He was a notable prince, having gifts of
nature enough to have conceived such matters, treasure enough to have employed
in the search thereof, he made no conscience therein, he had singular
conferences thereabout; he offered, and would have given half his kingdom to
have learned those things, which he heard might be wrought by magicians; he
procured all the cunning magicians in the world to come to Rome, he searched
for books also, and all other things necessary for a magician; and never could
find any thing in it, but cousenage and legier demaine. Tiridates the great
magician bids the Emperor Nero to a banquet, etc.
At length he met with one Tiridates, the great magician, who having with him
all his companions, and fellow magicians, witches, conjurors, and cousenors,
invited Nero to certain magical bankets and exercises. Which when Nero
required to learn, he (to hide his cousenage) answered that he would not, nor
could not teach him, though he would have given him his kingdom. The matter of
his refusal (I say) was, least Nero should espy the cousening devises thereof.
Which when Nero conceived, and saw the same, and all the residue of that art to
be vain, Nero made laws against conjurors and conjurations.
lying and ridiculous, having only shadows of truth, and that their arts were
only veneficall; he prohibited the same utterly, and made good and strong laws
against the use and the practices thereof, as Pliny and others do report. It
is marvel that any man can be so much abused, as to suppose that Satan may be
commanded, compelled, or tied by the power of man; as though the Devil would
yield to man, beyond nature; that will not yield to God his creator, according
to the rules of nature. And in so much as there be (as they confess) good
angels as well as bad; I would know why they call up the angels of hell, C.
Agrip. lib. de vanitat. scient.
and not call down the angels of heaven. But this they answer (as Agrippa
says) Good angels (forsooth) do hardly appear, and the other are ready at
hand. Here I may not omit to tell you how Cornelius Agrippa bewrays,
detecteth, and defaceth this art of conjuration, who in his youth traveled
into the bottom of all these magical sciences, and was not only a great
conjuror and practiser thereof, but also wrote cunningly De occulta
philosophia. Howbeit afterward in his wiser age, he recanteth his opinions,
and lamenteth his follies in that behalf, and discovers the impiety and
vanities of magicians, and inchanters, which boast they can do miracles; which
action is now ceased (says he) and assigns them a place with Iannes and
Iambres, affirming that this art teaches nothing but vain toies for a show.
Carolus Gallus also says; I have tried oftentimes, by the witches and
conjurors themselves, that their arts, (especially those which do consist of
charms, impossibilities, conjura^iuns, and witchcrafts, whereof they were wont
to boast) to be mere foolishness, doting lies and dreams. I for my part can
say as much, but that I delight not to allege mine own proofs and
authorities; for that mine adversaries will say they are partial, and not
indifferent.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of Salomons conjurations, and of the opinion conceived of his cunning and
practice therein.

IT is affirmed by sundry authors, that Solomon was the first inventor of those
conjurations; and thereof Josephus is the first reporter, who in his first book
De Iudaen^um antiquitatibus, cap. 22. rehearses soberly this story following;
which Polydore Virgil, and many other repeat verbatim, in this wi^^, and seem
to credit the fable, whereof there is skan^ a true word.

Solomon was the greatest philosopher, and did philosophy about all things, and
had the full and perfect knowledge of all their properties: but he had that
gift given from above to him, for the profit and health of mankind; which is
effectual against devils. He made also enchantments wherewith diseases are
driven away; and left diverse manners of conjurations written, where no the
devils giving place are so driven away; that they never return. And this kind
of healing is very common among my country men: Probatum est upon a patient
before witness; Ergo no lie.
for I saw a neighbor of mine, one Eleazar, that in the presence of Vespasian
and his sons, and the rest of the soldiers, cured many that were poss^ssed
with spirits. The manner and order of his cure was this. He did put unto the
nose of the possessed a ring, under the seal whereof was enclosed a kind of
root, whose virtue Solomon declared, and the savor thereof drew the devil out
at his nose; so as down fell the man, and then Eleazar conjured the devil to
depart, and to return no more to him. In the mean time he made mention of
Solomon, reciting incantations of Salomons own making. And then Eleazar being
willing to show the standers by his cunning, and the wonderful efficacy of his
art, did set not far from thence, a pot or basen full of water, and commanded
the devil that went out of the man, that by the overthrowing thereof, he would
give a sign to the beholders, that he had utterly forsaken and left the man.
Which thing being done, none there doubted how great Salomons knowledge and
wisdom was. Wherein a ^ugling knack was produced, to confirm a cogging cast of
knavery or cousenage.

Another story of Salomons conjuration I find cited in the sixth lesson, read
in the church of Rome upon S. Margarets day, far more ridiculous than this.
Lib. 4. did. 14. Decret. aureum did. 21. Rub. de exorcist.
Also Peter Lombarb master of the Sen^ences, and Graeti^^ (...) brother, the
compiler of the golden decrees; and Durandus in his Rationale livinorum, do
all soberly affirm Salomons cunning in this behalf; and specially this tale; to
wit, that Solomon enclosed certain thousand devils in a brazen bowl, and left
it in a deep hole or lake, so as afterward the Babylonians found it, and
supposing there had been gold or silver therein, brake it, and out flew all
the devils, etc. And that this fable is of credit, you shall perceive, in that
it is thought worthy to be read in the Romish church, Lect. 5. and 6.
as parcel of their divine service. Look in lessons of the day of S. Margaret
the virgin, and you shall find these words verbatim; which I the rather
recite, because it serves me for diverse turns; to wit, for Salomons
conjurations, for the tale of the brazen vessel, and for the popes
conjurations, which extended both to faith and doctrine, and to show of what
credit their religion is, that so shamefully is stained with lies and fables.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Lessons read in all Churches, where the Pope has authority, on S. Margarets
day translated into English word for word.

HOly Margaret required of God, Lect. in die sanctissimae Marg. vir. 5.
that she might have a conflict face to face with her secret enemy the devil;
and rising from prayer, she saw a terrible dragon, that would have devoured
her, but she made the sign of the cross, and the dragon burst in the midst.

Afterward, Lect. 6.
she saw another man sitting like a Niger, having his hands bound fast to his
knees, she taking him by the hair of the head, threw him to the ground, and set
her foot on his head; and her prayers being made, a light shined from heaven
into the prison where she was, and the cross of Christ was seen in heaven,
with a dove sitting thereon, who said; blessed art thou O Margaret, the gates
of Paradise attend thy coming. Then she giving thanks to God, said to the
devil, Declare to me thy name. The devil said; Take away thy foot from my
head, that I may be able to speak, and tell thee: which being done, the devil
said, Look in the word Iidoni, page 270.
I am Veltis, one of them whom Solomon shut in the brazen vessel, and the
Babylonians coming, and supposing there had been gold therein, brake the
vessel, and then we flew out; ever since lying in wait to annoy the just. But
seeing I have recited a part of her story, you shall also have the end thereof:
for at the time of her execution this was her prayer following.

Grant therefore O father, that whosoever writes, reads, or hears my
passion, or makes memorial of me, may deserve pardon for all his sins:
whosoever calls on me, being at the point of death, deliver him out of the
hands of his adversaries. And I also require, O Lord, that whosoever shall
build a church in the honor of me, or ministers unto me any candles For the
priests profit, I warrant you. This is common (they say) when a witch or
conjuror dies.
of his just labor, let him obtain whatsoever he asks for his health.
Deliver all women in travel that call upon me, from the danger thereof.

Her prayer ended, there were many great thunder claps, and a dove came down
from heaven, saying; Blessed art thou O Margaret the spouse of Christ. Such
things as thou have asked, are granted unto thee; therefore come thou into
everlasting rest, etc. Then the hangman (though she did bid him) refused to cut
off her head: to whom she said; Except thou do it, thou can have no part
with me, and then lo he did it, etc. But sithence I have been, and must be
tediouss, I thought good to refresh my reader with a lamentable story,
depending upon the matter precedent, reported by many grave authors, word for
word, in manner and form following.

CHAP. XXXV.
A delicate story of a Lombard, who by S. Margarets example would needs fight
with a real devil.

THere was (after a sermon made, wherein this story of S. Margaret was recited,
for in such stuff consisted not only their service, but also their sermons in
the blind time of popery;) there was I say, a certain young man, being a
Lombard, whose simplicity was such, as he had no respect unto the commodity of
worldly things, but did altogether affect the salvation of his soul, Kacoz^lia.
who hearing how great S. Margarets triumph was, began to consider with
himself, how full of sleights the devil was. And among other things thus he
said; O that God would suffer, that the devil might fight with me hand to hand
in visible form! I would then surely in like manner overthrow him, and would
fight with him till I had the victory. And therefore about the twelf hour he
went out of the town, and finding a convenient place where to pray, secretly
kneeling on his knees, he prayed a mong other things, that God would suffer the
devil (...) appear unto him in visible form, that according to the example of
S. Margaret, he might overcome him in battle. And as he was in the midst of
his prayers, there came into that place a woman with a hook in her hand, (...)
gather certain herbs which grew there, Mutual error by means of sudden sight.
who was dumb born. And when she came into the place, and saw the young man
among the herbs on (...) knees, she was afraid and waxed pale, and going back,
she rored in (...) sort, as her voice could not be understood, and with her
head and (...) made threatening signs unto him. The young man seeing such an
il^^voured foul queen, that was for age decrepit and full of wrinckles, (...) a
long body, lean of face, pale of color, with ragged clothes, crying very loud,
and having a voice not understandable, threatening him with the hook which she
carried in her hand, he thought surely she had been no woman, but a devil
appearing unto him in the shape of a woman, and though God had heard his
prayers. For the which causes he fell upon her lust^ly and at length threw her
down to the ground, saying; Art thou (...) thou cursed devil, art thou come?
No no, thou shall not over^^^ me in visible fight, whom thou have often
overcome in invisible ^^^^tations.

And as he spoke these words, he caught her by the hair, and drew her about,
beating her sometimes with his hands^, sometimes with his (...) and sometimes
with the hook so long, and wounded her so sore, that (...) left her a dying. At
the noise whereof many people came running unto them, and seeing what was done
they apprehended the young man, and thrust him into a vise prison, S. Vincent
raises the dead woman to life.
S. Vincent by virtue of his holiness understanding all this matter, caused
the body that seemed dead to be brought unto him, and thereupon (according to
his manner) he laid his hand upon her, who immediately revived, and he called
one of his chaplains to hear her confession. But they that were present said to
the man of God, that it were altogether in vain so to do, for that she had
been from her nativity dumb, and could neither hear nor unde^stand the priest,
neither could in words confess her sins. S. Vincent makes the dumb to speak.
Notwithstanding, S. Vincent had the priest hear her confession, affirming that
she should very distinctly speak all things unto him. And therefore,
whatsoever the man of God commanded, the priest did confidently accomplish and
obey; and as soon as the priest approached unto her, to hear her confession,
she, whom all Cathalonia knew to be dumb born, spoke and confessed her self,
pronouncing every word as distinctly, as though she had never been dumb. After
her confession she required the eucharist and extreme unction to be ministered
unto her, and at length she commended her self to God; and in the presence of
all that came to see that miracle, she spoke as long as she had any breath in
her body. The young man that killed her being saved from the gallows by S.
Vincents means, and at his intercession, departed home into Italy. Did. 8.
exempl. 17. ferm. 59. ca. 20.
This story last rehearsed is found in Speculo exemplorum, and repeated also by
Robert Carocul bishop of Aquinas, and many others, and preached publicly in
the church of Rome.

CHAP. XXXVI.
The story of Saint Margaret proved to be both ridiculous and impious in every
point.

FIrst, that the story of S. Margaret is a fable, may be proved by the
incredible, impossible, foolish, impious, and blasphemous matters contained
therein, and by the ridiculous circumstance thereof. Though it were cruelly
done of her to beat the devil, when his hands was bound; yet it was courteously
done of her, to pull away her foot at his desire. He could not speak so long as
she troad on his head, and yet he said; Tread off, that I may tell you what I
am. She saw the heavens open, and yet she was in a close prison. But her sight
was very clear, that could see a little dove sitting upon a cross so far off.
For heaven is higher than the Sun; and the sun, when it is nearest to us, is
3966000. miles from us. And she had a good pair of ears, Secundum Bordinum
Corrigens. Quaesit. Matthew. tract. 1. sect. 77.
that could hear a dove speak so far off. And she had good luck, that S. Peter
who (they say) is porter, or else the Pope, who has more doings than Peter,
had such leisure as to stay the gates so long for her. Solomon provided no good
place, neither took good order with his brazen bowl. I marvel how they escaped
that let out the devils. It is marvel also that they melted it not with their
breath long before: for the devils carry hell and hell fire about with them
always, in so much as (they say) they leave ashes evermore where they stand.
Surely she made in her prayer an unreasonable request, Psellui de operatione
daemonum.
but the date of her patent is out; for I believe that whosoever at this day
shall burn a pound of good candles before her, shall be never the better, but
three pence the worse. But now we may find in S. Margarets life, who it is that
is Christ's wife; whereby we are so much wiser then we were before. But look in
the life of S. Katharine, in the golden legend, and you shall find that he was
also married to S. Katherine, and that our Lady made the marriage, etc. An
excellent authority for bigamie. Here I will also cite another of their notable
stories, or miracles of authority, and so leave shameing of them, or rather
troubling you the readers thereof. Neither would I have written these fables,
but that they are authentic among the papists, and that we that are
protestants may be satisfied, as well of conjurors and witches miracles, as of
others; for the one is as gross as the the other.

CHAP. XXXVII.
A pleasant miracle wrought by a popish Priest.

Inspeculo exemplorum, did. 6. ex lib. exemplorum, Caesariis, exempl. 69.
Memorandum it is confessed in popery that true miracles cannot be joined with
false doctrine; Ergo neither papist, witch, nor conjuror can work miracles.
WHat time the Waldenses heresies began to spring, certain wicked me^, being
upheld and maintained by diabolical virtue, shawed certain signs and
wonders, whereby they strengthened and confirmed their heresies, and perverted
in faith many faithful men; for they walked on the water and were not drowned.
But a certain catholic priest seeing the same, and knowing that true signs
could not be joined with false doctrine, brought the body of our Lord, with the
pix, to the water, where they showed their power and virtue to the people, and
said in the hearing of all that were present. I conjure thee O devil, by him,
(...) I carry in my hands, that thou exercise not these great visions and
fantasies by these men, to the drowning of this people. Notwithstanding their
words, when they walked still on the water, as they did before, the priest in a
rage threw the body of our Lord, with the pix into the river, and by and by, so
soon as the sacrament touched the element, the fantasy ga^^ place to the
verity; and they being proved and made false, did sink, (...) lead to the
bottom, and were drowned; the pix with the sacrament immediately was taken
away by an angel. The priest seeing all these things, was very glad of the
miracle, but for the loss of the sacrament he was very pensive, passing away
the whole night in tears and mourning: in the morning he found the pix with the
sacrament upon the altar.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
The former miracle confuted, with a strange story of St Lucy.

HOw glad Sr John was now it were folly for me to say. How would he have
plagued the devil, that threw his God in the river to be drowned? But if other
had had no more power to destroy the Waldenses with sword and fire, than this
priest had to drown them with his conjuring box and cousening sacraments, there
should have been many a life saved. But I may not omit one fable, which is of
authority, wherein though there be no conjuration expressed, yet I warrant you
there was cousenage both in the doing and telling thereof. Lect. in die sanctae
Luci 7. and 8
You shall read in the lesson on saint Lucies day, that she being condemned,
could not be removed from the place with a teem of Oxen, neither could any fire
burn her, in so much as one was feign to cut off her head with a sword, and yet
she could speak afterward as long as she list. And this passes all other
miracles, except it be that which Bodin and M. Mal. recite out of Nider, of a
witch that could not be burned, till a scroll was taken away from where she hid
it, betwixt her skin and flesh.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Of visions, noises, apparitions, and imagined sounds, and of other illusions,
of wandering souls: with a confutation thereof.

MAny through melancholy do imagine, that they see or hear visions, spirits,
ghosts, strange noises, etc. as I have already proved before, at large. Many
again through fear proceeding from a cowardly nature and complexion, or from an
effeminate and fond bringing up, are timorous and afraid of spirits, and bugs,
etc. Some through imperfection of sight also are afraid of their own shadows,
and (as Aristotle says) see themselves sometime as it were in a glass. And
some through weakness of body have such imperfect imaginations. Drunken men
also sometimes suppose they see trees walk, etc. according to that which
Solomon says to the drunkards; Thine eyes shall see strange visions, and
mavelous appearances.

In all ages monks and priests have abused and bewitched the world with
counterfeit visions; Against the counterfeit visions of popish priests, and
other cousening devices.
which proceeded through idleness, and restraint of marriage, whereby they
grew hot and lecherous, and therefore devised such means to compass and
obtain their loves. And the simple people being then so superstitious, would
never seem to mistrust, that such holy men would make them cuskholds, but
forsook their beds in (...) case, and gave room to the clergy. Item, little
children, have been so scared with their mothers maids, that they could never
after endure to ^e in the dark alone, for fear of bugs. Many are deceived by
glasses through art perspective. Many hearkening (...) false reports, conceive
and beleeeve that which is nothing so. Many give credit to that which they read
in authors. But how many stories and books are written of walking spirits and
souls of men, contrary to the word of God; a reasonable volum cannot contain.
How common an opinion was it among the papists, that all souls walked (...)
the earth, after they departed from their bodies? In so much as it was in the
time of popery a usual matter, to desire sick people in their death beds, to
appear to them after their death, and to reveal their estate. The fathers and
ancient doctors of the church were too credulus herein, etc. Therefore no
marvel, though the common simple sort of men, and least of all, that women be
deceived herein, God in times past did send down visible angels and
appearances to men, but now he does not so. Through ignorance of late in
religion, it was thought, that every churchyard swarmed with soul and spirits:
but now the word of God being more free, open, and known, those conceits and
illusions are made more manifest and apparent, etc.

The doctors, councels, and popes, which (they say) cannot (...) have confirmed
the walking, appearing, and raising of souls (...) where find they in the
scriptures any such doctrine; And who certified them, that those appearances
were true? Truly all they cannot bring to pass, that the lies which have been
spread abroad herein, should (...) begin to be true, though the pope himself
subscribe, seal, and swear thereunto never so much. Where are the souls that
swarmed in times past? Where are the spirits? Who hears their noyses? Who
sees their visions? Where are the souls that made such moan for tren^^s
where by to be eased of the palms in purgatory? Are they all gone into Italy,
because masses are grown dear here in England? Mark wel^ this illusion, and
see how contrary it is unto the word of God. Consider how all papists believe
this illusion to be true, and how all (...) driven to say it is and was popish
illusion, Where be the spirits that (...) to have burial for their bodies? For
many of those walking souls (...) about their b^stnes. This doctrine was not
only preached, but also proved; note the particular instances following.
Do you not think, that the papists show nor (...) selves Godly divines, to
preach and teach the people such doctrine (...) to insert into their divine
service such fables as are read in their (...) church, all scripture giving
place thereto for the time? You shall see (...) lessons read there upon S.
Stevens day, that Gamaliel Nichodemus (...) man and Abdias his son, with his
friend S. Steven, appeared (...) priest, called Sir Lucian, requesting him to
remove their bodies and to bury them in some better place (for they had lien
from the time of their death, until then, being in the reign of Honorius the
emperors to (...) four hundred years buried in the field of Gamaliel) who in
that (...) said to Sir Lucian* Non insi selummodo causa solicitus sum, sed
potius (...) illis qui me^um sunt; that is, I am, not only careful for my
self but chiefly for those my friends that are with me. Whereby the whole
course may be perceived to be a false practice, and a counter-felt vision, or
rather a lewd invention. For in heaven men's souls remain not in sorrow and
care; neither study they there how to compass and get a worship full burial
here in earth. If they did, they would not have foreflowed it so long. Now
therefore let us not suffer our selves to be abused any longer, either with
conjuring priests, or melancholicall witches; but be thankful to God that has
delivered us from such blindness and error.

CHAP. XL.
Cardanus opinion of strange noises, how counterfeit visions grow to be
credited, of popish appearances, of pope Boniface.

CArdanus speaking of noises, H. Card. lib de var. rer. 15. c. 92.
among other things, says thus; A noise is heard in your house; it may be a
mouse, a cat, or a dog among dishes; it may be a counterfeit or a theafe
indeed, or the sault may be in your ears* I could recite a great number of
tales, how men have even forsaken their houses, because of such apparitions and
noises: and all has been by mere and rank knavery. And wheresoever you
shall hear, that there is in the night season such rumbling and fearful
noises, be you well assured that it is flat knavery, performed by some that
seems most to complain, and is least mistrusted. And hereof there is a very
art, which for some respects I will not discover. The devil seeks daily as
well as nightly whom he may devour, and can do his feats as well by day as by
night, or else he is a young devil, and a very bungler. But of all other
couseners, these conjurors are in the highest degree, and are most worthy of
death for their blasphemous impiety. But that these popish visions and
conjurations used as well by papists, as by the popes themselves, were mere
cousenages; and that the tales of the popes recited by Bruno and Platin^^ of
their magical devices, were but plain cousenages and knaveries, Pope
Celestinus cousened of his popedom by pope Boniface.
may appear by the history of Bonifacius the eight, who used this kind of
enchantment, to get away the popedom from his predecessor, Coelestinus. He
counterfeitted a voice through a cane reed, as though it had come from heaven,
persvading him to yield up his authority of popeship:, and to institute therein
one Bonifacius, a worthy man: otherwise he threatened him with damnation. And
therefore the fool yielded it up accordingly, to the said Bonifacius, An.
1264. of whom it was said; He came in like a fox, lived like a woolfe, and died
like a dog.

There be innumerable examples of such visions, which when they are not
detected, go for true stories: and therefore when it is answered that some are
true tales and some are false, Visions (...) stinguish^^.
until they be able to show forth before your eyes one matter of truth, you
may reply upon them with this distinction; to wit: visions tried are false
visions, undecided and untryed are true.

CHAP. XLI.
Of the noise or sound of echo, of one that narrowly escaped dro^^ning
thereby, etc.

ALas! how many natural things are there so strange, as to many seem
miraculous; and how many counterfeit matters are there, that to the simple seem
yet more wonderful? Cardane tells of one Comansis, who coming late to a
rivers side, H. Card. lib de subtilitat. 18.
not knowing where to pass over, cried out alowd for some body to show him the
foord^ who hearing an echo to answer according to his last word, supposing it
to be a man that answered him and informed him of the way, he passed through
the river, even there where was a deep whirlepoole, so as he hardly escaped
with his life; and told his friends, that the devil had almost persuaded him
to drown, himself. Idem, ibid.
And in some places these noises of echo are far more strange than other,
specially at Ticinum in Italy, in the great hall, where it rendereth sundry and
manifold noises or voices, which seem to end so lamentably, as it were a man
that lay a dying: so as few can be persuaded that it is the echo, but a spirit
that answers.

Of Winchester noise.
The noise at Winchester was said to be a very miracle, and much wondering was
there at it, about the year 1569, though indeed a mere natural noise
ingendered of the wind, the concavity of the place, and other isntrumental
matters helping the sound to seem strange to the heaters; specially to such as
would add new reports to the augmentation of the wonder.

CHAP. XLII.
Of Theurgie, with a confutation thereof, a letter sent to me cocerning these
matters.

THere is yet another art professed by these cousening conjurors, which some
fond divines affirm to be more honest and lawful than (...), which is called
Theurgie; wherein they work by good angels, Howbeit, their ceremonies are
altogether papisticall and superstitious, consisting in cleanlines partly of
the mind, partly of the body, and partly of things about and belonging to the
body; as in the skin, (...) the apparel, in the house, in the vessel and
household stuff, in (...) and sacrifices; the cleanlines whereof they say, does
dispose men to the contemplation of heavenly things. They cite these words of
Esaias for their authority; to wit: Wash your selves and be clean, etc. In so
much as I have known diverse superstitious persons of good account, which
usually wa^hed all their apparel upon conceits ridiculously. For
uncleanlinesse (^hey say) corrupts the air, infecteth man, and chaseth away
clean spirits. Hereunto belongs the art of Almadel, the art of Paul, the
art of Revelations, Appendents unto the supposed divine art of Theurgie.
and the art Notary. But (as Agrippa says) the more divine these arts seem to
the ignorant, the more damnable they be. But their false assertions, their
presumptions to work miracles, their characters, their strange names, their
diffuse phrases, their counterfeit holiness, their popish ceremonies, their
foolish words mingled with impiety, their barbarous and unlearned order of
construction, their shameless practices, their paltry stuff, their secret
dealing, their beggarly life, their bargaining with fools, their cousening of
the simple, their scope and drift for money does bewray all their art to be
counterfeit cousenage. And the more thoroughly to satisfy you herein, I thought
good in this place to insert a letter, upon occasion sent unto me, by one which
at this present time lies as a prisoner condemned for this very matter in the
kings bench, and reprieved by her majesty's mercy, through the good mediation
of a most noble and virtuous personage, whose honorable and godly disposition
at this time I will forbear to commend as I ought. The person truly that wrote
this letter seems unto me a good body, well reformed, and penitent, nor
expecting any galnes at my hands, but rather fearing to speak that which he
knows further in this matter, lest displeasure might ensue and follow.

The copy of a letter sent unto me R. S. by T. E. Master of art, and practiser
both of physic, and also in times past, of certain vain sciences; now
condemned to die for the same: wherein he opens the truth touching these
deceits.
MAster R. Scot, according to your request, Mark the sum and scope of this
letter.
I have drawn out certain abuses worth the noting, touching the work you have
in band; things which I myself have seen within these xxvi. years, among
those which which were counted famous and skillful in those sciences. And
because the whole discourse cannot be set down, without nominating certain
persons, of whom same are dead and some living, whose friends remain yet of
gr^^ credit: in respect thereof, I knowing that mine enemies do already in
number exceed my friends; I have considered with my self, that it is better
for me to stay my hand, than to commit that to the world, which may increase my
misery more than releeve the same. Notwithstanding, because I was noted above a
great many others to have had some dealings in those vain arts and wicked
practiser; I am thereefore to signify unto you, and I speak it in the
presence of God, that among all those famous and noted practisers, that I have
been conversant withal these xxvi. years, I could never see any matter of
truth to be done in those wicked sciences, but only mere cousenings and
illusions. And they, whom I thought to be most skillful therein, sought to see
some things at my hands, who had spent my time a dozen or fourteen years, to my
great loss and hindrance, and could never at any time see any one truth, or
sparkle of truth therein, Yea at (...) present I stand worthily condemned for
the same; for that contrary to my (...) laws, and the law of God, and also to
mine own conscience, I did spend my time in such vain and wicked studies and
practices being made and ^^maining a spectacle for all others to receive
warning by the Lord (...) may be the last (I speak it from my heart) and I
wish it, not only ^^ my native country, but also through the whole face of the
earth, specially among Christians. For mine own part I lament my time lost,
and have repented on five years past: at which time I saw a book, written in
the old Sax^^ tongue, Sr. John Malbornes book detecting the devises of
conjuration, etc.
by one Sir John Malborne a divine of Oxonford, three hundred years past,
wherein he opens all the illusions and inventions of th^se arts and sciences:
a thing most worthy the noting. I left the book with the parson of Slangham in
Sussex, where if you send for it in my name, you may have it. You shall think
your labor well bestowed, and it shall greatly (...) there the good enterprise
you have in hand, and there shall you see the whole science thoroughly
discuss^d, and all their illusions and cousenages ^^^phered at large. Thus
craving pardon at your hands for that I promised you, being very fearful,
doubtful, and loath to set my hand ^^ name under any thing that may be
offensive to the world, or hurtful ^^ my self, considering my case, except I
had the better warrant from my L. of Leicester, who is my very good Lord, and
by whom next under God, (her Majesty only excepted): I have been preserved;
and therefore (...) do any thing that may offend his Lordships cares. And so I
leave your, (...) to the Lords keeping, who bring you and al your actions to
good and (...) to Gods glory, and to the profit of all Christians. From the
Bench this 8. of March, 1582. Your worships poor and desolate friend and
servant,

T. E.


I sent for this book of purpose, to the parson of Slangham, and procured his,
best friends, men of great worship and credit, ^ito deale^ with him, that I
might borrow it for a time. But such is his folly and superstition, that
although he confessed he had it; yet he would not lend it: albeit a friend of
mine, being knight of the (...) would have given his word for the restitution
of the same safe and sound.

The author his conclusion.
The conclusion therefore shall be this, whatsoever heretofore has gone for
current, touching all these fallible arts, whereof a bit herual have written in
ample sort, be now counted counterfeit, and therefore not to be allowed, no not
by common sense, much less by reason, which should sif^ such cloaked and
pretended practices, turning them out of their rags and patched clowts, that
they may appear discovered, and (...) themselves in their nakedness. Which
will be the end of every secret ^^tent, privy purpose, hidden practice, and
close devise, have they never (...) shrowds and shelters for the time: and be
they with never so much ^^telousnesse and subtle circumspection clouded and
shadowed, yet will they at length be manisfestly detected by the light,
according to that old rimed verse: Quicquid nix celat, Andreas Gartnerus
Maeri^montanus. Eng by Ab. Fle.
solis calor omne revelat:
What thing soever snow does hide,
Heat of the sun does make it spide.


And according to the verdict of Christ, the true Nazarite, who never told
untruth, but who is the substances and groundworke of truth it self, saying;
Matt. 10 26. Mark 4.22. Luke 8.17. and 12.2.
Nihil est tam occulium quod non sit detegendum, Nothing is so secret, but it
shall be known and revealed.

THE xvj. Book.
CHAP. I.
A conclusion, in manner of an epilogue, repeating many of the former
absurdities of witchmongers conceits, confutations thereof, and of the
authority of James Sprenger and Henry Institor inquisitors and compilers of M.
Mal.

HItherto you have had delivered unto you, that which I have conceived and
gathered of this matter. In the substance and principal parts whereof I can
see no difference among the writers hereupon; of what country, condition,
estate, or religion so ever they be; but I find almost all of them to agree in
unconstancy, fables, and impossibilities; scratching out of M. Mal. the
substance of all their arguments: so as their authors being disapproved, they
must coin new stuff, or go to their grandams maids to learn more old wives
tales, whereof this art of witchcraft is contrived. But you must know that
James Sprenger, and Henry Institor, whom I have had occasion to allege many
times were copartners in the composition of that profound and learned book
called Malleus Maleficarum, The compilers or makers of the book called a
Mallet to brain witches
and were the greatest doctors of that art: out of whom I have gathered matter
and absurdity enough, to confound the opinions conceived of witchcraft;
although they were allowed inquisitors and assigned by the pope, with the
authority and commendation of all the doctors of the university of Collen, etc.
to call before them, to emprison, to condemn, and to execute witches; and
finally to seize and confiscate their goods.

These two doctors, to maintain their credit, and to cover their injuries,
have published those same monstrous lies, which have abused all Christendom,
being spread abroad with such authority, as it will be hard to suppress the
credit of their writings, be they never so ridiculous and false. Which although
they maintain and stir up with with their own praises; No marvel that they
were so opinionative herein, for God gave them over into strong delusions.
yet men are so bewitched, as to give credit unto them. For proof whereof I
remember they write in one place of their said book, that by reason of their
severe proceedings against witches, they suffered intolerable assaults,
specially in the night, many times finding needles sticking in their biggens,
which were thither conveyed by witches charms: and through their innocence and
holiness (they say) they were ever miraculously preserved from hurt. Howbeit
they affirm that they will not tell all that might make to the manifestation of
their holiness: for then should their own praise stink in their own mouths.
And yet God knows their whole book contains nothing but stinking lies and
popery. Which groundwork and foundation how weak and wavering it is, how unlike
to continue, and how slenderly laid, a child may soon discern and perceive.

CHAP. II.
By what means the common people have been made believe in the miraculous
works of witches, a definition of witchcraft, and a description thereof.

THe common people have been so assotted and bewitched, with whatsoeever poets
have feigned of witchcraft, either in earnest, in jest, or else in derision;
and with whatsoever loud liers and couseners for their pleasures herein have
invented, and with whatsoever tales they have heard from old doting women, or
from their mothers maids, and with whatsoever the grandfoole their ghostly
father, or any other morrow mass priest had informed them; and finally with
whatsoever they have swallowed up through tract of time, or through their own
timorous nature or ignorant conceit, concerning these matters of hags and
witches: as they have so settled their opinion and credit thereupon, that they
think it herefie to doubt in any part of the matter; specially because they
find this word witchcraft expressed in the scriptures; which is as to defend
praying to saints, because Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus is written in ^^ Deum.

The definition or description of witchcraft.
And now to come to the definition of witchcraft, which hitherto I did defer and
put off purposely: that you might perceive the true nature thereof, by the
circumstances, and therefore the rather to allow of the same, seeing the
variety of other writers. Witchcraft is in truth a cousening art, wherein the
name of God is abused, profaned, and blasphemed, and his power attributed to a
vile creature. In estimation of the vulgar people, The formal cause.
it is a supernatural work, contrived between a corporal old woman, and a
spiritual devil. The manner thereof is so secret, mystical, and strange,
that to this day there bath never been any credible witness thereof. It is
incomprehensible to the wise, learned or faithful, a probable matter to
children, fools, melancholic persons and papists. The trade is thought to be
impious. The final cause.
The effect and end thereof to be sometimes evil, as when thereby man or
beast, grass, trees, or corn, etc. is hur^; sometimes good, as whereby sick
folks are healed, thieves bewrayed, and true men come to their goods, etc. The
matter and instruments wherewith it is accomplished, The material cause.
are words, charms, signs, images, characters, etc. The which words although
any other creature do pronounce, in manner and form as they do, leaving out
no circumstance requisite or usual for that action; yet none is said to have
the grace or gift to perform the matter, except she be a witch, and so taken,
either by her own a consent, or by others imputation.

CHAP. III.
Reasons to prove that words and characters are but bables, and that witches
cannot do such things as the multitude supposes they can, their greatest
wonders proved trifles, of a young gentleman cousened.

THat words, characters, images, and such other trinkers, which are thought so
necessary instruments for witchcraft (as without the which no such thing can be
accomplished) are but bables, devised by couseners, to abuse the people
withal; I trust I have sufficiently proved. And the same may be further and
more plainly perceived by these short and compendious reasons following.

First, A necessary sequel.
in that the Turks and infidels, in their witchcraft, use both other words, and
other characters than our witches do, and also such as are most contrary. In
so much as, if ours bee^ bad, in reason theirs should be good. If their witches
can do anything, ours can do nothing. For as our witches are said to renounce
Christ, and despise his sacraments; so do the other forsake Mahomet and his
laws, which is one large step to christianity.

It is also to be thought, Probatum est, by mother Bungies confession that all
witches are couseners.
that all witches are couseners; when mother Bungie, a principal witch, so
reputed, tried, and condemned of all men, and continuing in that exercise and
estimation many years, (having cousened and abused the whole realm, in so much
as there came to her, witchmongers from all the furthest parts of the land, she
being in diverse books set out with authority, registered and chronicled by the
name of the great witch of Rochester, and reputed among all men for the chief
ringleader of all other witches) by good proof is ^ound to be a mere cousener;
confessing in her death bed freely, without compulsion or inforcement, that her
cunning consisted only in deluding and deceiving the people: saving that she
had (toward the maintenance of her credit in that cousening trade) some sight
in physic and surgery, and the assistance of a friend of hers, called Heron, a
professor thereof. And this I know, partly of mine own knowledge, and partly
by the testimony of her husband, and others of credit, to whom (I say) in her
death bed, and at sundry other times she protested these things; and also that
she never had indeed any material spirit or devil (as the voice went) nor yet
knew how to work any supernatural matter, as she in her life time made men
believe she had and could do.

The like may be said of one T. of Canterbury, whose name I will not literally
discover, who wonderfully abused many in these parts, making them think he
could tell where any thing lost b^came; with diverse other such practices,
whereby his fame was far beyond the others. And yet on his death bed he
confessed, that he knew nothing more then any other, but by sleight and
devices, without the assistance of any devil or spirit, saving the spirit of
cousenage: and this did he (I say) protest before many of great honesty,
credi^, and wisdom, who can witness the same, and also gave him good
commendations for his godly and honest end.

Again, who will maintain, that common witchcrafts are not cousenages, when
the great and famous witchcrafts, which had stolen credit not only from all the
common people, but from men of great wisdom and authority, are discovered to
be beggarly sleights of cousening varlots? Which otherwise might and would have
remained a perpetual objection against me. Were there not I. Bodin in the
preface before his book of Daemonomania reports this by a conjuring priest
late curat of Islington: he also shows to what end; read the place you that
understand Latin.
three images of late years found in a dunghill, to the terror and
astonishment of many thousands? In so much as great matters were thought to
have been pretended to be done by witchcraft. But if the Lord preserve those
persons (whose destruction was doubted to have been intended thereby) from all
other the lewd practices and attempts of their enemies; I fear not, but they
shall easily withstand these and such like devises, although they should indeed
be practiced against them. But no doubt, if such bables could have brought
those matters of mischief to pass, by the hands of traitors, witches, or
papists; we should long since have been deprived of the most excellent jewel
and comfort that we enjoy in this world. Howbeit, I confess, that the fear,
conceit, and doubt of such mischievous pretenses may breed inconvenience to
them that stand in awe of the same. And I wish, that even for such practices,
though they never can or do take effect, the practisers be punished with all
extremity; because therein is manifested a traitorous heart to the Queen, and a
presumption against God.

Note this devise of the waxen images found of late near London.
But to return to the discovery of the foresaid knavery and witchcraft. So it
was that one old cousener wanting money, devised or rather practiced (for it is
a stale devise) to supply his want, by promising a young Gentleman, whose humor
he thought would that way be well served, that for the sum of forty pounds, he
would not fail by his cunning in that art of witchcraft, to procure unto him
the love of any three women whom he would name, and of whom he should make
choice at his pleasure. The young Gentleman being abused with his cunning
devices, and too hastily yielding to that motion, satisfied this cunning man's
demand of money. Which, because he had it not presently to disburse, provided
it for him at the hands of a friend of his. Finally, this cunning man made the
three puppets of wax, etc. leaving nothing undone that appertained to the
cousenage, until he had buried them, as you have heard. But I omit to tell
what ado was made hereof, and also what reports and lies were bruited; as what
white dogs and black dogs* there were seen in the night season passing through
the watch, mawgre all their force and preparation against them, etc. But the
young Gentleman, who for a little space remained in hope mixed with joy and
love, now through tract of time has those his felicities powdered with doubt
and despair. For in stead of atchieving his love he would gladly have obtained
his money. But because he could by no means get either the one or the other (his
money being in hucksters handling, and his sure in no better forwardness) he
revealed the whole matter, hoping by that means to recover his money; which he
neither can yet get again* not has paid it where he borrowed. But till trial
was had of his simplicity or rather fully herein, he received some trouble
himself, hereabout though now dismissed.

CHAP. IIII.
Of one that was so bewitched that he could read no Scriptures but canonical,
of a devil that could speak no Latin a proof that witchcraft is flat
cousenage.

HEre I may aptly insert another miracle of importance, A strange miracle, if
it were true.
that happened within the compass of a childs remembrance, which may induce
any reasonable body to conceive, that these supernatural actions are but
fables and cousenages. There was one, whom for some respects I name not, that
was taken blind, deaf, and dumb; so as no Physician could help him: That man
(forsooth) though he was (as is said) both blind, dumb and deaf, yet could he
read any canonical Scriptures; but as for apocrypha, he could read none:
There the hypocrite was overmatcht for all his dissembled gravity.
wherein a Gods name consisted the miracle. But a leaf of apocrypha being
extraordinarily inserted among the canonical scriptures, he read the same as
authentic; wherein his knavery was bewrayed. Another had a devil, that
answered men so all questions, Mary her devil could understand no Latin, and
so was she (and by such means all the rest may be) bewrayed. Indeed our
witching writers say, that certain devils speak only the language of that
country where they are resiant, as French, or English, etc.

Furthermore in my conceit, nothing proves more apparently that witchcraft is
cousenage, and that witches instruments are but ridiculous bables, and
altogether void of effect; than when learned and godly Divines in their serious
writings, produce experiments as wrought by witches, and by devils at witches
commandments: which they expound by miracles, although indeed mere trifles.
Whereof they conceive amiss, being overtaken with credulity.

CHAP. V.
Of the divination by the sive and sheers, and by the book and key, Hemingius
his opinion thereof confuted, a babble to know what is a clock, of certain
juggling knacks, manifold reasons for the overthrow of witches and conjurors,
and their cousenages, of the devils transformations, of Ferrum candens, etc.

TO pass over all the fables, which are vouched by the popish doctors, you
shall hear the words of N. Hemingius, Heming. in lib. de superst. magicis.
whose zeal and learning otherwise I might justly commend: howbeit I am sorry
and ashamed to see his ignorance and folly in this behalf Neither would I have
bewrayed it, but that he himself, among other absurdities concerning the
maintenance of witches omnipotency, has published it to his great discredit.
Popish priests (says he) as the Chaldaeans used the divination by sive and
sheeres for the detection of theft, do practice with a psalter and a key
fastened upon the 49. psalm, to discover a thief, and when the names of the
suspected persons are orderly put into the pipe of the key, at the reading of
these words of the psalm [If thou saw a thief thou (...) consent unto him]
the book will wagge and fall out of the fingers of them that hold it, and he
whose name remains in the key must be the thief. The greatest clerks are not
the wisest men.
Hereupon Hemingius infers, that although conjuring priests and witches
bring not this to pass by the absolute words of the psalm, which tend to a far
other scope; yet satan does nimbly, with his invisible (...), give such a
twitch to the Book, as also in the other case to the sive and the sheers, that
down-fals the book and key, sive and sheeres, upstarts the (...), and away
runs the devil laughing, etc.

But alas, Hemingius is deceived, as not perceiving the conceit, or rather the
deceit thereof. For where he supposes those actions to be miraculous, and
done by a devil; they are in truth mere bables wherein coe^^steth not so much
as legierdemaine. For every carter may conceive the slight hereof; because the
book and key, sive and sheeres, being stayed up in that order, A natural
reason of the former knack.
by natural course of necessity must within that space (by means of the air,
and the pulse beating at the fingers end) turn and fall down. Which experience
being known to the witch or conjuror, she or he do form and frame their
prophefie accordingly; as whosoever makes proof thereof shall manifestly
perceive it. By this (...) practice, or experience, you shall know what it is a
clock, if you (...) between your finger and your thumb a thread of six or seven
inches long unto the other end whereof is tied a gold ring, or some such like
things in such sort as upon the beating of your pulse, and the moving of the
ring, the same may strike upon either side of a goblet or glass. The^^ things
are (I confess) witchcraft, because the effect or event proceeded not of that
cause which such couseners say, and others believe they do. As when they lay a
medicine for the ague. etc. to a child's wrists, they also (...) virtue whereof
(they say) the child is healed; whereas indeed the medicine only does the feat.
And this is also a silly jugglers knack, which wants legierdemaine, whom you
shall see to thrust a pin, or a small knife, through the head and brain of a
chicken or pullet, and with certain mystical words seem to cure him;
whereas, though no such words were spoken, the chicken would live, and do well
enough; as experience teaches and declares.

Again, when such as have maintained the art and prosession of conjuring, and
have written thereupon most cunningly, have published recantations, and
confessed the deceipts thereof, C. Agripp. in lib. de vanit. scient. and in
epistola ante librum de occult philosophia. Plin. lib. natural. hist. 30. ca.
1. Pet. Mart. in lucis communibus.
as Co^nelius Agrippa did, why should we defend it? Also, when heathen princes,
of great renown, authority, and learning, have searched with much industry and
charge, the knowledge and secrecy of conjuration and witchcraft, and finally
found by experience all to be false and vain that is reported of them, as Nero,
Iulianus apostata, and Valence did; why should we seek for further trial, to
prove witchcraft and conjuration to be cousenage?

Also, when the miracles imputed unto them, exceed in quantity, quality and
number, all the miracles that Christ wrought here upon earth, for the
establishing of his Gospel, for the confirmation of our faith, and for the
advancement of his glorious name; what good christian will believe them to be
true? And when Christ himself says; The works that I do, no man else can
accomplish; why should we think that a foolish old woman can do them all, and
many more?

Also, when Christ knew not these witches, nor spoke one word of them in all
the time of his being here upon earth, having such nec^ssary occasion (if at
leastwise they with their familiars could do as he did by the spirit of God,
as is constantly affirmed) why should we suppose that they can do as they say,
but rather that they are deceivers? When they are fain to say, that witches
wrought not in that art, all those thirty three years that Christ lived, and
that there were none in Jobs time, and that the cousening oracles are now
ceased; who sees not that they are witless, and mad fools that maintain
it? When all the mischiefs are accomplished by poisons and natural means,
which they affirm to be brought to pass by words, Note that during all Christ's
time upon earth, which was 33. years, witches were put to silence, etc.
it manifests to the world their cousenage. When all the places of Scripture,
which witchmongers allow for the proof of such witches, are proved to make
nothing for their purpose, their own fables and lies deserve small credit. When
one of the chief points in controversy; to wit, execution of witches, is
grounded upon a false translation; namely, You shall not suffer a witch to live
(which is in Latin Venesicam non vetinebitis in vita) where the word in every
man's ear sounds to be a poisoner, rather than a worker of miracles, and so
interpreted by the seventy interpreters, Josephus, and almost all the Rabbis
which were Hebrews born: why should any of their interpretations or allegations
be trusted, or well accounted of? When working of miracles is ceased, and the
gift of prophecy also; so as the godly, through invocation of the holy spirit,
cannot perform such wonderful things, as these witches and conjurors by the
invocation of devils and wicked spirits undertake, and are said to do; what
man that knows and honors God will be so infatuate as to believe these
lies and so prefer the power of witches and devils before the godly endued with
Gods holy spirit? When many printed books are published, even with authority,
in confirmation of such miracles wrought by those couseners, for the det^ction
of witchcrafts and in fine all is not only sound false, and to have been
accomplished by cousenage, but that there has been therein a set purpose to
defame honest matrones, as to make them be thought to be witches: why should we
believe; Bodin, M. Mal. etc. in their cousening tales and fables? When they say
that witches can fly in the air, and come in at a little coane, or a hole in a
glass window, and steal away sucking children, and hurt their mothers; and yet
when they are brought into prison, they cannot escape out of the grate, which
is far bigger: who will not condemn such accusations or confessions to be
frivolous, etc? When (if their assertions were true) concerning the devils
usual taking of shapes, and walking, talking, conferring, burting, and all
manner of dealing with mortal creatures, Christ's argument to Thomas had been
weak and easily answered; But Christ's argument was* undoubted; Ergo, etc.
yea the one half, or all the whole world might be inhabited by devils, every
poor man's house might be hired over his head by a devil, he might take the
shape and favor of an honest woman, and play the witch; or of an honest man
and play the thief, and so bring them both, or whom he list to the gallows* who
sees not the vanity of such assertions? For then the devil might in the
likeness of an honest man commit any criminal offense; as Lavater in his
nineteenth chapter De spectris, reports of a grave wise magistrate in the
territory of ^igurie, who affirmed; that as he and his servant went through
certain pastures, he espied in the morning, the devil in likeness of one whom
he knew very well, wickedly dealing with a mare. I marvel for what purpose
that magistrate went to that fellows house.
Upon the sight whereof he immediately went to that fellows house, and
certainly learned there, that the same person went not out of his chamber that
day. And if he had not wisely bolted out the matter, the good honest man (says
he) had surely been, cast into prison, and put on the rack, etc.

The like story we read of one Cunegunda, wife to Henry the second emperor of
that name, Alber^us Crantzius in lib. 4. mertopolis. cap. 4.
in whose chamber the devil (in the likeness of a youngman, with whom she was
suspected to be too familiar in court) was often seen coming in and out.
Howbeit, she was purged by the trial Candentis ferri, and proved innocent; for
she went upon glowing iron unhurt, Prove. 6.
etc. And yet Solomon says; May a man carry fire in his bosom, and his
clothes not be burned? Or can a man go upon coal^, and his feet not scortched?
And thus might the devil get him up into every pulpit, and spread heresies, as
I doubt not, but he does in the mouth of wicked preachers, though not so
grossly as is imagined and reported by the papists and witchmongers. And
because it shall not be said that I ^^lie them, I will cite a story credibly
reported by their cheifest doctors; namely James Sprenger, Mal. malef. par. 2.
que. 1. cap. 9.
and Henry Iustitor, who say as follows, even word for word.

CHAP. VI.
How the devil preached good doctrine in the shape of a priest, how he was
discovered, and that it is a shame (after confutation of the greater
witchcrafts) for any man to give credit to the lesser points thereof.

ON a time the devil went up into a pulpit, and there made a very catholic
sermon: but a holy priest coming to the good speed, by his holiness perceived
that it was the devil. So he gave good ear unto him, but could find no fault
with his doctrine. He should rather have asked who gave him orders and license
to preach.
And therefore so soon as the sermon was done, he called the devil unto him,
demanding the cause of his sincere preaching; who answered: Behold I speak the
truth, knowing that while men be hearers of the word, and not followers, God is
the more offended, and my kingdom the more enlarged. And this was the
strangest device (I think) that ever any devil used: for the apostles
themselves could have done no more. Again, when with all their familiars,
their ointments, etc. whereby they ride invisibly, nor with all their charms,
they can neither convey themselves from the hands of such as lay wait for them;
nor can get out of prison, that otherwise can go in and out at a mouse hole;
nor finally can save themselves from the gallows, that can transubstantiate
their own and others bodies into flies or fleas, etc. who sees not, that
either they lie, or are belyed in their miracles; when they are said to
transfer their neighbors corn into their own ground, and yet are perpetual
beggars, and cannot enrich themselves, either with money or otherwise: who is
so foolish as to remain longer in doubt of their supernatural power? When
never any yet from the beginning of the world till this day, has openly showed
any other trick, conceit, or cunning point of witchcraft, than legierdemaine
or cousenage: who will tarry any longer for further trial? when both the
common law and also the injunctions do condemn prophesying, and likewise
false miracles, and such as believe them in these days: who will not be afraid
to give credit to those knaveries? When hereby they make the devil to be a god
that hears the prayers, and understands the minds of men: who will not be
ashamed, being a christian, ^^ be so abused by them? When they that do write
most frankly of these matters, except lying Sprenger and Institor, have never
seen any thing herein; insomuch as the most credible proof that Bodin brings
of his wonderful tales of witchcraft, John Bodin.
is the report of his host at an alehouse where he baited: who will give
further ear unto these incredible fables? When in all the new testament, we are
not warned of these bodily appearances of devils, as we are of his other
subtilties, etc. who will be afraid of their bugs? When no such bargain is
mentioned in the scriptures, why should we believe so incredible and impossible
covenants, Yet many that bear the show of honest men are very credulous herein:
being the ground of all witchmongers religion, without the which they have no
probability in the rest of their foolish assertions? When as, if any honest
man's conscience be appealed unto, he must confess he never saw trial of such
witchcraft or conjuration to take effect, as is now so certainly affirmed: what
conscience can condemn poor souls that are accused wrongfully, or b^leeve
them that take upon them impiously to do or work those impossib^^ things? When
the whole course of the scripture is utterly repugnant to these impossible
opinions, saving a few sentences, which nevertheless rightly understood,
relieve them nothing at all: who will be seduced by their fond arguments? When
as now that men have spied the knavery of oracles, and such pelf, and that
there is not one oracle in the world remaining; who cannot perceive that all
the residue heretofore of these devices, have been cousenages, knaveries, and
lies? When the power of God is so impudently transferred to a base creature,
what good christian can abide to yield unto such miracles wrought by fools?
When the old women accused of witchcraft, are ut^erly insensible, and unable to
say for themselves; and much less to bring such matters to pass, as they are
accused of: who will not lament to see the extremity used against them? When
the foolisher sort of people are always most mistrustfull of hurt by
witchcraft, and the simplest and dotingest people mistrusted to do the hurt:
what wise man will not conceive all to be but folly? When it were an easy
matter for the devil, if he can do as they affirm, to give them great store of
money, and make them rich, and does it not; being a thing which would procure
him more disciples than any other thing in the world; Witches are commonly very
beggars.
the wise must needs condemn the devil of folly, and the witches of
peevishness, that take such pains, and give their souls to the devil to be
tormented in hell fire, and their bodies to the hangman to be trussed on the
gallows, for nichels in a bag.

CHAP. VII.
A conclusion against witchcraft, in manner and form of an induction.

A general conclusion against them whom the subject of this book concerns.
BY this time all Kentishmen know (a few fools excepted) that Rob^^ good fellow
is a knave. All wisemen understand that witches miraculous enterprises, being
con^^^ry to nature, probability and reason, are void of truth or possibility*
All protestants perceive, that popish charms, conjurations, execrations, and
benedictions are not effectual, but be toies and devices only to keep the
people blind, and to enrich the clergy. All christians see, that to confess
witches can do as they say, were to attribute to a creature the power of the
Creator. All children well brought up conceive and spy, or at the least are
taught, that juglers miracles do consist of legierdemain and confederacy. The
very heathen people are driven to confess, that there can be no such
conference between a spiritual devil and a corporal witch, as is supposed; for
no doubt, all the heathen would then have every one his familiar devil, for
they would make no conscience to acquaint themselves with a devil that are not
acquainted with God.

I have dealt, and conferred with many (marry I must confess papists for the
most part) that maintain every point of these absurdities. And surely I allow
better of their judgments, than of others, unto whom some part of these
cousenages are discovered and seen; and yet concerning the residue, they remain
as wise as they were before; specially being satisfied in the highest and
greatest parts of conjuring and cousening; to wit, in popery, and yet will be
abused with beggarly juggling, and witchcraft.

CHAP. VIII.
Of natural witchcraft or fascination.

BUt because I am loath to oppose my self against all the writers herein^ or
altogether to discredit their stories, or wholly to deface their reports,
touching the effects of fascination or witchcraft; I will now set down certain
parts thereof, which although I my self cannot admit, without some doubts,
difficulties and exceptions, yet will I give free liberty to others to believe
them, if they list; for that they do not directly oppugn my purpose.

Many great and grave authors write, Isigonus. Memphradorus. Solon, etc.
Vairus. I. Bodinus. Mal. malef.
and many fond writers also affirm, that there are certain families in
Aphrica, which with their voices bewitch whatsoever they praise. Insomuch as,
if they commend either plan^, corn, infant, horse, or any other beasts, the
same presently withers, decays and dies. This mystery of witchcraft is not
unknown or neglected of our witchmongers, and superstitious fools here in
Europe. But to show you examples near home here in England, as though our voice
had the like operation; you shall not hear a butcher or horsecourser cheapen a
bullock or a jade, but if he buy him not, he says, God save him; if he do
forget it, and the horse or bullock chance to die, the fault is imputed to the
chapman. Certainly the sentence is godly, if it do proceed from a faithful and
a godly mind; but if it be spoken as a superstitious charm, by those words and
syllables to compound with the fascination and misadventure of unfortunate
words, the phrase is wicked and superstitious, though there were far greater
show of godliness than appears therein.

CHAP. IX.
Of enchanting or bewitching eyes. With the like property were the old Illyrian
people endued: if we will credit the words of Sabinus grounded upon the report
of Aul. Gell.


MAny writers agree with Virgil and Theocritus in the effect of witching eyes,
affirming that in Scythia there are women called Bithiae, having two bals or
rather blacks in the apple of their eyes. And as Didimus reports, some have
in the one eye two such bals, and in the other the (...) of a horse. These
(forsooth) with their angry looks do bewitch and hurt not only young lambs, but
young children. There be other that retain such venom in their eyes, and send
it forth by beams and streams so violently, that therewith they annoy not only
them with whom they are conversant continually; but also all other, whose
company they frequent, of what age, strength or complexion soever they be: as
Cicero, Plutarch, Phila^chus, and may others give out in their writings.

I. Bap. Neapol. in lib. de natural magia.
This fascination (says John Baptista Porta Neapolitanus) though it b^gin by
touching or breathing, is always accomplished and finished by the eye, as an
extermination or expulsion of the spirits through the eyes, approaching to the
heart of the bewitched, and infecting the same, etc. Whereby it comes to
pass, that a child, or a young man endued with a clear, whole, subtle and
sweet blood, yields the like spirits, breath, and vapors springing from the
purer blood of the heart. And the lightest and finest spirits, ascending into
the highest parts of the head, do fall into the eyes, and so are from thence
sent forth, as being of all other parts of the body the most clear, and fullest
of ve^ns and pores, and with the very spirit or vapor proceeding thence, is
conveyed out as it were by beams and streams a certain fiery force; whereof he
that beholds sore eyes shall have good experience. This is held of some for
truth.
For the poison and disease in the eye infecteth the air next unto it, and the
same proceeds further, carrying with it the vapor and infection of the
corrupted blood: with the contagion whereof, the eyes of the beholders are most
apt to be infected. By this same meant it is thought that the cockatrice
depriveth the life, and a woolf takes away the voice of such as they suddenly
meet withal and behold.

Old women, in whom the ordinary course of nature fails in the office of
purging their natural monthly humors, show also some proof hereof. For (as
the said I. B. P. N. reports alleging Aristotle for his author) they leave
in a looking glass a certain froth, by means of the gross vapors proceeding
out of their eyes, which comes so to pass, because those vapors or spirits,
which so abundantly come from their eyes, cannot pierce and enter into the
glass, which is hard and without pores, and therefore resists: Non est in
speculo ves quae speculatur in ill^.
but the beams which are carried in the chariot (...) conveyance of the
spirits, from the eyes of one body to another, do pie^^^ to the inward parts,
and there breed infection, whilst they, search and seek for their proper
region. And as these beams and vapors do proceed from the heart of the one, so
are they turned into blood about the heart of the other* which blood
disagreeing with the nature of the bewitched party infeebleth the rest of his
body, and makes him sick; the contagion whereof so long continues, as the
distempered blood has force in the members. And because the infection is of
blood, the fever or sickness will be continual; whereas if it were of
choler, or phlegm, it would be intermittent or alterable.

CHAP. X.
Of natural witchcraft for love, etc.

BUt as there is fascination and witchcraft by malicious and angry eyes unto
displeasure; Nescio quis oculus t^neros mibi sascinat agnos, says Virgil; and
thus Englished by Abraham Fleming.

I wore not I What watching eye Does use to hant a My tender lams Sucking their
d^^^. And them inchant.


so are there witching aspects, tending contrari wise to love, or at the least,
to the procuring of good will and liking. For if the fascination or witchcraft
be brought to pass or provoked by the desire, by the wishing and coveting of
any beautiful shape or savor, the venom is strained through the eyes, though
it be from a far, and the imagination of a beautiful form rests in the heart
of the lover, and kindles the fire wherewith it is afflicted. And because the
most delicate, sweet, and tender blood of the beloved does there wander, his
countenance is there represented shining in his own blood, and cannot there be
quiet; and is so haled from thence, that the blood of him that is wounded,
reboundeth and slippeth into the wounder, according to the saying of Lucretius
the poet to the like purpose and meaning in these verses; Idque petit corpus,
men's unde est saucia amore,
Namque omnes plerunque cadunt in vulnus, and ill^m
Emicat in parlem sanguis, unde icimur ictu;
Et si cominus est, os tum rubor occupat humor:
And to that body it is rebounded, Englished by Abraham Fleming.

From whence the mind by love is wounded,
For in a manner all and some,
Into that wound of love do come,
And to that part the blood does flee
From whence with stroke we stricken be,
If hard at hand, and near in place,
Then ruddie color fills the face.


Thus much may seem sufficient touching this matter of natural magic;
whereunto though much more may be annexed, yet for the avoiding of
tediousness, and for speedier passage to that which remains; I will break
off this present treatise. And now somewhat shall be said con^erning devils and
spirits in the discourse following.

A Discourse upon devils and spirits, and first of Philosophers opinions, also
the manner of their reasoning hereupon; and the same confuted.
CHAP. I.
H. Card. lib. de var. rer. 16. cap. 93.
THere is no question nor theme (says Hierome Cardons) so difficult to deal in,
nor so noble an argument to dispute upon, as this of devils and spirits. For
that, being confessed or doubted of, the eternity of the soul is either
affirmed or denied. The Platonists and Stoics.
The heathen philosophers reason hereof amongst themselves in this sort. First,
they that maintain the perpetuity of the soul, say that if the soul died with
the body; to what end should men take pains either to live well or die well, when
no reward for virtue nor punishment for vice insueth after this life, The
Epicureans and Peripateticks.
the which otherwise they might spend in ease and security? The other sort say
that virtue and honesty is to be pursued, Nou spe praemii, sed virtutis amore,
that is, Not for hope of reward, but for love of virtue. If the soul live ever
(say the other) the least portion of life is here. And therefore we that
maintain the perpetuity of the soul, may be of the better comfort and courage,
to sustain with more constancy the loss of children, yea and the loss of life
it self: whereas, if the soul were mortal, all our hope and felicity were to be
placed in this life, which many Atheists (I warrant you) at this day do. But
both the one and the other missed the cushion. For, to do any thing without
Christ, is to weary our selves in vain; since in him only o^^ corruptions are
purged. And therefore the folly of the Gentiles, that place Summum bonum in the
felicity of the body* Summum bonum cannot consist in the happiness of the body
or mind.
or in the happiness or pleasures of the mind, is not only to be derided, but
also abhorred. For both our bodies and minds are intermedled with most
miserable cala^^ties: and therefore therein cannot consist perfect felicity.
But in the word of God is exhibited and offered unto us that hope which is mos^
(...) absolute, sound and sincere, not to be answered or denied by the
judgment of philosophers themselves. For they that prefer temperance before
all other things as Summum bonum, Moral temperance.
must needs see it to be but a witness of their natural calamity, corruption
and wickedness; and that it serves for nothing, but to restrain the
dissoluteness, which has place in their minds infected with vices; which are
to be bridled with such corrections; yea and the best of them all fails in
some point of modesty. Wherefore serves our philosophers prudence, but to
provide for their own folly and misery; Moral prudence.
whereby they might else be utterly overthrown? And if their nature were not
entangled in errors, they should have no need of such circumspection. Moral
justice.
The justice whereof they speak, serves but to keep them from ravine, theft,
and violence: and yet none of them all are so just but that the very best and
uprightest of them fall into great infirmities, both doing and suffering much
wrong and injury. Moral fortitude.
And what is their fortitude but to arm them to endure misery grief, danger,
and death it self? But what happiness or goodness is to be reposed in that
life, which must be waited upon with such calamities, and finally must have the
help of death to finish it? I say, if it be so miserable, why do they place
Summum bonum therein? Romans 2.
S. Paul to the Romans shows, that it cannot be that we should attain to
justice, through the moral and natural actions and duties of this life:
because that never the Jews nor the Gentiles could express so much in their
lives, as the very law of nature or of Moses required. And therefore he that
works without Christ, does as he that reckons without his host.

CHAP. II.
Mine own opinion concerning this argument, to the disproofe of some writers
hereupon.

I For my part do also think this argument, about the nature and substance of
devils and spirits, The question about spirits doubtful and difficult.
to be so difficult, as I am persuaded that no one author has in any certain
or perfect sort hitherto written thereof. In which respect I can neither allow
the ungodly and profane sects and doctrines of the Sadduces and Peripateticks,
who deny that there are any devils or spirits at all; nor the fond and
superstitious ^reatise; of Plato, Proclus, Plotinus, Porphy^ie; or yet the
vain and absurd opinions of Psellus, Nider, Sprenger, Cumanus, Bodin, Michael,
Andreas, Ianus, Matchaeus, Laurentius Ananias, Iamblichus, etc: who with many
others write so ridiculously in these matters, as if they were babes fraied
with bugges; some affirming that the souls of the dead become spirits, the
good to be angels, Plotinus. The Greeks. Laur. Ananias. The Manichees Plutarch.
Psellus. Mal. malef. Avicen, and the Cabal^ists. The Thalmudists.

Psellus etc. The Platonists. The Papists.


the bad to be devils; some that spirits or devils are only in this life;
some, that they are men; some, that they are women; some that devils are of
such gender as they lift themselves; some, that they had no beginning, nor
shall have ending, as the Manichees maintain; some, that they are mortal and
die, as Plutarch affirms of Pan; some, that they have no bodies at all, but
receive bodies, according to their fantasies and imaginations; some, that
their bodies are given unto them; some, that they make themselves. Some, say
they are wind; some, that they are the breath of living creatures; some, that
one of them begat another; some, that they were created of the least part of
the mass, whereof the earth was made; and some, that they are substances
between God and man, and that of them some are terrestrial, some celestial,
some watery, some airy, some fiery, some starry, and some of each and every part
of the elements, and that they know our thoughts, and carry our good works and
prayers to God, and return his benefits back unto us, and that they are to be
worshipped: wherein they meet and agree iumpe with the papists; as if you read
the notes upon the second chapter to the Colossians, in the Seminaries
testament printed at Rhemes, you shall manifestly see, though as contrary to
the word of God as black to white, as apppeareth in the Apocalypse, where the
angel expressly forbad John to worship him.

Apoc. 19.10. ibid. 22.8.9.
Again, some say that they are mean betwixt terrestiall and celestial bodies,
communicating part of each nature; and that although they be eternal, yet that
they are moved with affections: and as there are birds in the air, fishes in
the water, and worms in the earth; so in the fourth element, which is the
fire, is the habitation of spirits and devils. And lest we should think them
idle, they say they have charge over men, and government in all countries and
nations. The Sadduces.
Some say that they are only imaginations in the mind of man. Tertullian says
they are birds, and fly faster then any soul of the air. Some say that devils
are not, but when they are sent; and therefore are called evil angels. Some
think that the devil sends his angels abroad, and ^e himself makes his
continual abode in hell, Ps^llus de operatione daemonum, cap. 8.
his mansion place.

CHAP. III.
The opinion of Psellus touching spirits, of their several orders, and a
confutation of his errors therein.

PSellus being of authority in the church of Rome, and not impugnable by any
catholic, being also instructed in these supernatural or rather diabolical
matters by a monk called Marcus, who had been familiarly conversant a long
time, as he said, with a certain devil, reports upon the same devils own
word, which must needs understand best the state of this question, that the
bodies of angels and devils consist not now of all one element, though perhaps
it were otherwise before the fall of Lucifer; and that the bodies of spirits
and devils can feel and be felt, Such are spirits walking in white sheets,
etc.
do hurt and be hurt: in so much as they lamen^ when they are stricken; and
being put to the fire are burnt, and yet that they themselves burn
continnually, in such sort as they leave ashes behind them in places where they
have bee^e* as manifest trial thereof has been (if he say truly) in the
borders of Italy. Psellus, ibid. cap. 9.
He also says upon like credit and assurance, that devils and spirits do avoid
and shed from out of their bodies, such seed or nature, as whereby certain
vermin are ingendered; and that they are nourished with food, as we are,
saving that they receive it not into their mouths, but suck it up into their
bodies, in such sort as sponges soke up water. Idem. cap. 10.
Also he says they have names, shapes, and dwelling places, as indeed they
have, though not in temporal and corpor^^ sort. Idem ibid. cap. 11. Oh
heathenish, nay oh papisticall folly!


Furthermore, he says, that there are six princiall kind of devils, which are
not only corporal, but temporal and worldly. The first sort consist of fire,
wandering in the region near to the moon, but have no power to go into the
moon. The second sort consisting of air, have their habitation more low and
near unto us: these (says he) are proud and great boasters, very wise and
deceitful, and when they come down are seen with streams of fire at their
tail. The opinions of all papists.
He says that these are commonly conjured up to make images laugh, and lamps
burn of their own accord; and that in Assyria they use much to prophecy in a
basin of water. A cousening knavery.
Which kind of incantation is usual among our conjurors: but it is here
commonly performed in a pitcher or pot of water; or else in a vial of glass
filled with water, wherein they say at the first a little sound is heard
without a voice, which is a token of the devils coming. Anon the water seems
to be troubled, and then there are heard small voices, wherewith they give
their answers, speaking so softly as no man can well hear them: H. Card. lib.
de. var. rer. 10. cap. 93.
because (says Cardane) they would not be argued or rebuked of lies. But this
I have elsewhere more largely described and confuted. The third sort of devils
Psellus says are earthly; the fourth watery, or of the sea; the fifth under the
earth; the sixth sort are Lucifugi, that is, such as delight in darkness, and
are scant endued with sense, and so dull, as they can scarce be moved with
charms or conjurations.

The same man says, that some devils are worse than other, but yet that they
all hate God, and are enemies to man. But the worser moity of devils are Aquei,
Devils of diverse nature^, and their operations.
Subterranei, and Lucifugi; that is, watery, under the earth, and shunners of
light: because (says he) these hurt not the souls of men, but destroy men's
bodies like mad and ravening beasts, molesting both the inward and outward
parts thereof. Aquei are they that raise tempests, and drown seafaring men,
and do all other mischiefs on the water. Subterranei and Lucifugi enter into
the bowels of men, and torment them that they possess with the frenzy, and
the falling evil. They also assault them that are miners or pioners, which use
to work in deep and dark holes under the earth. Such devils as are earthy
and aerie, he says enter by subtilty into the minds of men, to deceive them,
provoking men to absurd and unlawful affections.

But herein his philosophy is very unprobable, The former opinion confuted.
for if the devil be earthy, he must needs be palpable; if he be palpable, he
must needs kill them into whose bodies he enters. Item, if he be of (...)
then must he also be visible and untransformable in that (...) Gods creation
cannot be annihilated by the creature. So as, though it were granted, that they
might add to their substance matter and form, etc. yet it is most certain,
that they cannot diminish or alter the substance whereof they consist, as not
to be (when they li^t) spiritual, or to relinquish and leave earth, water,
fire, air, or this and that element whereof they are created. But howsoever
they imagine of water, air, or fire, I am sure earth must always be visible
and palpable, yea, and air must always be invisible, and fire must be hot,
add water must be moist. And of these three latter bodies, specially of water
and air, no form nor shape can be exhibited to mortal eye naturally, or by
the power of any creature.

CHAP. IIII.
More absurd assertions of Psellus and such others, concerning the actions and
passions of spirits, his definition of them, and of his experience therein.

Psellus lib. de operat. daem. cap. 12.

If this were spoken of the tentations, etc. of satan, it were tolerable. 1.
Cor. 12.


MOreover, the same author says that spirits whisper in our minds, and yet not
speaking so loud, as our ears may hear them: but in such sort as our souls
speak together when they are dissolved; making an example by loud speaking a
far often, and a comparison of soft whispering near hand, so as the devil
enters so near to the mind as the ear need not hear him; and that every
part of a devil or spirit sees, hears, and speaks, etc. But herein I will
believe Paul better then Psellus, or his monk, or the monks devil. For Paul
says; if the whole body were an eye, where were hearing? If the whole body
where hearing, where were smelling, etc. Whereby you may see what accord is
betwixt Gods word and witchmongers.

The papists proceed in this matter, and say, that these spirits use great
knavery and unspeakeable bawdery in the breach and middle parts of man and
woman, by tickling, and by other lecherous devices; so that they fall jumpe in
judgment and opinion, though very erroniously, with the foresaid Psellus,
Psellus ibid. cap. 13. If a babe of two years old throw stones from Pawles
steeple, they will do hurt, etc.

Howbeit I think the spirit of tentation to be that devil; and therefore (...)
Christ bids us watch and pray, lest we be tempted, etc. Psel. in operat.
daem. cap. 14. Idem. cap. 17.


of whose doctrine also this is a parcel, to wit, that these devils hurt not
cattle for the hate they bear unto them, but for love of their natural and
temperate heat and moisture, being brought up in deep, dry and cold places;
mary they hate the heat of the sun and the fire, because that kind of heat
dries too fast. They throw down stones upon men, but the blows thereof do
no harm to them whom they hit; because they are not cast with any force: for
says he the devil have little and small strength, so as these stones do
nothing but fray and terrify men, as scarecrowes do birds out of the corn
fields. But when these devils enter into the pores, then do they raise
wonderful tumults in the body and mind of man. And if it be a subterrene
devil (...) does writhe and bow the possessed, and speaks by him, using the
spirit of the patient (...) his instrument. But he says, that when Lucifugus
possesses a man, (...) him dumb, and as it were dead: and these be they that
are cast out (says he) only by fasting and prayer.

The same Psellus, with his mates Bodin and the penners of M. Man. and others,
do find fault with the physicians that affirm such infirmities to be curable
with diet, and not by enchantments; saying, that physicians do only attend upon
the body, and that which is perceiveable by outward sense; and that as touching
this kind of divine philosophy, they have no skill at all: And to make devils
and spirits seem yet more corporal and terrene, he says that certain devils
are belonging to certain countries, and speak the languages of the same
countries, and none other; some the Assyrian, some the Chaldaean, and some the
Persian tongue, and that they feel stripes, and fear hurt, and specially the
di^t of the sword (in which respect conjurors have swords with them in their
circles, to terrify them) and that they change shapes, even as suddenly as men
do change color with blushing, fear, anger, and other moods of the mind. He
says yet further, Beast like devils.
that there be brute beasts among them, and yet devils, and subject to any kind
of death; insomuch as they are so foolish, as they may be compared to flies,
fleas, and worms, who have no respect to any thing but their food, not
regarding or remembering the hole from out of whence they came last. Marry
devils compounded of earth, cannot often transform themselves, but abide in
someone shape, such as they best like, and most delight in; to wit, in the
shape of birds or women; and therefore the Greeks call them N^idas, Noreidas,
and Dreidas, in the feminine gender; which Dreidae inhabited, (as some write)
the Islands beside Scotland called Druidae, which by that means had their
denomination and name. Other devils that dwell in dryer places transform
themselves into the masculine kind. Finally Psellus says they know our
thoughts, and can prophecy of things to come. His definition is, that they are
perpetual minds in a passible body.

To verify these toies he says, But Ps^llus saw nothing himself. Probable and
likely stuff.
that he himself saw in a certain night a man brought up by Aletus Libius into
a mountain, and that he took an herb, and spat thrice into his mouth, and
anointed his eyes with a certain ointment, so as thereby he saw great troops
of devils, and perceived a crow to fly into his mouth; and since that hour he
could prophecy at all times, saving on Good Friday, and Easter-sunday. If the
end of this tale were true, it might not only have satisfied the Greek-church,
in keeping the day of Easter, together with the church of Rome; but might also
have made the pope (that now is) content with our Christmas and Easter day, and
not to have gathered the minutes together, and reformed it so, as to show how
falsely he and his predecessors (whom they say could not err) has observed it
hitherto. And truly this, and the dansing of the sun on Easter day morning
sufficiently or rather miraculously proves that computation, which the pope
now begins to doubt of, and to call in question.

CHAP. V.
The opinion of Fascius Cardanus touching spirits, and of his familiar devil.

FAscius Cardanus had (as he himself and his son Hierome Cardanus report) a
familiar devil, Fasc. Card. operat. de demon.
consisting of the fiery element, who, so long as he used conjuration, did give
true answers to all his demands; but when he burned up his book of
conjurations, though he resorted still unto him, yet did he make false answers
continually. He held him bound twenty and eight years, and loose five years.
And during the time that he was bound, he told him that there were many devils
or spirits. He came not always alone, but sometimes some of his fellows with
him. He rather agreed with Psellus then with Plato: for he said they were
begotten, (...) died, and lived long; but how long they told him not: howbeit,
as he might conjecture by the devils face, who was 42 years old, and (yet
appeared very young, he thought they lived two or three hundred years; and
they said that their souls and ours also died with their bodies. They had
schools and universities among them: but he conceived not that any were ^o
dull headed, as Psellus makes them. But they are very quick in credit, that
believe such fables, which indeed is the groundwork on witchcraft and
conjuration. But these histories are so gross and pal^pable, that I might be
thought as wise in going about to confute them, as to answer the stories of
Friar Rush, Adam Bell, or the golden Legend.

CHAP. VI.
The opinion of Plato concerning spirits, devils and angels, what sacrifices
they like best, what they fear, and of Socrates his familiar devil.

The Platonists opinion.
PLato and his followers hold, that good spirits appear in their own likeness;
but that evil spirits appear and show themselves in the form of other bodies;
and that one devil reigns over the rest, as a prince does in every perfect
commonwealth over men. Item, they obtain their purposes and desires, only by
entreaty of men and women; because in nature they are their inferiors and use
authority over men none otherwise* than priests by virtue of their function,
and because of religion wherein (they say) they execute the office of God.
Sometimes they say that the fiery spirits or supreme substances enter into the
pur^^ of the mind, and so obtain their purpose; sometimes otherwise to wit,
by virtue of holy charms, and even as a poor man obtained for Gods sake any
thing at a princes hand as it were by importunat^nesse.

The other sort of devils and defiled souls are so conversant on earth, ^^
that they do much hurt unto earthly bodies, specially in leachery, Gods and
angels (say they) because they want all material and gross substance, desire
most the pure sacrifice of the mind. What kind of sacrifices each spirit
likes best.
The grosser and more terrestrial spirits desire the grosser sacrifices; as
beasts and cattle. They in the middle or mean region delight to have
frankincense, and su^^ mean stuff offered unto them: and therefore (say they)
it is necessary to sacrifice unto them, all manner of things, so the same be
slato^^ and dye not of their own accord; for such they abhor. Some say that
spirits fear wonderfully vain threats, and thereupon will depart; as if you
tell them that you will cut the heavens in pieces, or reveal their secrets as
complain of them to the gods, or s^y that you will do any impossibility or
such things as they cannot understand; they are so timorous, as they will
presently be gone: and that is thought the best way to be rid of them. But
these be most commonly of that sort or company which are called Principatus,
being of all other the most easy to be conjured.

They say Socrates had a familiar devil: Of Socrates his private devil or
familiar spirit.
which Plato relyeth much upon, using none other argument to prove that there
are such spirits, but because Socrates (that would not lie) said so; and pardy
because that devil did ever dissuade and prohibit, not only in Socrates his
own cases, but sometimes in his friends behalf; who (if they had been ruled)
might through his admonition have saved their lives. His disciples gathered
that his devil was Saturnall, and a principal fiery devil; and that he, and
all such as do naturally know their devils, are only such as are called
Daemonii viri, otherwise, couseners. Item, they say that fiery spirits urge men
to contemplation, the airy to business, the watery to lust; and among these
there are some that are Martial, which give fortitude; some are Joviall,
giving wisdom; some Saturniall, always using disswasion and dehor^ing. Item,
some are born with us, and remain with us all our life; some are mere
strangers, who are nothing else but the souls of men departed^ his life, etc.

CHAP. VII.
Plato's nine orders of spirits and angels, D^onysius his division thereof not
much differing from the same, all disproved by learned Divines.

PLato proposes or sets forth nine several orders of spirits, besides the
spirits and souls of men. The first spirit is God that commands all the
residue; the second are those that are called Idiae, which give all things to
all men; the third are the souls of heavenly bodies which are mortal; the
fourth are angels; the fifth archangels; the sixth are devils, who are ministers
to infernal powers, as angels are to supernall; the seventh are half Gods; the
eight are principalities; the ninth are princes. From which division Dionysius
does not much swarve, Dionys. in coelest. h^rearch. cap. 9.10
saving that he deals (as he says) only with good spirits, whom he likewise
divides into nine parts or offices. The first he calls Seraphim, the second
cherubim, the third thrones, the fourth dominations, the fifth virtues, the sixth
powers, the seventh principalities, the eight archangels, the ninth and
inferior sort he calls angels. Ephesians. 6.
Howbeit, some of these (in my thinking) are evil spirits; or else Paul gave
us evil counsel, when he willed us to fight against principalities, and
powers, and all spiritual wickedness.

But Dionysius in that place goes further, Dionys. in coelest. hierarch.
impropriating to every country, and almost to every person of any account, a
peculiar angel; as to Iewry, he assigns Michael; to Adam, Razael; to
Abraham, Zekiel; to Isaac, Raphael; to Jacob, Peliel; to Moses, Metraton, etc.
But in these discourses be either followed his own imaginations and conceits,
or else the corruptions of that age. Nevertheless, I had rather confute him by
M. Calvine, and my kinsman M. Deering, than by my self, or mine own words. I.
Calv. lib. inslit. 1. c. 14.
For M. Calvine says, that Dionysius, herein spe^^^eth not as by h^arsay, but
as though he had slipped down from heaven, and told of things which he had
seen. And yet (says he) Paul was (...) into the third heaven, and reports no
such matters. But if you read M* Deering upon the first chapter to the Hebrews,
Edw. Deering in lect upon the Hebrews reading 6. Mal 3.1.
you shall see this matter ^otably handled; where he says, that whenever
archangell is mentioned in the Scriptures, it signifies our Savior Christ,
and no creature* And certain it is that Christ himself was called an angel.
The names also of angels, as Mith^el, Gabriel, etc. are given to them (says
Calvine) according to the capacity of our weakness. But because the decision
of this is neither within the compass of man's capacity, nor yet of his
knowledge, I will proceed no further to discuss the same, but to show the
absurd opinions of papists and witchmongers on the one side, and the most sober
and probable collections of the contrary minded on the other side.

CHAP. VIII.
The commencement of devils fondly gathered out of the 14. of Isa. of Lucifer
and of his fall, the Cabalists the Thalmudists and Schoolm^ns opinions of the
crea^ion of angels.

THe witchmongers, which are most commonly bastard divines, do fondly gather
and falsely conceive the commencement of devils out of the fourteenth of Isay,
Isai. 14.
where they suppose Lucifer is cited* as the nam^ of an angel; who on a time
being desirous to be checkmate with God himself, would needs (when God was gone
a little aside) be sitting down or rather pirking up in Gods own principal and
cathedral chair; and that therefore God cast him and all his confederates out
of heaven: so as some fell down from thence to the bottom of the earth; some
having descended but into the middle region, and the tail of them having not
yet passed through the higher region, stayed even then and there, when God
said, Ho. But God knows there is no such thing meant nor mentioned in that
place. For there is only fore-shewed the deposing and deprivation of King
Nebuchadnezzar, who exalting himself in pride (as it were above the stars)
esteemed his glory to surmount all others, as far as Lucifer the bright
morning star shines more gloriously than the other common stars, and was
punished by exile, until such time as he had humbled himself; and therefore
metaphorically was called Lucifer.

But forsooth, because these great clerks would' be thought methodicall, and to
have crept out of wisdoms bosom, who rather crawled out of follies breec^es;
they take upon them to show us, first, whereof these angels that fell from
heaven were created; to wit, of the left side of tha^ massy mold, The opinion
of the Thalmudists.
whereof the world was compounded, the which (say they) was Putredo terrae;
that is, the rottenness of the earth. The Cabalist^ with whom Avicen seems
to agree, say that one of these begat another^ others say, they were made all
at once. The Greeks do write that angels were created before the world. The
Latinists say they were made the fourth day, Laur. Anan. lib. de nature. daem. 1
Creavit coelum. and terra^.
when the stars were made. Laurence Ananias says, they were made the first
day, and could not be made the fourth day, because it is written; Quando sa^ta
sunt sider a, laudaverunt me angel^: When the stars were made the angels
praised me; so as (says he) they were made under the names of the heavens.

There is also a great question among the schoolmen, whether more angels sell
down with Lucifer, or remained in heaven with Michael. Many having a bad
opinion of the angels honesties, affirm that the greater part fell with
Lucifer; Laur. Anan. lib. denatur daem. 1.
but the better opinion is (says Laurentius Ananias) that the most part
remained. And of them that think so, some say the tenth part were cast down,
some the ninth; and some gather upon S. John, that the third part were only
damned; because it is written, that the dragon with his rail plucked down with
him the third part of the stars.

CHAP. IX.
Of the contention between the Greek and Latin church touching the fall of
angels, the variance among papists themselves herein, a conflict between
Michael and Lucifer.

THere was also another contention between the Greek church and the Latin; to
wit, of what orders of angels they were that did fall with Lucifer. Our
schoolmen say they were of all the nine orders of angels in Lucifers
conspiracy. But because the superior order was of the more noble constitution
and excellent estate, and the inferior of a less worthy nature, the more part
of the inferior orders fell as guilty and offenders with Lucifer. Some say the
devil himself was of the inferior order of angels, and some that he was of the
highest order; Lau. Anan. lib. de na^ur. them. 1.
because it is written, In cherubim extentus and protegens posui te in monte
sanct^ Dei, Extended upon a cherubin and protecting, I have put thee in the
holy mountain of God. And these say further, that he was called the dragon,
because of his excellent knowledge. Finally these great doctors conclude, that
the devil himself was of the order of Seraphim, which is the highest, because
it is written, Quomodo enim mane oriebaris Lucifer? For when thou did rise in
the morning O Lucifer? They of this sect affirm, that Cacodsmones were they
that rebelled against Jove; I mean they of Plato his sect, himself also holding
the same opinion. Our schoolmen differ much in the cause of Lucifers fall. For
some say it was for speaking these words, Ponam sedem meam in aquilone, and
similis ero altissimo, I will put my seat in the North, and I will be like the
most High. Others say, because he utterly refused felicity, and thought scorn
thereof; others say, because he thought all his strength proceeded from
himself, and not from God; others say that it was, because he attempted to do
that by himself, and his own ability, which he should have obtained by the gift
of another; others say, that his condemnation grew hereupon, for that he
challenged the place of the Messiah; others say, because he detracted the time
to adore the majesty of God, as other angels did; others say, because he
utt^rly refused it. Scotus and his disciples say that it was, because he
rebelliously claimed equal omnipotency with God; with whom lightly the
Themists never agree. Laur. Anan. lib. de nature. dam. 1.
Others say it was for all these causes together, and many more: so as hereupon
(says Laurentius Ananias) grew a wonderful conflict between Michael and the
good angels on the one side, and Lucifer and his siends on the other: so as,
after a long and doubtful s^itmish, Michael overthrew Lucifer, and turned him
and his fellows ou^ of the doors.

CHAP. X.
Where the battle between Michael and Lucifer was fought, how long it
continued, and of their power; how fondly papists and infidels write of them,
and how reverently Christians ough^ i^ think of them.

NOw where this battle was fought, and how long it continued, there is as great
contention among the schoolmen, as was betwixt Michael and Lu^ifer. The
Thomists say this battle was fought in the empyreal he^ven, where the abode is
of blessed spirits, and the place of pleasure and felicity. Augustine and many
others say, that the battle was fought in the highest region of the air; others
say, in the sirmament; others in p^radise. The Thomists also say it continued
but one instant or prick of time^ for they tarried but two instants in all,
Instans, viz. punctum temp. n^mpe indivi duum Nunc.
even from their creation to their expulsion. The Scotists say, that between
their production and their ^^l, there were just four instants. Nevertheless,
the greatest number of schoolmen affirm, that they continued only three
instants; because (...) stood with Gods justice, to give them three warnings;
so as at the t^^^ warning Lucifer fell down like lead (for so are the words) to
the bo^^^^^ of hell; the rest were left in the air, to tempt man. The Sadduces
(...) as gross the other way; for they said, that by angels was meant nothing
else, but the motion that God does inspire in men, or the tokens of his power.
Eusebius. in eccl^s. histor.
He that reads Eusebius shall see many more absurd opinions and asseverations
of angels; as how many thousand years they serve as angels, before they come to
the promotion of archangels, etc.

Monsieur Bodin, M. Mal. and many other papists gather upon the seventh of
Daniel, 1.0000000. Johannes Cassianus in confessione theolog. tripart.
that there are just ten millions of angels in heaven. Many ^y that angels are
not by nature, but by office. Finally, it were infini^e to show the absurd and
curious collections hereabout. I for my part think with Calvine, that angels
are creatures of God; though Moses spoke ^^thing of their creation, who only
applied himself to the capacity of the common people, reci^ing nothing but
things seen. And I say further wi^^ him, that they are heavenly spirits, whose
ministration and service God uses; and in that respect are called angels. I
say yet again wi^^ hi^ that it is very certain, I. Call lib. inslit. 1. cap. 14.
sect. 8.
that they have no shape at all; for they are spirits, who never have any; and
finally, I say with him, that the scriptures, for the capacity of our wit, does
not in vain paint out angels unto us with wings; because we should conceive,
that they are ready swiftly to succor us. And certainly all the founder
divines do conceive and give out, that both the names and also the number of
angels are set down in the scripture by the Holy Ghost, in terms to make us
understand the greatness and the manner of their message^; which (I say) are
either expounded by the number of angels, or signified by their names.

Furthermore, Mich. And. ^hes. 107. 101. Idem. these. 103, 108.
the school doctors affirm, that four of the superior orders of angels never
take any form or shape of bodies, neither are sent of any arrand at any time.
As for archangels, ^hey are sent only about great and secret matters; and
angels are common hacknies about every trifle; and that these can take what
shape or body they list; marry they never take the form of women and children.
Item they say that angels take most terrible shapes: for Gabriel appeared to
Mary, when he saluted her, Facie rutilante, vest coruscante, ingressu
mirabili, aspectu terribili, etc. that is, with a bright countenance, shining
attire, wonderful gesture, and a dreadful visage, etc. But of apparitions I
have spoken somewhat before, and will say more hereafter. It has been long, and
continues yet a constant opinion, not only among the papists; but among others
also, that every man has assigned him, at the time of his nativity, a good
angel and a bad. For the which there is no reason in nature, nor authority in
scripture. For not one angel, but all the angels are said to rejoice more of
one convert, Luk 15.7. Luk 16.23. I. Call. lib. instit. 1. cap. 14.2. Reg. 16.17.
than of ninety and nine just. Neither did one only angel convey Lazarus into
Abraham's bosom. And therefore I conclude with Calvine, that he which refers
to one angel, the care that God has to every one of us, does himself great
wrong: as may appear by so many fiery chariots showed by Elizaeus to his
servant. But touching this mystery of angels, let us reverently think of them,
and not curiously search into the nature of them, considering the vilene^se of
our condition, in respect of the glory of their creation. And as for the
foresaid fond imaginations and fables of Lucifer, etc. they are such as are not
only ridiculous, but also accomptable among those impious curiosities, and vain
questions, which Paul speaks of: neither have they any title or letter in the
scripture for the maintenance of their gross opinions in this behalf.

CHAP. XI.
Whether they became devils which being angels kept not their vocation, in Jude
and Peter; of the fond opinion of the Rabbis touching spirits and bugs, with a
confutation thereof.

WE do read in Jude, Jud. verse. 6. 2 Pet. 2.4.
and find it confirmed in Peter, that the angels kept not their first estate,
but left their own habitation, and sinned, and (as Job faith) committed folly:
and that God therefore did cast them down into hell, reserving them in
everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day. But
many divines say, that they find not any where, that God made devils of them,
or that they became the princes of the world, Mal. malef. par. 2. quae. 1. cap.
2.3.

Mal. malef. par. 2. cap. 1. quaest. 1.


or else of the air; but ^ather prisoners* Howbeit, diverse doctors affirm,
that this Lucifer, notwithstanding his fall has greater power than any of the
angels in heaven: marry they say that there be certain other devils o^ the
inferior sort of angels, which were then thrust out for smaller faults, and
therefore are tormented with little pains, besides eternal damnation; and
these (say they) can do little hurt. They affirm also, that they only use
certain juggling knacks* delighting thereby to make men laugh, as they travel by
the high ways; but other (say they) are much more churlish. Mich. And. Laur.
Anan. Mal. malef. etc.

Author. lib. Zeor hammor in Genesis 2.


For proof hereof they allege the eighth of Matthew, where he would none
otherwise be satisfie^ but by exchange, from the annoying of one man, to the
destruction of a whole herd of swine. The Rabbines, and namely Rabbie Abraham,
writing upon the second of Genesis, do say, that God made the fairies, bugs,
Incubus, Robin good fellow, and other familiar or domestical spirits and devils
on the friday; and being prevented with the evening of the sabbath, finished
them not, but left them unperfect; and therefore, that eve^ since they use to
fly the holiness of the sabbath, seeking dark holes in mountains and woods,
wherein they hide themselves til the end of the sabbath, and then come abroad
to trouble and molest men.

But as these opinions are ridiculous and fondly collected; so if we have only
respect to the bare word, or rather to the letter, where spirits or dive's are
spoken of in the scriptures, we shall run into as dangerous absurdit^es as these
are. The gross dullness of many at the hearing of a spirit named.
For some are so carnally minded, that a spirit is no sooner spoken of, but
immediately they think of a black man with cloven feet, a pair of horns, a
tail, claws, and eyes as broad as a basin, etc. But surely the devil were not
so wise in his generation, as I take him to be, if he would terrify men with
such ugly shapes, though he could do it at his pleasure. For by that means men
should have good occasion and opportunity to fly from him, and to run to God
for succor; as the manner is of all them that are terrified, though perchance
they thought not upon God a long time before. But in truth we never have so
(...) cause to be a fraid of the devil, as when he flatteringly insinuates
himself into our hearts, to satisfy, please, and serve our humors, enticing
us to prosecute our own appetites and pleasures, without any of these ^^ternal
terrors. I would weete of these men where they do find in the scriptures,
that some devils be spiritu^l, and some corporal; or how these earthy or watery
devils enter into the mind of man, Augus^ine says, Aug. in ser. 4. Greg. 29
sup. Job. Leo pont. ser. 8, Nativit.
and diverse others affirm, that satan or the devil while we feed, allureth us
with gluttony: he thrusts lust into our generation; and sloth into our
exercise; into our conversation, envy; into our traffic, avarice; into our
correction, wrath; into our government, pride; he ^utteth into our hearts evil
cogitations; into our mouths, lies, etc. When we wake, he moves us to evil
works; when we sleep, to evil and file by dreams; he provokes the merry to
loosnesse, and the sad to despair.

CHAP. XII.
That the devils assaults are spiritual and not temporal, and how grossly
some understand those parts of the scripture.

UPon that, which hitherto has been said, you see that the assaults of satan
are spiritual, Ephe. 6.11, 12.
and not temporal; in which respect Paul wishes us not to provide a corselet
of steel to defend us from his claws; but bids us put on the whole armor
of God, that we may be able to stand against the invasions of the devil. For
we wrestle not against flesh and blood; but against principalities, powers, and
spiritual wickedness. And therefore he advises us to be sober and watch; 2 Timothy 2.8.9.
for the devil goes about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour. He
means not with carnal teeth; Idem. ibid.
for it follows thus, Whom resist ye steadfastly in faith. And again he says,
That which is spiritual only discerns spiritual things; 1 Cor. 2.14.
for no carnal man can discern the things of the spirit. Why then should we
think that a devil, which is a spirit, can be known, or made tame and familiar
unto a natural man; or contrary to nature, can be by a witch made corporal,
being by God ordained to a spiritual proportion?

The cause of this gross conceit is, that we hearken more diligently to old
wives, and rather give credit to their fables, than to the word of God;
imagining by the tales they tell us, that the devil is such a bulbegger, as I
have before described. For whatsoever is proposed in scripture to us by
parable, or spoken figuratively or significatively, or framed to our gross
capacities, etc. is by them so considered and expounded, as though the bare
letter, or rather their gross imaginations thereupon were to be preferred
before the true sense and meaning of the word. For I dare say, Judge. 9.7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
that when these blockheads read Iothans parable in the ninth of Judges to the
men of Sichem; to wit, that the trees went out to anoint a king over them,
saying to the olive tree, Reign thou over us; who answered and said, Should I
leave my fatness, etc. they imagine that the wooden trees walked, and spoke
with a man's voice: or else, that some spirit entered into the trees, and
answered as is imagined they did in the idols and oracles of Apollo, and such
like; who indeed have eyes, and see not; ears and hear not; mouths, and speak
not, etc.

CHAP. XIII.
The equivocation of this word spirit, how diversely it is taken in the
scriptures, where (by the way) is taught that the scripture is not always
literally to be interpreted, nor yet allegorically to be understood.

SUch as search with the spirit of wisdom and understanding, shall find, that
spirits, as well good as bad, are in scriptures diversely taken: yea they shall
well perceive, that the devil is no horned beast. For Exodus 31.1.
sometimes in the scriptures, spirits and devils are taken for infirmities of
the body; Acts 8.19. Gal. 3.
sometimes for the vices of the mind; sometimes also for the gifts of either
of them. John 6. Matthew. 16.
Sometimes a man is called a devil, as Judas in the sixth of John, and Peter in
the xvi. of Matthew. 1 Cor. 3. Gal. 3. 1 Cor. 2. 2 Cor. 7.
Sometimes a spirit is put for the Gospel; sometimes for the mind or soul of
man; sometimes Luke 9. 1 Cor. 5. Philip. 1. 1 These. 5.
for the will of man, his mind and counsel; sometimes 1 John 4.
for teachers and prophets; sometimes 1 Timothy 4.
for zeal toward God; sometimes Ephesians. 5. Isai. 11.2. Zach. 12.10.
for joy in the Holy Ghost, etc.

And to interpret unto us the nature and signification of spirits, we find
these words written in the scripture; to wit, The spirit of the Lord shall rest
upon him; The spirit of counsel and strength; The spirit of wisdom and
understanding; The spirit of knowledge and the fear of the Lord. Again, I will
pour out my spirit upon the house of David, etc. The spirit of grace and
compassion. Romans 1.15. 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10.
Again, Ye have not received the spirit of bondage, but the spirit of
adoption., And therefore Paul says, To one is given, by the spirit, the word
of wisdom; to another, the word of knowledge by the same spirit, to another,
the gift of healing; to another, the gift of faith by the same spirit; to
another, the gift of prophecy; to another, 1 Cor. 12.11
the operation of great works; to another, the discerning of spirits; to
another, the diversity of tongues; to another, the interpretation of tongues:
and all these things works one and the self same spirit. Thus far the words
of Paul. And finally, Esaias says, that the Lord mingled among them the spirit
of error. Isai. 19.14. Isai. 29.
And in another place, The Lord has covered you with a spirit of slumber.

1 Samuel 28. Hest. 16.
As for the spirits of divination spoken of in the scripture, they are such as
was in the woman of Endor, the Philippian woman, the wench of Westwell, and the
holy maid of Kent; who were endued with spirits or gifts of divination, whereby
they could make shift to gain money, and abuse the people by sleights and
crafty inventions. But these are possessed of borrowed spirits, Sap. 15.13, 29.
as it is written in the book of Wisdom; and spirits of mere cousenage and
deceit, as I have sufficiently proved elsewhere. I deny not therefore that
there are spirits and devils, of such substance as it has pleased God to
create them. But in what place soever it be found or read in the scriptures, a
spirit or devil is to be understood spiritually, and is neither a corporal nor
a visible thing. Where it is written, that God sent an evil spirit between
Abimelech, Judge. 9.23.
and the men of Sichem, we are to understand, that he sent the spirit of
hatred, and not a bulbegger. Also where it is said; Number. 5.14.
If the spirit of jealousy come upon him* it is as much to say as; If he be
moved with a jealous mind: and not that a corporal devil assaulteth him. Luke
13.11
It is said in the Gospel; There was a woman, which had a spirit of infirmity
18. years, who was bowed together, etc. whom Christ, by laying his hand upon
her, delivered of her disease. Whereby it is to be seen, that although it be
said, that satan had bound her, etc. yet that it was a sickness or disease of
body that troubled her; for Christ's own words expound it. Neither is there any
word of witchcraft mentioned, which some s^y was the cause thereof.

There were seven devils cast out of Mary Magdalen. Mark. 16.9.
Which is not so grossly understood by the learned, as that there were in her
just seven corporal devils, such as I described before elsewhere; but that by
the number of seven devils, a great multitude, and an uncertain number of vices
is signified; which figure is usual in diverse places of the scripture. And this
interpretation is more agreeable with Gods word, Levit. 26. Prove. 24. Luke 17.
than the papisticall paraphrase, which is; that Christ, under the name of the
seven devils, recounteth the seven deadly sins only. Others allow neither of
these expositions; because they suppose that the efficacy of Christ's miracle
should this way be confounded; as though it were not as difficult a matter,
with a touch to make a good Christian of a vicious person; as with a word to
cure the ague, Matthew. 8.16.
or any other disease of a sick body. I think not but any of both these cures
may be wrought by means, in process of time, without miracle; the one by the
preacher, the other by the physician. But I say that Christ's work in both was
apparently miraculous: for with power and authority, even with a touch of his
finger, and a word of his mouth, Luke 4.36. Luke 7.21.
he made the blind to see, the halt to go, the lepers clean, the deaf to
hear, the dead to rise again, and the poor to receive the Gospel, out of whom
(I say) he cast devils, and miraculously conformed them to become good
Christians, John 8.11.
which before were dissolute livers; to whom he said, Go your ways and sin no
more.

CHAP. XIV.
That it pleased God to manifest the power of his Son and not of witches by
miracles.

JEsus Christ, Luke 8.14.
to manifest his divine power, rebuked the winds, and they ceased; and the
waves of water, and it was calm; which if neither our divines nor physicians
can do, much less our conjurors, and least of all our old witches can bring
any such thing to pass. But it pleased God to manifest the power of Christ
Jesus by such miraculous and extraordinary means, providing and as it were
preparing diseases, that none otherwise could be cured, that his sons glory,
and his peoples faith might the more plainly appear; Levit. 14 7, 8. Luke
7.17.4 John 9.
as namely, leprosy, lunacy, and blindness, as it is apparent in the Gospel,
where it is said, that the man was not stricken with blindness for his own
sins, nor for any offense of his ancestors; but that he was made blind, to
the intent the works of God should be showed upon him by the hands of Jesus
Christ. But witches with their charms can cure (as witchmongers affirm) all
these diseases mentioned in the scripture, and many other more; as the gout,
the toothach, etc. which we find not that ever Christ cured.

Mat. 4.17, etc.
As touching those that are said in the Gospel to be possessed of spirits, it
seems in many places that it is indifferent, or all one, to say; He is
possessed with a devil; or, he is lunatic or phrentick; which disease in these
days is said to proceed of melancholy. But if every one that now is lunatic,
be possessed with a real devil; then might it be thought, that devils are to be
thrust out of men by medicines. But who says in these times with the woman of
Canaan, My daughter is vexed with a devil, except it be presupposed, that she
meant her daughter was troubled with some disease? Indeed we say, and say
truly, to the wicked, the devil is in him: but we mean not thereby, that a
real devil is gotten into his guts. And if it were so, I marvel in what shape
this real devil, that possesses them, remains. Enters he into the body in
one shape, and into the mind in another? If they grant him to be spiritual and
invisible, I agree with them.

Some are of opinion, that the said woman of Canaan meant indeed that her
daughter was troubled with some disease; because it is written instead of that
the devil was cast out, that her daughter was made whole, even the self same
hour. Mat. 15.28.
According to that which is said in the 12. of Matthew; There was brought unto
Christ one possessed of a devil, which was both blind and dumb, and he healed
him: so as, he that was blind and dumb both spoke and saw. Mat. 12.22.
But it was the man, and not the devil, that was healed, and made to speak and
see. Whereby (I say) it is gathered, that such as were diseased, as well as
they that were lunatic, were said sometimes to be possessed of devils.

CHAP. XV.
Of the possessed with devils.

HEre I cannot omit to show, how fondly diverse writers, and namely, James
Sprenger, Mal. males. quaest. 5. pa. 1.
and Henry Institor do gather and note the cause, why the devil makes choice
to possess men at certain times of the moon; which is (say they) in two
respects: first, that they may defame so good a creature as the moon; secondly,
because the brain is the moistest part of the body. The devil therefore
considers the aptness and convenience thereof (the A maxim in philosophy,
as the sun in aridis and fiecis.
moon having dominion over all moist things) so as they take advantage thereby,
tho better to bring their purposes to pass. And further they say, that devils
being conjured and called up, appear and come sooner in some certain
constellations, than in other some: thereby to induce men to think, that there
is some godhead in the stars. But when Saul was relieved with the sound of
the harp, they say that the departure of the devil was by means of the sign of
the cross imprinted in David's veins: whereby we may see how absurd the
imaginations and devices of men are, when they speak according to their own
fancies, without warrant of the word o^ God. But me thinks it is very absurd
that Iosiphus affirms; Joseph. de antiquitat. Iud. item de bello Iud. lib. 7.
c. 35.
to wit, that the devil should be thrust out of any man by virtue of a root.
And as vain it is, that Aelianus writes of the magical herb Cynospastus,
otherwise called Aglaphotis; which is all one with Salomons root named Raaros,
as having force to drive out any devil from a man possessed.

CHAP. XVI.
That we being not thoroughly informed of the nature of devils and spirits, must
satisfy our selves with that which is delivered us in the Scriptures touching
the same, how this word devil is to be understood both in the singular and
plural number, of the spirit of God and the spirit of the devil, of tame
spirits, of Ahab.

THe nature therefore and substance of devils and spirits, because in the
scripture it is not so set down, as we may certainly know the same; we ought to
content and frame our selves faithfully to believe the words and sense there
delivered unto us by the high spirit, which is the Holy Ghost, Number. 27.16.
who is Lord of all spirits; always considering, that evermore spirits are
spoken of in scripture, as of things spiritual, though for the help os our
capacities they are there sometime more grossly and corporally expressed,
either in parables or by metaphors, than indeed they are. As for example (and
to omit the history of Job, which elsewhere I handle) it is written; 1 Reg. 18;
verse 23. verse 4.
The Lord said, Who shall entice Ahab, that he may fall at Ramoth Gilead, etc.
Then came forth a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said; I will go
entise him. And the Lord said, Wherewith? And he said; I will go and be a
lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. Then he said; Go forth, thou
shall prevail, etc.

This story is here set forth in this wise, to bear with our capacities, and
specially with the capacity of that age, that could not otherwise conceive of
spiritual things, than by such corporal demonstrations. And yet here is to be
noted, that one spirit, and not many or diverse, did possess all the false
prophets at once. Luke 8.27, 28. Mark. 5.9. Luke 8.
Even as in another place, many thousand devils are said to possess one man;
and yet it is also said even in the self same place, that the same man was
possessed only with one devil. For it is there said that Christ met a man,
which had a devil, and hoe commanded the foul spirit to come forth of the man,
I. Call. lib. inflit. lib. 1 cap 14. sect. 14.
etc. But Calvine says, Where satan or the devil is named in the singular
number, thereby is meant that power of wickedness, that stands against the
kingdom of justice. And where many devils are named in the scriptures, we are
thereby taught, that we must fight with an infinite multitude of enemies, lest
despising the fewness of them, we should be more flack to enter into barrel,
and so fall into security and idleness.

On the other side, it is as plainly set down in the scripture, that some are
possessed with the spirit of God, as that the other are endued and bound with
the spirit of the devil. Numb. 11. Ibid. ver. 25. Acts 16. 2 Reg. 2. Judge.
3.10.
Yea sometimes we read, that one good spirit was put into a great number of
person^; and again, that diverse spirits rested in and upon one man: and yet no
real or corporal spirit meant. As for example; The Lord took of the spirit
that was upon Moses, and put it upon the seventy elders, and when the spirit
rested upon them, they prophesied. Why should not this be as substantial and
corporal a spirit, as that wherewith the maid in the Acts of the Apostles was
possessed? Also Elisha entreated Elia, that when he departed, his spirit might
double upon him. We read also that the spirit of the Lord came upon Judge. 11.39.
Othinel, upon Ibid. 14.6.
Gidcon, Ibid. 14.6.
Ieptha, Numb. 24.2.
Samson, 1 Samuel 16.13.
Balaam, 1 Samuel 18.14.
Saul, Ezekiel. 11.5.
David, 2 Chronicles. 14.
Ezekiel, 1 Chro. 12 18
Zachary, Numb. 14.
Amasay; yea it is written, that Caleb had another spirit than all the
Israelites beside; and in another place it is said, that Dan. 5.11. Joh. 3.34.
Eccles. 8.
Dani^l had a more excellent spirit than any other. So as, though the spirits,
as well good as bad, are said to be given by number and proportion; yet the
quality and not the quantity of them is always thereby meant and presuposed.
Howbeit I must confess, that Christ had the spirit of God without measure, as
it is written in the Evangelist John. But where it is said that spirits can be
made tame, and at commandment, I say to those gross conceivers of Scripture
with Solomon, (who as they falsely affirm was of all others the greatest
conjuror) says thus in express words; No man is lord over a spirit, to
retain a spirit at his pleasure.

CHAP. VII.
Whether Spirits and souls can assume bodies, and of their creation and
substance, wherein writers do extremely contend and vary.

SOme hold opinion, that spirits and souls can assume and take unto them
bodies at their pleasure, of what shape or substance they lift; of which mind
all papists, and some protestants are, being more gross than another sort,
which hold that such bodies are made to their hands. Howbeit, these do vary
in the elements, wherewith these spiritual bodies are composed. For (as I have
said) some affirm that they consist of fire, some think of air, For every
natural motion is either circular or elementary.
and some of the stars and other celestial powers. But if they be
celestial, then (as Peter Martyr says) must they follow the circular motion:
and if they be elementary, then must they follow the motions of those elements,
of which their bodies consist. Of air they cannot be, for air is Corpus
homogeneum; so as every part of air is air, whereof there can be no distinct
members made. For an organicall body must have bones, sinews, veins, flesh,
etc. which cannot be made of air. Neither (as Peter Martyr affirms) can an
airy body receive or have either shape or figure. But some ascend up into the
clouds, where they find (as they say) diverse shapes and forms even in the
air. Unto which objection P. Martyr answers, saying, and that truly, that
clouds are not altogether air, but have a mixture of other elements mingled
with them.

CHAP. XVIII.
Certain popish reasons concerning, spirits made of air, of day devils and
night devils, and why the devil loves no salt in his meat.

MAny affirm (upon a fable cited by M. Mal.) that spirits are of air, because
they have been cut (as he says) in sunder and closed presently again; and also
because they vanish away so suddenly. But of such apparitions I have already
spoken, and am shortly to say more, which are rather seen in the imagination of
the weak and diseased, than in verity and truth. Which sights and apparitions,
as they have been common among the unfaithful; so now, since the preaching of
the Gospel they are most rare. And as among fainthearted people; namely,
women, children, and sick folks, they usually swarmed: so among strong bodies
and good stomachs they never used to appear; as elsewhere I have proved; which
argues that they were only fantastical and imaginary. Now say they that
imagine devils and spirits to be made of air, that it must needs be that they
consist of that element; because otherwise when they vanish suddenly away, they
should leave some earthy substance behind them. If they were of water, then
should they moisten the place where they stand, and must needs be shed on the
floor. If they consisted of fire, then would they burn any thing that touched
them: and yet (say they) Abraham and Lot washed their feet, Genesis 18.19.
and were neither scalded nor burnt.

I find it not in the Bible, but in Bodin, that there are day devils and night
devils. I. Bod. lib. de daem. 3. ca. 4.
The same fellow says, that Deber is the name of that devil, which hurts by
night; and Cheleb is he that hurreth by day: howbeit, he confesses that Satan
can hurt both by day and night; although it be certain (as he says) that he
can do more harm by night than by day; producing for example, Exodus 12.29.
how in a night he slew the first born of Egypt. And yet it appears plainly
in the text, that the Lord himself did it. Whereby it seems, that Bodin
puts no difference between God and the devil. For further confirmation of
this his foolish assertion, that devils are more valiant by night than by day,
Psalm. 104.20
he alleges the 104 Psalm, wherein is written, Thou make darkness, and
it is night, wherein all the beasts of the Forest creep forth, the lions roar,
etc. when the sun rises, they retire, etc. So as now he makes all beast to be
devils, or devils to be beasts. I. Bod. lib. de them. 3. ca. 5.
Oh barbarous blindness! This Bodin also says, that the devil loves no salt
in his meat, for that it is a sign of eternity, and used by Gods commandment
in all sacrifices; Levit. 1.
abusing the Scriptures, which he is not ashamed to quote in that behalf. But
now I will declare how the Scripture teaches our dull capacities to conceive
what manner of thing the devil is, by the very names appropriated unto him in
the same.

CHAP. XIX.
That such devils as are mentioned in the scriptures, have in their names their
nature and qualities expressed, with instances thereof.

SUch devils are mentioned in the Scriptures by name, have in their names their
nature and qualities expressed, being for the most part the idols of certain
nations idolatrously erected, in stead, or rather in spite of God. 2 Reg. 13.
For Beelzebub, which signifies the lord of the flies, because he takes every
simple thing in his web, was an idol or oracle erected at Ekron, to whom
Ahaziah sent to know whether he should recover his disease: as though there had
been no God in Israel. Mat. 10 and 12. Mark. 3. Luke 11.
This devil Beelzebub was among the Jews reputed the principal devil. The
Grecians called him Pluto, the Latins, Sumanus, quasi summum deorum manium,
the chief ghost of spirit of the dead whom they supposed to walk by night:
although they absurdly believed also that the soul died with the body. So as
they did put a difference between the ghost of a man and the soul of a man: and
so do our papists; howbeit, none otherwise but that the soul is a ghost, when
it walks on the earth, after the dissolution of the body, or appears to any
man, either out of heaven, hell, or purgatory, and not otherwise. 2 Reg. 19.
Nisroch signifies a delicate tentation, and was worshipped by Senacharib in
Assyria. 2 Reg. 17.
Tarcat is in English, fettered, and was the devil or idol of the Hevites.
Ose. 9.11. Numb. 25. Deuteronomy. 3. and 4. Josu. 22.
Beelphegor, otherwise called Priapus, the gap^ng or naked, god was worshipped
among the Moabites. 2 Reg. 17.
Adramelech, that is, the cloak or power of the king, was an idol at
S^pharvais, which was a city of the Assyrians. Numb. 21. 1 Reg. 11. 2 Reg. 23.
Chamos, that is feeling, or departing, was worshipped among the Moabites.
Judge. 16. 1 Mac. 10.
Dagon, that is, corn or grief, was the idol of the Philistines. 1 Reg. 11. 2
Reg. 23.
Asarte, that is, a fold or flock, is the name of a she idol at Sydonia, whom
Solomon worshipped; some think it was Venus, 2 Reg. 23. 1 Chronicles. 20. Jerem. 49.
Joseph. lib. de antiquit. Iudae or. 6. cap. 14. 1 Samuel 7. 2 Reg. 23.
Melchom, that is, a king, was an idol or devil, which the sons of Ammo^
worshipped.

Sometimes also we find in the scriptures, that devils and spirits take their
names of wicked men, or of the houses or states of abominable persons: as
Astaroth, which (as Josephus says) was the idol of the Philistines, whom the
Jews took from them at Salomons commandment, and was also worshipped of
Solomon. Which though it signify riches, flocks, etc. yet it was once a city
belonging to Og the king of Basan, where they say the giants dwelt. In these
respects Astaroth is one of the special devils named in Salomons conjuration,
and greatly employed by the conjurors. I have sufficiently proved in these
quotations, that these idols are Dii gentium, the gods of the Gentiles; and
then the prophet David may satisfy you, that they are devils, who says Dii
gentium daemonia sunt, The gods of the gentiles are devils. What a devil was
the rood of grace to be thought, but such a one as before is mentioned and
described, who took his name of his courteous and gracious behavior toward his
worshippers, Psalm. 96.
or rather those that offered unto him? The idolatrous knavery whereof being
now bewrayed, it is among the godly reputed a devil rather than a god; and so
are diverse others of the same stamp.

CHAP. XX.
Diverse names of the devil, whereby his nature and disposition is manifested.

IT has also pleased God to inform our weak capacities, as it were by
similitudes and examples, or rather by comparisons, to understand what manner
of thing the devil is, by the very names appropriated and attributed unto him
in the scriptures; wherein sometimes he is called by one name, sometimes by
another, by metaphors according to his conditions. Ioh 40. Job 3. Isai 27.
Elephas is called in Job, Behemoth, which is, Bruta; whereby the greatness
and brutishness of the devil is figured. Leviathan is not much different from
Elephas; whereby the devils great subtilty and power is showed unto us. Matthew.
6. Matthew. 4. etc. Marc. 16. James 2.
Mammon is the covetous desire of money, wherewith the devil overcomes the
reprobate. c Demon signifies one, that is cunning or crafty. Cacodaemon is
perversely knowing. All those which in ancient times were worshipped as Gods,
were so called. Matthew. 4. John 8. Apoc. 12.
Diabolus is Calumniator, an accuser, or a slenderer. Satan is Adversarius, an
adversary, that troubles and molesteth. Apoc. 9.
Abaddon a destroyer. Mark. 5. Luke 8.
Legio, because they are many. Ephesians. 2.
Prince of the air. John 8.12.14.16.
Prince of the world. Job 41.
A king of the sons of pride. 1 Pet. 5.
A roaring lion. John 8.
An homicide or manslayer, a liar, and the father of lies. 1 John 3.
The author of sin. Act. 16.
A spirit. Yea sometimes he is called the spirit of the Lord, as the
executioner and minister of his displeasure, etc. Sometimes, the Ose. 4.
spirit of fornication, etc. And many other like epithets or additions are
given him for his name. He is also called Psalm. 34. 1 Chronicles. 21.
the angel of the Lord. Prove. 17.
The cruel angel of Satan. 2 Cor. 12.
The Apoc. 9.
angel of hell. The Apoc. 12.
great dragon, for his pride and force. The Job 41.
red dragon, for his bloudinesse. Genesis 3.
A serpent. An Apoc. 12.
owl, a Isai. 27. Isai. 13.24.
kite, a satyr, a crow, a pelican, a hedghog, a griph, a stork, etc.

CHAP. XXI.
That the idols or gods of the Gentiles are devils, their diverse names, and in
what affairs their labors and authorities are employed, wherein also the
blind superstition of the heathen people is discovered.

ANd for so much as the idols of the Gentiles are called devils, Psalm 96.
and are among the unlearned confounded and intermedled with the devils that
are named in the Scriptures; I thought it convenient here to give you ^a note
of them, to whom the Gentiles gave names, according to the offices unto them
assigned. Penates are the domestical gods, or rather devils that were said to
make men live quietly within doors. Juno and Minerva.
But some think these rather to be such, as the Gentiles thought to be set over
kingdoms; and that Lares are such as trouble private houses, and are set to
oversee cross ways and cities. Larvae are said to be spirits that walk only
by night. Genii are the two angels, which they supposed were appointed to wait
upon each man. Manes are the spirits which oppose themselves against men in the
way. Daemones were feigned gods by poets, as Jupiter, Juno, etc. Virunculi
terrei are such as was Robin Good Fellow, Cousening gods or knaves.
that would supply the office of servants, specially of maids; as to make a
fire in the morning, sweep the house, grind mustard and malt, draw water, etc.
these also rumble in houses, Terra, aqua, aer, ignis, sol and Luna.
draw latches, go up and down stairs, etc. Dii geniales are the gods that
every man did sacrifice unto at the day of their birth. Tetrici be they that
make folk afraid, and have such ugly shape, which many of our Divines do call
Subterranei. Cobali are they that follow men, and delight to make them laugh,
with tumbling, juggling, and such like toies. Virunculi are dwarfs about three
handfuls long, and do no hurt; but seem to dig in minerals, and to be very
busy, and yet do nothing. Guteli or Trulli are spirits (they say) in the
likeness of women, showing great kindness to all men; and hereof it is that
we call light women, truls* Daemones montani are such as work in the minerals,
and further the work of the laborers wonderfully, Hudgin of Germany, and Rush
of England.
who are nothing afraid of them. Hudgin is a very familiar devil, which will
do no body hurt, except he receive injury: but he cannot abide that, nor yet
be mocked: he talks with men friendly, sometimes visibly, and sometimes
invisibly. There go as many tales upon this Hudgin, in some parts of Germany,
as there did in England of Robin Good Fellow. But this Hudgin was so called,
because he always ware a cap or a hood; and therefore I think it was Robin
Hood. Friar Rush was for all the world such another fellow as this Hudgin, and
brought up even in the same school; to wit, in a kitchen; in so much as the
self same tale is written of the one as of the other, concerning the skullian,
which is said to have been flaih, etc. for the reading whereof I I refer you
to Friar Rush his story, 1 Wier. lib. de praest. daem. 1. cap. 23.
or else to John Wier us, De praestigi^^ daemonum.

There were also Familiares daemones, which we call familiars: such as Socrates
and Caesar were said to have; and such as Feats sold to Doctor Burcot. Quintus
Sertorius had Diana her self for his familiar; and Numa Pompilius had Aegeria;
but neither the one nor the other of all these could be preserved by their
familiars from being destroyed with untimely death. Simon Samareus boasted,
that he had gotten by conjuration, the soul of a little child that was slain,
to be his familiar, and that he told him all things that were to come, etc. I
marvel what privilege souls have, which are departed from the body, to know
things to come more than the souls within man's body. There were spirits, which
they called Albae mulieres, and Albae Sibyllae, which were very familiar, and
did much harm (they say) to women with child, and to suckling children Deumus
as a devil is worshipped among the Indians in Calesute, who (as they think)
has power given him of God to judge the earth, etc. his image is horribly
pictured in a most ugly shape. Thevet says, that a devil in America, called
Agnan, bears sway in that country. In Girue one Grigrie is accounted the
great devil, Bawdy priests in Ginnie.
and keeps the woods; these have priests called Charoibes, which prophecy
after^ hey have lien by the space of one hour prostrate upon a wench of twelve
years old, and all that while (say they) he calls upon a devil called
Hoviculs^ra, and then comes fourth and utters his prophecy. For the true
success whereof the people pray all the while that he lies grovelling like a
lecherous knave. There are a thousand other names, which they say are
attributed unto devils; and such as they take to themselves are more ridiculous
than the names that are given by others, which have more leisure to devise
them. In little books containing the cousening possessed, at Maidstone, where
such awonder was wrought, Look in the word ( Ob) lib. 7. cap 3.
as also in other places, you may see a number of counterfeit devils names, and
other trish trath.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Romans chief gods called Dii-selecti, and of other heathen gods, their
names and offices.

THere were among the Romans twenty idolatrous gods, which were called Dii
selecti sive electi, chosen gods; whereof twelve were male, and eight female,
whose names do thus follow: Ianus, Saturnus, Jupiter, Genius, Mercurius,
Apollo, Mars, Vulcanus, Neptunus, Sol, O^cus and Vibar, which were all he gods:
Tellus, Ceres, Juno, Minerva, Luna, Diana, Venus and Vesta, were all she gods.
No man might appropriate any of these unto himself, but they were left common
and indifferent to all men dwelling in one realm, province, or notable city.
These heathen gentiles had also their gods, which served for sundry purposes;
as to raise thunder, A good god and goddess for women.
they had Statores, Tonantes, Feretrii, and Jupiter Elicius. They had Cantius,
to whom they prayed for wise children, who was more apt for this purpose than
Minerva that issued out of Jupiters own brain. Lucina was to send them that
were with child safe delivery, and in that respect was called the mother of
child wives. Opis was called the mother of the babe newborn, whose image
women with child hanged upon their girdles before their bellies, and bare it so
by the space of nine months; and the midwife always touched the child
therewith before she or any other laid hand thereon.

If the child were well borne, they sacrificed thereunto, although the mother
miscarried: but if the child were any part unperfect, or dead, etc. they used to
beat the image into powder, or to burn or drown it. Vagianus was he that kept
their children from crying, The names of certain heathenish gods, and their
peculiar offices.
and therefore they did always hang his picture about babes necks: for they
thought much crying in youth portended ill fortune in age. Cuninus, otherwise
Cunius, was he that preserved (as they thought) their children from misfortune
in the cradle. Ruminus was to keep their dugs from corruption. Volumnus and
his wife Volumna were gods, the one for young men, the other for maids that
desired marriage: for such as prayed devoutly unto them, should soon be
married. Agrestis was the god of the fields, and to him they prayed for
fertility. B^llus was the god of war and warriers, and so also was Victoria,
to whom the greatest temple in Rome was built. Honorius was he that had charge
about in keepers, that they should well entreat pilgrims. B^recynthia was the
mother of all the gods. Aesculanus was to discover their mines of gold and
silver, and to him they prayed for good success in that behalf. Aesculapius
was to cure the sick, whose father was A^ollo, and served to keep weeds out
of the corn. Segacia was to make seeds to grow. Flo^a preserved the vines from
frosts and blasts. Sylvanus was to preserve them that walked in gardens.
Bacchus was for drunkards. Pavor for cowherds; Meretrix for whores, to whose
honor there was a temple built in Rome, in the midst of forty and four
streets, A very homely charge.
which were all inhabited with common harlots. Finally Colatina, alias Clotina,
was goddess of the stool, the jakes, and the privy, to whom as to every of
the rest, there was a peculiar temple edified: besides that notable temple
called Panth^o^, wherein all the gods were placed together; so as every man and
woman, according to their sollyes and devotions, might go thither and worship
what gods they list.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of diverse gods in diverse countres.

THe Egyptians were yet more foolish in this behalf than the Romans (I mean
the heathenish Romans that then were, and not the popish Romans that now are,
for no nation approaches near to these in any kind of idolatry.) The
Egyptians worshipped Anubis in the likeness of a dog, because he loved dogs
and hunting. Yea they worshipped all living creatures, as namely of beasts, a
bullock, a dog, and a cat; of flying fowls, Beasts, bi^ds, vermin, fishes,
herbs and other trumpe^y worshipped as gods.
Ibis (which is a bird with a long bill, naturally devouring up venomous things
and noisome serpents) and a sparrow hawke; of fishes they had two gods; to wit,
Lepidotus piscis, and Oxyrinchus. The Saitans and Thebans had to their god a
sheep. In the city Lycopolis they worshipped a woolfe; in Herin^polis, the
Cynocephalus; the Leopolitans, a lion; in Le^topolis,, a fish in Nilus called
Latus. In the city Cynopolis they worshipped Anubis. At Babylon, besides
Memphis, they made an onion their god; the Th^bans an eagle; the Maendescans, a
goat; the Persians, a fire called Orimasda; the Arabians, Bacchus, Venus, and
Diasaren; the Boeotians, Amphyaraus; the Aphricans, Mopsus; the Scy^hians,
Minerva; the Nancratits, Serapis, which is a serpent; Astartes (being as Cicero
writes the fourth Venus, who was she, as others affirm, whom Solomon
worshipped at his concubines request) was the goddess of the Assyrians. At
Noricum* being a part of Bavaria, they worship Tibilenus; the Moors worship
Iuba^ the Macedonians, Gabirus; the Poenians, Vranius; at Samos Juno was their
god; at Paphos, Venus; at Lemnos, Vulcane; at Naxos, Liberus; at Lampsacke,
Priapus with the great genitals; who was set up at Hellespont to be adored. In
the i will Diomedea, Diomedes; at Delphos, Apollo; at Ephes^s, Diana was
worshipped. And because they would play small game rather than sit out, they
had Acharus Cyrena^cus, to keep them from flies and flieblowes; Hercules
Canopius, to keep them from fleas; Apollo Parnopesus, Inperiall god^ and their
assistants.
to keep their cheeses from being mouseaten. The Gre^ks were the first, that I
can learn to have assigned to the gods their princ^pall kingdoms and offices:
as Jupiter to rule in heaven, Pluto in hell, Neptune in the sea, etc. To these
they joined, as assistants, diverse commissioners; as to Jupiter, Saturn, Mars,
Venus, Mercury, and M^nerva: to Neptune, Nereus, etc. Tutilina was only a
mediatrix to Jupiter, not to destroy corn with thunder or tempests, before
whom they usually lighted candles in the temple, to appease the sane, according
to popish custom in these days. The number of gods among the gentiles.
But I may not repeat them all by name, for the gods of the gentiles were by
good record, as Varre and others report, to the number of 30. thousand, and
upward. Whereby the reasonable reader may judge their superstitious blindness.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of popish provincial gods, a comparison between them and heathen gods, of
physical gods, and of what occupation every popish god is.

NOw if I thought I could make an end in any reasonable time, I would begin
with our antichristian gods, otherwise called popish idols, 1. Reg. 20. 2. Chr.
32. 1. Cor. 16. Judge. 3. 2 Chr. 33. 2. Reg. 23, etc.
which are as rank devils as Dii gentium, Gods of the Gentiles, spoken of in
the psalms or as Dii montium, Gods of the Mountain, set forth and rehearsed
in the first book of the king^; or as Dii terrarum or Dii populorum, Gods of
the Earth or of People, mentioned in the second of the Chronicles 32. and in
the first of the Chronicles 16. or as Dii terrae, Gods of the earth, in Judges
3. or as Dii filiorum Seir, Gods of the sons of Seir in the second of the
Chronicles 25. or as Dii alieni, strange Gods, which are so often mentioned in
the scriptures.

Surely, there were in the popish church more of these in number, more in
common, more private, more public, more for lewd purposes, and more for no
purpose, than among all the heathen, ^ither heretofore, or at this present
time: for I dare undertake, that for every heathen idol I might produce twenty
out of the popish church. Popish gods of nations.
For there were proper idols of every nation: as S George on horseback for
England (excepting whom there is said to be no more horsemen in heaven save
only S. Martine) S. Andrew for Burgundy and Scotland, S. Michael for France,
S. James for Spain, S. Patrike for Ireland, S. Dav^d for Wales, S. Peter for
Rome, and some part of Italy. Had not every city in all the popes dominions his
several patron? As Paul for London, De^is for Paris, Ambrose for Millen,
Loven for Gaunt, Romball for Mackline, S. Marks lion for Venice, the three
magitian kings for Cullen, and so of other. Yea, had they not for every small
town, and every village and parish (the names whereof I am not at leisure to
repeat) a several Idol? Parish gods or popish idols.
As S. Sepulcher, for one: S. Bride, for another; S. All hallowes, All saints,
and our Lady for all at once: which I thought meeter to rehearse, than a
bedroll of such a number as are in that predicament. Had they not be idols and
she idols, some for men, some for women; some for beasts, some for fowls,
etc. Do you not think that S. Martin might be opposed to Bacchus? If S. Martine
be too weak we have S. Vrbane, S. Clement, and many other to assist him. Was
Venus and Merctrix an advocate for whores among the Gentiles? Behold, there
were in the Romish church to encounter with them, S. Aphra, S. Aphrodite, and
S. Maudline. But insomuch as long Mug was as very a whore as the best of them,
she had wrong that she was not also canonized, and put in as good credit as
they; for she was a gentlewoman born; whereunto the pope has great respect in
canonizing of his saints. For (as I have said) he canonizeth the rich for
saints, and burns the poor for witches. But I doubt not, Magdalen, and many
other godly women are very saints in heaven, and should have been so, though
the pope had never canonized them; but ^e does them wrong, to make them the
patronesses of harlots and strong strumpets.

Se the golden Legend for the life of S. Bridget.

He saints and she saints of the old stamp with their peculiar virtues touching
the cuting of diseases.


Was there such a traitor among all the heathen idols, as S. Thomas Be^ket? Or
such a whore as S. Bridget? I warrant you S. Hugh was as good a huntsman as
Anubis. Was Vulcane the protector of the heathen smithes? Yea forsooth, and S.
Euloge was patron for ours. Our painters had Luke, our weavers had Steven, our
millers had Arnold, our tailors had Goodman, our sowters had Crispine, our
potters had S. Gore with a devil on his shoulder and a pot in his hand. Was
there a better horseleech among the gods of the Gentiles than S. Loy? Or a
better sowge^^r than S. Anthony? Or a better toothdrawer than S. Apolline? I
believe that Apollo Parnopeius was no better a ratcatcher than S. Gertrude, who
has the popes patent and commendation therefore. The Thebans had not a better
shepherd than S. ^endcline, nor a better Gissard to keep their geese than
Gallus. But for physic and surgery, our idols exceed them all. For S. John,
and S. Valentine excelled at the falling evil. S. Roch (...) good at the
plague, S. Petronill at the ague. As for S. Margaret, she passed Lucina for a
midwife, and yet was but a maid; in which respect S. ^opurge is joined with her
in commission.

For mad men, and such as are possessed with devils, S. Roman was excellent,
and friar Ruffine was also prettily skilful in that art. For botches and biles,
Cosmus and Damian; S. Clare for the eyes, S. Apolline for teeth, S. Job for the
For the French pox or the common kind of pox, or both? This would be known.
pox. And for sore breasts S. Agatha was as good as Ruminus. Whosoever served
Servatius well, should be sure to lose nothing: if Servatius failed in his
office, S. Vinden could supply the manes with his cunning; for he could cause
all things that were lost to be restored again. But here lay a straw for a
while and I will show you the names of some, which exceed these very far, and
might have been canonized for archsaints; all the other saints or idols being
in comparison of them but bunglers, and benchwhistlers. And with your leave,
when all other saints had given over the matter, and the saints utterly
forsaken of their servitors, they repaired to these that I shall name unto you,
with the good consent of the pope, who is the fautor, or rather the patron of
all the saints, devils, and idols living or dead, and of all the gods save one.
And whereas none other saint could cure above one disease, in so much as it was
idolatry, folly I should have said, to go to Job for any other malady than the
pox; nothing comes amiss to these. For they are good at any thing, and never
a whit nice of their cunning: yea greater matters are said to be in one of
their powers, than is in all the other saints. New saints.
And these are they: S. mother Bungi^, S. mother Pain, S. Feats, S. mother
Still, S. mother Du^ten, S. Kytrell, S. Ursula Kempe, S. mother Newman, S.
doctor Heron, S. Rosimund a good old father, and diverse more that deserve to
be registered in the popes calendar, or rather the devils rubric.

CHAP. XXV.
A comparison between the heathen and the papists, touching their excuses for
idolatry.

ANd because I know, that the papists will say, that their idols are saints,
and no such devils as the gods of the Gentiles were: you may tell them, that
not only their saints, but the very images of them were called Divi. Divos
vocant Grammatici cos qui ex hominibus dii facti sunt.
Which though it signify gods, and so by consequence idols or friends: yet put
but an (^^) thereunto, and it is Divill in English. But they will say also that
I do them wrong to gibe at them; because they were holy men and holy women. I
grant some of them were so, and further from allowance of the popish idolatry
employed upon them, than grieved with the derision used against that abuse. Yea
even as silver and gold are made idols unto them that love them too well, and
seek too much for them: so are these holy men and women made idols by them that
worship them, and attribute unto them such honor, as to god only appertains.

The heathen gods were for the most part good men, and profitable members to
the commonwealth wherein they lived, and deserved fame etc. in which respect
they made gods of them when they were dead; as they made devils of such
emperors and philosophers as they hated, or as had deserved ill among them.
And is it not even so, and worse, in the common wealth and church of popery?
Does not the pope excommunicate, curse, and condemn for heretics, and drive
to the bottomless pit of hell, proclaiming to the very devils, all those that
either write, speak, or think, contrary to his idolatrous doctrine? Cicero,
when he derided the heathen gods, Cic. de. natuf. deorum.
and inveyed against them that yielded such servile honor unto them, knew the
persons, unto whom such abuse was committed, had well deserved as civil
citizens; and that good fame was due unto them, and not divine estimation. Yea
the infidels that honored those gods, as hoping to receive benefits for their
devotion employed that way, knew and conceived that the statues and images,
before whom with such reverence they powered forth their prayers, were stocks
and stones, and only pictures of those persons whom they resembled: yea they
also knew, that the parties themselves were creatures, and could not do so
much as the papists and witchmongers think the Roode of grace, or mother Bungie
could do. The papists see a moth in the eye of others, but no beam in their
own.
And yet the papists can see the abuse of the Gentiles, and may not hear of
their own idolatry more gross and damnable than the others.

CHAP. XXVI.
The conceit of the heathen and the papists all one in idolatry, of the
council of Trent, a notable story of a hangman arraigned after he was dead and
buried, etc.

BUt papists perchance will deny, that they attribute so much to these idols as
I report; or that they think it so meritorious to pray to the images of saints
as is supposed, affirming they they worship God, and the saints themselves,
under the forms of images. Which was also the conceit of the heathen, and
their excuse in this behalf; whose eyesight and insight herein reached as far
as the papisticall distinctions published by popes and their councels. Neither
do any of them admit so gross idolatry, as the council of Trent has done,
The idolatrous council of Trent.
who allows that worship to the Rood that is due to Jesus Christ himself,
and so likewise of other images of saints. I thought it not impertinent
therefore in this place to insert an example taken out of the Rosarie of our
Lady, in which book do remain (besides this) ninety and eight examples to this
effect: which are of such authority in the church of Rome, that all scripture
must give place unto them. And these are either read there as their special
homilies, or preached by their chief doctors. And this is the sermon for this
day verbatim translated out of the said Rosarie, a book much esteemed and
reverenced among papists.

Exempl. 4.
A certain hangman passing by the image of our Lady, saluted her, commending
himself to her protection. Afterward, while he prayed before her, he was
called away to hang an offender; but his enemies intercepted him, and slew him
by the way. And lo a certain holy priest, which nightly walked about every
church in the city, rose up that night, and was going to his Lady, I should say
to our Lady church. And in the churchyard he saw a great many dead men, and
some of them he knew, of whom he asked what the matter was, etc. who answered,
that the hangman was slain, and the devil challenged his soul, the which our
Lady said was hers: and the judge was even at hand coming thither to hear the
cause, and therefore (said they) we are now come together. The priest thought
he would be at the hearing hereof, and hid himself behind a tree; But our Lady
spied him well enough; as you shall read.
and anon he saw the judicial seat ready prepared and furnished, where the
judge, to wit, Jesus Christ, sat, who took up his mother unto him. Soon after
the devils brought in the hangman pinnioned, and proved by good evidence, that
his soul belonged to them. On the other side, our Lady pleaded for the hangman,
proving that he at the hour of death commended his soul to her. The judge
hearing the matter so well debated on either side, but willing to obey (for
these are his words) his mothers desire, and loath to do the devils any wrong,
gave sentence that the hangmans soul should return to his body, until he had
made sufficient satisfaction; ordaining that the pope should set forth a
public form of prayer for the hangmans soul. It was demanded, who should do
the errand to the popes holiness? Ma^y quoth our Lady, that shall yonder
priest that lurketh behind the tree. The priests arse made buttons.
The priest being called forth, and injoined to make relation hereof, and to
desire the pope to take the pains to do according to t^is decree, asked by
what token he should be directed. Then was delivered unto him a rose of such
beauty, as when the pope saw it, he knew his message was true. And so, if they
do not well, I pray God we may.

CHAP. XXVII.
A confutation of the fable of the hangman, of many other feigned and
ridiculous tales and apparitions, with a reproof thereof.

BY the tale above mentioned you see what it is to worship the image of our
lady. Our B. ladies favor.
For though we kneel to God himself, and make never so humble petitions unto
him, without faith and repentance, it shall do us no pleasure at all. Yet this
hangman had great friendship showed him for one point of courtesy used to our
lady, having not one dram of faith, repentance, nor yet of honesty in him.
Nevertheless, so credulous is the nature of man, as to believe this and such
like fables: yea, to discredit such stuff, is thought among the papists flat
heresy. And though we that are protestants will not believe these toies, being
so apparently popish: yet we credit and report other appearances, and assuming
of bodies by souls and spirits; though they be as profane, absurd, and impious
as the other. We are sure the holy maid of Kents vision was a very cousenage:
but we can credit, imprint, and publish for a true possession or history, Greg.
4. dialog. cap. 51. Alexand. lib. 5. cap. 23. and. lib. 2. cap. 9. etc. Greg.
lib. 4. dialog. ca. 40. idem cap. 55. and in other places elsewhere
innumerable. Micha. And. these. 151.
the knavery used by a cousening varlot at Maidstone; and many other such as
that was. We think souls and spirits may come out of heaven or hell, and
assume bodies, believing many absurd tales told by the schoolmen and Romish
doctors to that effect: but we discredit all the stories that they, and as
grave men as they are, tell us upon their knowledge and credit, of souls
condemned to purgatory, wandering for saccour and release by trentals and
masses said by a popish priest, etc. and yet they in probability are equal,
and in number far exceed the other.

We think that to be a lie, which is written, or rather fathered upon Luther;
to wit, that he knew the devil, and was very conversant with him, and had
eaten many bushels of salt and made jolly good cheer with him; and that he was
confuted in a disputation with a real devil about the abolishing of private
mass. Neither do we believe this report, that the devil in the likeness of a
tall man, Alex. ab Alexand. lib. 4. genealog dierum. chap. 19. Plutarch.
oratione ad Apoll onium. Item. Rasiliens. in epist. Platina de vitis pontisicum.

Nauclerus. 2. generat. 35.


was present at a sermon openly made by Carolostadius; and from this sermon
went to his house, and told his son that he would fetch him away after a day
or twain: as the papists say he did indeed, although they lie in every point
thereof most maliciously. But we can believe Platina and others, when they tell
us of the appearances of pope Benedict the eight, and also the ninth; how the
one rode upon a black horse in the wilderness, requiring a bishop (as I
remember) whom he met, that he would disribute certain money for him, which he
had purloined of that which was given in alms to the poor, etc. and how the
other was seen a hundred years after the devil had killed him in a wood, of an
heremite, in a bears skin, and an asses head on his shoulders, etc. himself
saying that he appeared in such sort as he lived. And diverse such stuff
rehearsed by Platina.

Ambr. ser. 90. de passione Agn. Eusebius. lib. eccles. hist. 5. Niceph. lib. 5.
cap. 7. Hieronym. in vita Pau. Theodor. lib. hist. 5. ca. 24. A^han. in vita
Antho.
Now because S. Ambrose writes, that S. Anne appeared to Constance the daughter
of Constantine, and to her parents, watching at her sepulcher: and because
Eusebius and Nicephorus say, that the Pontamian virgin, Origens disciple,
appeared to S. Basil, and put a crown upon his head, in tok^n of the glory of
his martyrdom, which should shortly follow: and because Hierome writes of
Paul's appearance; and Theodoret, of S. John the Baptist; and Athanasuis, of
Ammons, etc. many do believe the same stories and miraculous appearances to be
true. But few protestants will give credit unto such shameful fables, or any
like them, when they find them written in the Legendary, Festival, Rosaries
of our Lady, or any other such popish authors. Whereby I gather, that if the
protestant believe some few lies, the papists believe a great number. This I
write, to show the imperfection of man, how attentive our ears are to hearken
to tales, And though herein consist no great point of faith or infidelity; yet
let us that profess the gospel take warning of papists, not to be carried
away with every vain blast of doctrine; but let us cast away these profane and
old wives fables. And although this matter have passed so long with general
credit and authority; yet many Melawoth. in Calendar. Manlii. 23. April.
Marbach. lib. de miracul. adversus Ins. Johannes Rivius de veter. superstit.
Athan. lib. 99. quae. 11. August. de cura pro mortu. ca. 13. Luke 16.
grave authors have condemned long since all those vain visions and
apparitions, except such as have been showed by God, his son, and his angels.
Athanasius says, that souls once loosed from their bodies, have no more
society with mortal men, Augustine says, that if souls could walk and visit
their friends, etc. or admonish them in sleep, or other-wise, his mother that
followed him by land and by sea would show her self to him, and reveal her
knowledge, or give him warning, etc. But most true it is that is written in the
gospel; We have Moses and the prophets, who are to be hearkened unto, and nor
the dead.

CHAP. XXVIII.
A confutation of Johannes Laurentius, and of many others, maintaining these
fained and ridiculous tales and apparitions, and what drives them away: of
Moses and Helias appearance in mount Thabor.

FUrthermore, to prosecute this matter in more words; if I say that these
apparitions of souls are but knavaries and cousenages; Matthew. 17. Luk 9.
they object that Moses and Helias appeared in mount Thabor, and talked with
Christ, in the presence of the principal apostles. yea, and that God appeared
in the bush, Johan. Laur. lib. de nature demon.
etc. As though spirits and souls could do whatsoever it pleases the Lord to
do, or appoint to be done for his own glory, or for the manifestation of his
son miraculously. And therefore I thought good to give you a taste of the
witchmongers absurd opinions in this behalf.

And first you shall understand, that they hold, that all the souls in heaven
may come down and appear to us when they list, Mich. Andr.
and assume any body saving their own; otherwise (say they) such souls should
not be perfectly happy. these. 222 etc. Idem these. 235. and 136. Idem these. 226.
Th. Aq. 1 pa. quae. 89. ar. 8.
They say that you may know the good souls from the bad very easily. For a
damned soul has a very heavy and sour look; but a saints soul has a
cheerful and a merry countenance; these also are white and shining, the other
cole black. And these damned souls also may come up out of hell at their
pleasure; although Abraham made Dives believe the contrary. They affirm that
damned souls walk oftenest: next unto them the souls of purgatory; and most
seldom the souls of saints. Also they say that in the old law souls did appear
seldom; Gregor in dial. 4. Mich. And. these. 313.316.317
and after dooms day they shall never be seen more: in the time of grace they
shall be most frequent. The walking of these souls (says Michael Andr.) is a
most excellent argument for the proof of purgatory; for (says he) those souls
have testified that which the popes have affirmed in that behalf; to wit, that
there is not only such a place of punishment, but that they are released from
thence by masses, Idem these. 346. Leo. sermon. de jejuniis 10. men's. Gelas. in
epistola ad episc. Mich. And^. these. 345. Greg. dial. 4. cap. 1.12.14. Mich.
And. these. 347. Greg. dial. 4. cap. 11.
and such other satisfactory works; whereby the goodness of the mass is also
ratified and confirmed.

These heavenly or purgatory souls (say they) appear most commonly to them that
are born upon ember days, and they also walk most usually on those ember
daaes; because we are in best state at that time to pray for the one, and to
keep company with the other. Also they say, that souls appear oftenest by
night; because men may then be at best leisure, and most quiet. Also they never
appear to the whole multitude, seldom to a few, and most commonly to one
alone; for so one may tell a lie without controlment. Also they are oftenest
seen by them that are ready to dye; as Trasilla saw pope Foelix; Vrsine, Peter
and Paul; Galta Romana, S. Peter; and as Musa the maid saw our Lady; which are
the most certain appearances, credited and allowed in the church of Rome; also
they may be seen of some, and of some other in that presence not seen at all;
Mich. And. these. 347. Mich. And. these. 341. I Would. these. 388. I Would. these. 411.
Mal. malef. 1. Bod. etc. Mich. And these. 412. Idem. these. 414.
as Vrsine saw Peter and Paul, and yet many at that instant being present could
not see any such sight, but thought it a lie; as I do, Michael Andraeas
confesses, that papists see more visions than protestants) he says also, that
a good soul can take none other shape than of a man; marry a damned soul may
and does take the shape of a black moor, or of a beast, or of a serpent, or
specially of an heretic. The christian signs that drive away these evil
souls, are the cross, the name of Jesus, and the relick^ of saints; in the
number whereof are holiwater, holy bread, Agnus Dei, etc. For Andrew says,
that notwithstanding Julian was an Apostate, and a betrayer of a christian
religion; yet at an extremity, with the only sign of the cross, he drove away
from him many such evil spirits; whereby also (he says) the greatest diseases
and sicknesses are cured, and the forest dangers avoided.

CHAP. XXIX.
A confutation of assuming of bodies, and of the serpent that seduced Eve.

THey that contend so earnestly for the devils assuming of bodies and visible
shapes, do think they have a great advantage by the words uttered in the third
of Genesis, Genesis 3.14, 15.
where they say, the devil entered into a serpent or snake; and that by the
curse it appears, that the whole displeasure of God lighted upon the poor
snake only. How those words are to be considered may appear, in that it is of
purpose so spoken, as our weak capacities may thereby best conceive the
substance, tenor, and true meaning of the word, which is there set down in the
manner of a tragedy, in such humane and sensible form, as wonderfully
informs our understanding; though it seem contrary to the spiritual course
of spirits and devils, and also to the nature and divinity of God himself; who
is infinite, and whom no man ever saw with corporal eyes, and lived. And
doubtless, if the serpent there had not been taken absolutely, nor
metaphorically for the devil, the Holy Ghost would have informed us thereof in
some part of that story. But to affirm it sometimes to be a devil, and
sometimes a snake; whereas there is no such distinction to be found or seen in
the text, is an invention and a fetch (me thinks) beyond the compass of all
divinity. Genesis 3.1. 1 Cor. 11.3.
Certainly the serpent was he that seduced Eve; now whether it were the devil,
or a snake; let any wise man (or rather let the word of God) judge. Doubtless
the scripture in many places expounds it to be the devil. Sap. 2.24.
And I have (I am sure) one wiseman on my side for the interpretation hereof,
namely Solomon; who says, Through envy of the devil came death into the
world; referring that to the devil, which Moses in the letter did to the
serpent. But a better expositor hereof needs, not, than the text it self,
even in the same place, where it is written; I will put enmity between thee and
the woman, and between thy seed and her seed, he shall break thy head, and thou
shall bruise his heel. What christian knows not, that in these words the
mystery of our redemption is comprised and promised? Wherein is not meant (as
many suppose) that the common seed of women shall tread upon a s^akes head, and
so break it in pieces, etc. but that special seed, which is Christ, should be
borne of a woman, to the utter overthrow of satan and in the redemption of
mankind, whose heel or flesh in his members the devil should bruise and
assault, with continual attempts, and carnal provocations, etc.

CHAP. XXX.
The objection concerning the devils assuming of the serpents body answered.

THis word serpent in holy scripture is taken for the devil: Genesis 3.1.
The serpent was more subtle than all the beasts of the field. It likewise
signifies such as be evil speakers, such as have slandering tongues, also
heretics, etc. They have sharpened their tongues like serpents. Psalm. 139.4.
It does likewise betoken the death and sacrifice of Christ: as Moses lifted up
the serpent in the wilderness, Number. 8 and 9. John 3 14.
so must the son of man be lifted up upon the cross. Moreover, it is taken for
wicked men: O ye serpents and generation of vipers. Thereby also is signified
as well a wise as a subtle man: and in that sense did Christ himself use it;
Man. 23.33. Mat. 10.16.
saying, Be ye wise as serpents, etc. So that by this brief collection you see,
that the word serpent, as it is equivocall, so likewise it is sometimes taken
in the good and sometimes in the evil part. But where it is said, that the
serpent was father of lies, author of death, and the worker of deceit* me
thinks it is a ridiculous opinion to hold, that thereby a snake is meant; which
must be, if the letter be preferred before the allegory. I. Call. in Genes. cap.
3.1.
Truly Calvines opinion is to be liked and reverenced, and his example to be
embraced and followed, in that he offers to subscribe to them that hold, that
the Holy Ghost in that place* did of purpose use obscure figures, that the
clear light thereof might be deferred, Idem ibid.
till Christ's coming. He says also with like commendation (speaking hereof,
and writing upon this place) that Moses does accommodate and fitten for the
understanding of the common people, in a rude and gross style, those things
which be there delivers; forbearing once to rehearse the name of satan. And
further he says, that this order may not be thought of Moses his own device;
Idem ibid. Idem. ibid.
but to be taught him by the spirit of God: for such was (says he) in those
days the childish age of the church, which was unable to receive higher or
profounder doctrine. Finally, he says even hereupon, that the Lord has
supplied, with the secret light of his spirit, whatsoever wanted in plainness
and clearness of eternal words.

If it be said, according to experience, that certain other beasts are far
more subtle than the serpent; they answer, that it is not absurd to confess,
that the same gift was taken away from him, by God, because he brought
destruction to mankind. Which is more (me thinks) than need be granted in that
behalf. Mat. 10.16.
For Christ says not; Be ye wise as serpents were before their transgression;
but, Be wise as serpents are. I would learn what impiety, absurdity, or offense
it is to hold, that Moses, under the person of poisoning serpent or snake,
describes the devil that poisoned Eve with his deceiptfull words, Isai. 30.6.
Mat. 3.12, 13. Luke 3. etc. Genesis 3.
and venomous assault. Whence comes it else, that the devil is called so
often, The viper, The serpent, etc. and that his children are called the
generation of vipers; but upon this first description of the devil made by
Moses? For I think none so gross, as to suppose, that the wicked are the
children of snakes, according to the letters no more than we are to think and
gather, that God keeps a book of life, written with pen and ink upon
paper; as citizens record their free men.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of the curse rehearsed Genesis 3. and that place rightly expounded, John Calvines
opinion of the devil.

THe curse rehearsed by God in that place, whereby witchmongers labor so
busily to prove that the devil entered into the body of a snake, and by
consequence can take the body of any other creature at his pleasure etc.
reaches I think further into the devils matters, than we can comprehend it, or
is needful for us to know, that understand not the ways of the devils
creeping, and is far unlikely to extend to plague the generation of snakes; as
though they had been made with legs before that time, and through his curse
was deprived of that benefit. And yet, if the devil should have entered into
the snake, in manner and form as they suppose; I cannot see in what degree of
sin the poor snake should be so guilty, as that God, who is the most righteous
Judge, might be offended with him. Family of love.
But although I abhor that lewd interpretation of the family of love, and
such other heretics, as would reduce the whole Bible into allegories: yet (me
thinks) the creeping there is rather metaphorically or significately spoken,
than literally; even by that figure, which is there prosecuted to the end.
Wherein the devil is resembled to an odious creature, who as he creeps upon
us to annoy our bodies; so does the devil there creep into the conscience of
Eve, to abuse and deceive her: wh^^ seed* nevertheless shall tread down and
dissolve his power and (...) And through him, all good christians (as Calvine
says) obtain power to do the like. I. Call. lib. instit. 1. cap. 14. sect. 18
For we may not imagine such a material tragedy, as there is described, for
the ease of our feeble and weak capacities.

For whenever we find in the scriptures, that the devil is called god, the
prince of the world, a strong armed man, to whom is given the pow^ of the air;
a roaring lion, a serpent, etc. the Holy Ghost moved us thereby, to beware of
the most subtle, strong and mighty enemy, and to make preparation, and arm our
selves with faith against so terrible an adversary. And this is the opinion and
counsel of Calvine, I. Call. lib. inst. 1. cap. 14. sect. 13.
that we seeing our own weakness, and his force manifested in such terms, may
beware (...) the devil, and may fly to God for spiritual old and comfort.
And as for his corporal assaults, or his attempts upon our bodies, his night
walkings, his visible appearings, his dancing with witches, etc. we are neither
warned in the scriptures of them, nor willed by God or his prophets to fly
them; neither is there any mention made of them in the scriptures. And
therefore think I those witchmongers and absurd writers to be as gross on the
side, as the Sadduces are impious and fond on the other, which say, that
spirits and devils are only motions and affections, and that angels are but
tokens of Gods power. Aug. de cura pr^ mort. etc.
I for my part confess with Augugustine, that these matters are above my reach
and capacity; and yet so far as Gods word teaches me, I will not stick to
say, that they are living creatures, ordained to serve the Lord in their
vocation. And although they abode not in their first estate, yet that they are
the Lords ministers, and executioners of his wrath, to try and tempt in this
world, and to punish the reprobate in hell fire in the world to come.

CHAP. XXXII.
Mine own opinion and resolution of the nature of spirits, and of the devil,
with his properties.

But to use few words in a long matter, P. Mart. in loc. com. 9 sect. 14.
and plain terms in a doubtful case, this is mine opinion concerning this
present argument. First, that devils are spirits and no bodies. For (as Peter
Martyr says) spirits and bodies are by antithesis opposed one to another; so
as a body is no spirit, nor a spirit a body. And tha^ the devil, whether he be
many or one (for by the way you shall understand, that he is so spoken of in
the scriptures, as though there were but 1 Samuel 22. Luke 8. John 8. Ephesians. 6. 2 Timothy 2. 1 Pet. 5.
one, and sometimes as though Coloss. 1. v. 16. 1 Cor. 10. Matthew. 8. and 10,
Luke 4.
one were many legions, the sense whereof I have already declared according to
Calvin's opinion, he is a creature made by God, and that for vengeance, as it is
written in Eccles. 39. verse. 28. and of himself naught, though employed by God
to necessary and good purposes. For in places there it is written, ^ap. 1.
Apocal. 4.
that 1 Timothy 4.4.
all the creatures of God are good: and again, then God, in the creation of the
world, Genesis 1.
saw all that he had made was (...); the devil is not comprehended within
those words of commendation. For it is written that he was a Genesis 8.44. 1 John
3.8. Is 54.16.
murderer from the beginning and abode not in the truth, because there is no
truth in him; but when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own as being a
liar, and the father of ^^es, and (as John says) a sinner from the beginning.
Neither was his creation (so far as I can find) in that week that God made
man, and those other creatures mentioned in Genesis the first, and yet God
created him purposely to destroy. I take his substance to be such as no man can
by learning define, nor by wisdom search out. Edw. Deering, in his reading upon
the Hebr. 1. reading the 6.
M. Deering says that Paul himself, reckoning up principalities, powers, etc.
adds, Every name that is named in this world, or in the world to come. A
clear sentence (says he) of Paul's modesty, insconfessing a holy ignorance of
the state of angels, Ephesians. 6.12. Col. 2.16. Matthew. 25.
which name is also given to devils in other places of the scripture. His
essence also and his form is also so proper and peculiar (in mine opinion) unto
himself, as he himself cannot alter it, but it must need^ be content therewith,
as with that which God has ordained him, and assigned unto him, as peculiarly
as he has given to us our substance without power to alter the same at our
pleasures. For we find not that a spirit can make a body, more than a body can
make a spirit: the spirit of God excepted, which is omnipotent. Nevertheless;
I learn that their nature is prone to all mischief: for as the very
signification of (...) enemy and an accuser is wrapped up in Satan and
Diabolus; so does Christ himself declare him to be in the thirteenth of
Matthew. 1 Pet. 5. Idem. ibid. Mat. 25.41.
And therefore he brooketh well his name; for he lies daily in wait, not only
to corrupt, but also to destroy mankind; being (I say) the very ^^mentor
appointed by God to afflict the wicked in this world with wicked temptations,
Mal. malef. par. 1. que. 5. The etymon of the word Diabolus.
and in the world to come with hell fire. But I may not here forget how M. Mal.
and the residue of that crew do expound this word Diabolus; for Dia (say they)
is Duo, and Bolus is Morsellus, whereby they gather that the devil eats up a
man both body and soul at two morsels. Whereas in truth the wicked may be said
to eat up and swallow down the devil, rather then the devil to eat up them;
though it may well be said by a figure, that the devil like a roaring lion
seeks whom he may devour: which is meant of the soul and spiritual
devouring, as very novices in religion may judge.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Against fond witchmongers, and their opinions concerning corporal devils.

NOw, how Brian Darcies he spirits and she spirits, Titty and Tif^^, Suckin and
Pidgin, Liard and Robin, etc. his white spirits and black spirits, gray
spirits and red spirits, devil tode and devil lamb, (...) cat and devils
dam, agree herewithall, or can stand consonant with the word of God, The book
of W. W. published.
or true philosophy, let heaven and earth judge. It (...) mean time, let any
man with good consideration peruse that book (...) by W. W. and it shall
suffice to satisfy him in all that may required touching the vanities of the
witches examinations, confessions, and executions; where, though the tale be
told only of the accusers part, without any other answer of theirs than their
adversary ^^teth down; mine assertion will be sufficiently proved true. And
(...) it seems to be performed with some kind of authority, I will say (...)
more for the confutation thereof, but refer you to the book it self whereto
if nothing be added that may make to their reproach, I (...) warrant nothing is
left out that may serve to their condemnation. (...) whether the witnesses be
not single, of what credit, sex and age they ^^ namely lewd, miserable, and
envious poor people; most of them (...) speak to any purpose being old women,
and children of the age of 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9. years.

And note how and what the witches confess, and see of what weight and
importance the causes are; whether their confessions be not won through hope
of favor, and extorted by flattery or threats, without proof. But in so much
as there were not past seventeen or eighteen condemned at (...) at S. Osees in
the county of Essex, At S. Osees 17. or 18. witches condemned at once.
being a whole parish (though of no great quantity) I will say the less:
trusting that by this time there remain not many in that parish. If any be yet
behind, I doubt not but (...) Darcie will find them out; who, if he lack aid,
Richard Gallis of Windsor were meet to be associated with him; which Gallis
has set forth another book to that effect, of certain witches of Windsor
executed at Abi^^ton. But with what impudency and dishonesty he has finished
it, with what lies and forgeries he has furnished it, what folly and frenzy he
has mered in it; I am ashamed to report; and therefore being but a two penny
book, I had rather desire you to buy it, and so to peruse it, than to fill my
book with such beastly stuff.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
A conclusion wherein the Spirit of spirits is described, by the illumination
of which spirit all spirits are to be tried: with a confutation of the
Pneumatomachi flatly denying the divinity of this Spirit.

TOuching the manifold signification of this word [Spirit] I have elsewhere in
this brief discourse told you my mind; which is a word nothing differing in
Heb. from breath or wind. For all these words following; to wit, Spiritus,
Ventus, Flatus, Halitus, are indifferently use by the Holy Ghost, and called by
this Hebrew word (...) in the sacred scripture, For further proof whereof I
cite unto you the words of Isay; Isai. 30.28.
For his spirit (or breath) is as a river that overfloweth up to the neck, etc.
in which place the prophet describes the coming of God in heat and
indignation unto judgment, Zach. 6.5. Genesis 1.2. John 3.8.
etc. I cite also unto you the words of Zaccharie; These are the four spirits
of the heaven, etc. Likewise in Genesis; And the spirit of God moved upon the
waters. Moreover, I cite unto you the words of Christ; The spirit (or wind)
blows where it lists. Unto which said places infinite more might be added
out of holy writ, tending all to this purpose; namely, to give us this for a
note, that all the sayings above cited has many more that I could allege,
where mention is made of spirit, the Hebrew text uses no word but one; to wit,
(...) which signifies (as I said) Spiritum, ventum, flatum, halitum; which may
be Englished, Spirit, wind, blast, breath.

But before I enter upon the very point of my purpose, it shall not be miss,
Eras. Sarcer. in dictio Scholast, doctr. li^. S.
to make you acquainted with the collection of a certain School divine; who
distinguishes and divides this word [Spirit] into six significations; saying
that it is sometimes taken for the air, sometimes for the bodies of the
blessed, sometimes for the souls of the blessed, sometimes for the power
imaginative or the mind of man; and sometimes for God. Again he says, that of
spirits there are two sorts, some created and some uncreated.

A spirit uncreated (says he) is God himself, and it is essentially taken,
and agrees unto the three persons notionally, to the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost personally. A spirit created is a creature, and that is likewise of
two sorts; to wit, bodily, and bodilesse. A bodily spirit is also of two sorts:
for some kind of spirit is so named of spiritualnesse, as it is distinguished
from bodilinesse: otherwise it is called Spiritus a spirando, id est, a stando,
of breathing or blowing, as the wind does.

A bodilesse spirit is one way so named of spiritualnesse, and then it is taken
for a spiritual substance; and is of two sorts; some make a full and complete
kind, and is called complete or perfect, as a spirit angelical: some do not
make a full and perfect kind, and is called incomplete or unperfect as the
soul. There is also the spirit vital, which is a certain subtle or very
fine substance necessarily disposing and tending unto life. There be moreover
spirits natural, which are a kind of subtle and very fine substances,
disposing and tending unto equal complexions of bodies. Again there be spirits
animal, which are certain subtle and very fine substances disposing and
tempering the body, that it might be animated of the form, that is, that it
might be perfected of the reasonable soul. Thus far he. In whose division you
see a philosophical kind of proceeding, though not altogether to be
condemned, yet in every point not to be approved.

Erasm. Sar. in lib. loc and lit. praedictis.
Now to the spirit of spirits, I mean the principal and holy spirit of God,
which one defines or rather describes to be the third person in trinity
issuing from the Father and the Son, no more the charity, dilection and love of
the Father and the Son, than the Father is the charity, dilection and love of
the Son and Holy Ghost. Another treating upon the (...) argument proceeds in
this reverent manner: Laurent. a Villavicentio in phrasib. s. script. lit. S.
page 176.
The holy spirit is the virtue or power of God, quickening, nourishing,
fostering* and perfecting all things; by whose only breathing it comes to pass
that we both know and love God, and become at the length like unto him: which
spirit is the pledge and earnest penny of grace, and bears witness unto our
heart^ whiles we cry Abba, Romans 8.15. 2 Cor. 6.5.
Father. This spirit is called the spirit of God the spirit of Christ, and the
spirit of him which raised up Jesus from the dead.

Jesus Christ, for that he received not the spirit by measure, but in fullness,
does call it his spirit, John. 15.26.
saying; When the comforter shall come, whom I will send, even the holy spirit,
he shall testify of me. This spirit has diverse metaphorical names attributed
thereunto in the Holy Scriptures. It is called by the name of water, because it
washes, comfort, moiestneth, softeneth, and makes fruitful with all
godliness and virtues the minds of men, which otherwise would be unclean,
comfortless, hard, dry, and barren of all goodness; whereupon the prophet Isay
says ^ I will power water upon the thirsty, Isai. 44.
and floods upon the dry ground, etc. Wherewithal the words of Christ do
agree; John 7.38. John. 4.14.
He that believes in me, as says the scripture, out of his belly shall flow
rivers of waters of life. And elsewhere; Whosoever drinks of the water that I
shall give him, shall never be more a thirst. Other places likewise there be,
wherein the holy spirit is signified by the name of water and flood; as in the
13. of Isay, the 29. of Ezech. the 146. Psalm, etc. The same spirit by reason
of the force and vehemence thereof is termed fire. For it does purify and
cleanse the whole man from top to toe, it does burn out the soil and dross of
sins, and sets him all in a flaming and hot burning zeal to prefer and
further Gods glory. Which plainly appeared in the Apostles, who when they had
received the spirit, they spoke fiery words, yea such words as were
uncontrollable, in so much as in none ^o^e than in them this saying of this
prophet Jeremy was verified, Jer. 23.29.
Nunquid non verba m^a sunt quasi ignis? Are not my words even as it were fire?
This was d^clared and showed by those fiery tongues, which were seen upon the
Apostles after they had re^iv^d ^^e holy spirit.

Moreover, this spirit is called anointing, or ointment, because that as in
old time priests and kings were by anointing deputed to their office and
charge, and so were made fit and serviceable for the same; even so the elect
are not so much declared as renewed and made apt by the training up of the holy
spirit, both to live well and also to glorify God. Whereupon depends the
saying of John; 1 John 2.10.
And ye have no need that any should teach you, but as the same ointment does
teach you. It is also called in Scripture, The oil of gladness and rejoicing;
whe^eof it is said in the book of Psalms; Psalm. 44. Cy^ill. in Evang. Ioh.
lib. 3. cap. 14.
God even thy God has anointed thee with the oil of joy and gladness, etc. And
by this goodly and comfortable name of oil in the Scriptures is the mercy of
God oftentimes expressed, because the nature of that does agree with the
property and quality of this. For as oil does flote and swim above all other
liquors, so the mercy of God does surpass and overreach all his works, and the
same does most of al disclose it self to miserable man.

It is likewise called the finger of God, Exodus 8.
that is the might and power of God: by the virtue whereof the Apostles did
cast out devils; to wit, even by the finger of God. It is called the spirit of
truth, because it makes men true and faithful in their vocation; and for that
it is the touchstone to try all counterfeit devices of man's brain, and all
vain sciences, profane practices, deceitful arts, and circumventing
inventions; such as be in general all sorts of witchcrafts and enchantments,
within whose number are comprehended all those wherewith I have had some
dealing in this my discovery; to wit, charms or incantations, divinations,
augury, judicial astrology, nativity casting, alcumystery, conjuration,
lotshare, popery which is mere paltry, with diverse other: not one whereof no
nor all together are able to stand to the trial and examination, which this
spirit of truth shall and will take of those false and evil spirits. Nay, they
shall be found, when they are laid into the balance, to be lighter than vanity:
very dross, when they once come to be tried by the fervent heat of this
spirit; and like chafe, when this spirit blows upon them, driven away with a
violent whirlewind; such is the perfection, integrity, and effectual operation
of this spirit, whose working as it is manifold, so it is mavelous, and
therefore may and is called the spirit of spirits.

The holy spirit can abide nothing that is carnal, and unclean.
This spirit withdrawing it self from the hearts of men, for that it will not
inhabit and dwell where sin has dominion, gives place unto the spirit of
error and blindness, to the spirit of servitude and compunction, which
bireth, gnaweth, and whetteth their hearts with a deadly hate of the gospel;
in so much as it grieveth their minds and irketh their ears either to hear or
understand the truth; of which disease properly the Pharisees of old were, and
the papists even now are sick. Yea, the want of this good spirit is the cause
that many fall into the spirit of perverseness and frowardness, into the
spirit of giddiness, lying, drow^^nesse, and dullness; Isai. 29.10. Isai.
19.14.
according as the prophet Isay says; For the Lord has covered you with a
spirit of slumber, and has shut up your eyes* and again elsewhere, Dominus
miscuit in medio, etc. The Lord has mingled among them the spirit of
giddiness, and has made Egypt to err, as a drunken man erreth in his vomit;
as it is said by Paul; And their foolish heart was blinded, To. 1.21, 23.
and God gave them over unto their own hearts lusts. Which punishment Moses
threatens unto the Jews; The Lord shall smite thee with madness, with
blindness and amazedness of mind, and thou shall grope at high noon as a
blind man uses to grope, Deuteronomy. 28.28, 29.
etc.

In some, this word [Spirit] does signify a secret force and power, wherewith
our minds are moved and directed; if unto holy things, then is it the motion of
the holy spirit, of the spirit of Christ and of God; if unto evil things, then
is it the suggestion of the wicked spirit, of the devil, A question.
and of satan. Whereupon I infer, by the way of a question, with what spirit
we are to suppose such to be moved, as either practice any of the vanities
treated upon in this book, or through credulity addict themselves thereunto as
unto divine oracles, or the voice of angels breaking through the clouds? We
cannot impute this motion unto the good spirit; for then they should be able to
discern between the nature of spirits, and not swarve in judgment: An answer.
it follows therefore, that the spirit of blindness and error does seduce
them; so that it is no marvel if in the alienation of their minds they take
falsehood for truth, shadows for substances, fancies for verities, etc. for it
is likely that the good spirit of God has forsaken them, A great likelihood no
doubt.
or at leastwise absented it self from them, else would they detest these
divelish devices of men, which consist of nothing but delusions and vain
practices, whereof (I suppose) this my book to be a sufficient discovery.

Judgment distinguished.
It will be said that I ought not to judge, for he that judges shall be judged.
Whereto I answer, that judgment is not to be understood of three kind of
actions in their proper nature; whereof the first are secret, and the judgment
of them shall appertain to God, who in time will disclose whatsoever is done in
covert, and that by his just judgment. The second are mixed actions, taking
part of hidden and part of open, so that by reason of their uncertainty and
doubtfulnesse they are discussable and to be tried; these after due examination
are to have their competent judgment, and are incident to the magistrate. The
third are manifest and evident, and such as do no less apparently show
themselves than an inflammation of blood in the body: and of these actions
every private man gives judgment, because they be of such certainty, as that
of them a man may as well conclude, as to gat^er, that because the sun is risen
in the east, Ergo it is morning: he is come about and is full south, Ergo it is
high noon; he is declining and closing up in the west, Ergo it is evening. So
that the objection is answered.

Howbeit, letting this pass, and spiritually to speak of this spirit, which
whiles many have wanted, it has come to pass that they have proved altogether
carnal; and not savouring heavenly divinity have tumbled into worse than
philosophical barbarism, and these be such as of writers are called Josias
Simlerus li. 4. ca. 5. adversus vileres and novos Anti^^initarios. etc.
Pneumatomachi, a sect so injurious to the holy spirit of God, that contemning
the sentence of Christ, wherein he foretells that the sin against the holy
spirit is never to be pardoned, neither in this world nor in the world to come,
they do not only deny him to be God, but also pull from him all being, and with
the Sadduces maintain there is none such; but that under and by the name of
holy spirit is meant a certain divine force, wherewith our minds are moved, and
the grace and favor of God whereby we are his beloved. Against these
shameless enemies of the holy spirit, I will not use material weapons, but
syllogisticall charms. And first I will set down some of their paralogismes
or false arguments; and upon the neck of them infer fit confutations grounded
upon sound reason and certain truth.

Their first argument is knit up in this manner. Objection. The scripture does
never call the holy spirit God.
The holy spirit is no where expressly called God in the scriptures; E^go he
is not God, or at leastwise he is not to be called God. The antecedent of this
argument is false; because the holy spirit has the title or name of God in the
fifth of the Acts. Again, the consequent is false. For although he were not
expressly called God, The 1. answer.
yet should it not thereupon be concluded that he is not very God; because unto
him are attributed all the properties of God, which unto this do equally
belong. A refutation of the antecedent etc.
And as we deny not that the father is the true light, although it be not
directly written of the father, but of the son; He was the true light giving
light to every man that comes into this world; so likewise it is not to be
denied, that the spirit is God, although the scripture does not expressly and
simply note it; sithence it ascribes equal things thereunto; as the
properties of God, the works of God, the service due to God, and that it does
interchangeably take the names of Spirit and of God oftentimes. They therefore
that see these things attributed unto the holy spirit, and yet will not suffer
him to be called by the name of God; do as it were refuse to grant unto Eve the
name of Homo, Objection. Hilarie does not call the spirit God, neither is he so
named in the common Collects.
whom notwithstanding they confess to be a creature reasonable and mortal.

The second reason is this. Hilarie in all his twelve books of the Trinity does
no where write that the holy spirit is to be worshipped; he never gives
thereunto the name of God, neither dares he otherwise pronounce thereof, than
that it is the spirit of God. Besides this, there are usual prayers of the
church commonly called the Collects, whereof some are made to the Father, some
to the Son, but none to the holy spirit; and yet in them all mention is made
of the three persons. The 2. answer. Hilarious lib. 12. de Triade.
Hereunto I answer, that although Hilarie does not openly call the holy spirit,
God: yet does he constantly deny it to be a creature. Now if any ask me why
Hilarie was so coy and nice to name the holy spirit, God, whom he denies to be
a creature, when as notwithstanding between God and a creature there is no
mean: I will in good sooth say what I think. I suppose that Hilary, for himself
thought well of the godhead of the holy spirit: but this opinion was thrust and
forced upon him of the Pneumatomachi, who at that time rightly deeming of the
son did erewhiles join themselves to those that were sound of judgment. There
is also in the ecclesiastical history a little book which they gave Liberius a
bishop of Rome, The place is long, and therefore I had rather refer the
reader unto the book than to insert so many lines.
whereinto they foisted the Nicene creed. And that Hilarie was a friend of the
Pneumatomachi, it is perceived in his book De synodis where he writes in this
manner; Nihil autem mirum vobis videri d^bet, fratres charissimi, etc. It ought
to seem no wonder unto you dear brethren, etc. As for the objection of the
prayers of the church called the collects, that in them the holy spirit is not
called upon by name: we oppose and set against them the songs of the church,
wherein the said spirit is called upon. But the collects are more ancient then
the songs, hymns, and anthems. I will not now contend about ancientnesse,
neither will I compare songs and collects together; but I say thus much only,
to wit, that in the most ancient times of the church the holy spirit has been
openly called upon in the congregation. Now if I be charged to give an
instance, Collecta in die domin. sanctae Trinit.
let this serve. In the collect upon trinity sunday it is thus said; Almighty
and everlasting God, which have given unto us thy servants grace by the
confession of a truth to acknowledge the glory of the eternal trinity, and in
the power of the divine Majesty to worship the unity; we beseech thee that
through the steadfastness of this faith, we may evermore be defended from all
adversity, which live and reignest one God world without end. Now because
that in this collect, where the trinity is expressly called upon, the names of
persons are not expressed; but almighty and everlasting God invocated, who
abides in trinity and unity; it does easily appear elsewhere also that the
persons being not named under the name of almighty and everlasting God, not
only the father to be understood, but God which, abides in trinity and unity,
that is the father, the son, and the Holy Ghost.

A third objection of theirs is this. The son of God oftentimes praying in
the gospels, speaking unto the father, promises the holy spirit, and does also
admonish the apostles to pray unto the heavenly father, but yet in the name of
the son. Objection. The spirit is not to be prayed unto but the father only.
Besides that, he prescribes them this form of prayer. Our father which art
in heaven. Ergo the father only is to be called upon, and consequently the
father only is that one and very true God, of whom it is written; Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

3. Answer. The consequent is denied.
Whereto I answer first by denying the consequent; The son prayed to the father
only, Ergo the father only is of us also to be prayed unto. For the son of
God is distinguished of us both in person and in office; he as a mediator
makes intercession for us to the father; and although the son and the holy
spirit do both together receive and take us into favor with God; yet is he
said to entreat the father for us; because the father is the fountain of all
counsels and divine works. Furthermore touching the form of praying described
of Christ, it is not necessary that the fathers name should personally be there
taken, since there is no distinction of persons made; but by the name of father
indefinitely we understand God or the essence of God, the father, the son,
and the Holy Ghost. For this name has not always a respect unto the
generation of the son of God; but God is called the father of the faithful,
because of his gracious and free adopting of them, the foundation whereof is
the son of God, in whom we be adopted: but yet so adopted, that not the father
only receives us into his favor; but with him also the son and the holy
spirit does the same. Therefore when we in the beginning of prayer do advertise
our selves of Gods goodness toward us; we do not cast an eye to the father
alone, but also to the son, who gave us the spirit of adoption; and to the
holy spirit in whom we cry Abba, Father. And if so be that invocation and
prayer were restrained to the father alone, then had the saints done amiss, in
calling upon, invocating, and praying to the son of God, and with the son the
holy spirit, in baptism, according to the form by Christ himself assigned
and delivered.

Another objection is out of the fourth of Amos, Objection. Amos says that the
spirit was created.
in this manner. For lo it is I that make the thunder, and create the spirit,
and show unto men their Christ, making the light and the clouds, and mounting
above the high places of the earth, the Lord God of hosts is his name. Now
because it is read in that place, showing unto men their Christ; the
Pneumatomachi contended that these words are to be understood of the holy
spirit.

4. Answer. Spirit in this place signifies wind.
But Ambrose in his book De spiritu sancto, lib. 2. cap. 7. does rightly answer,
that by spirit in this place is meant the wind. for if the prophets purpose and
will had been to speak of the holy spirit, he would not have begun with
thunder, nor have ended with light and clouds. Howbeit, the same father says;
If any suppose that these words are to be drawn unto the interpretation of the
holy spirit, because the prophet says, Showing unto men their Christ; he ought
also to draw these words unto the mystery of the Lords incarnation: and he
expounds thunder to be the words of the Lord, and spirit to be the reasonable
and perfect soul. But the former interpretation is certain and convenient with
the words of the prophet, by whom there is no mention made of Christ; but the
power of God is set forth in his works. Behold (says the prophet) he that
forms the mountains, and creates the wind, and declares unto man what is
his thought, which makes the morning darkness, and walks upon the high
places of the earth, the Lord God of hosts is his name. In this sort Santes a
right skillful man in the Hebrew tongue translateth this place of the prophet.
To create is not him to be made that was not.

Eusebius. Caesariens lib. 3. adversus Marcemull


But admit this place were written of the holy spirit, and were not appliable
either to the wind or to the Lords incarnation: yet does it not follow that the
holy spirit is a creature; because this word of Creating does not always
signify a making of something out of nothing; (...) Eusebius in expounding
these words (The Lord created me in the beginning of his ways) writes thus.
The prophet in the person of God, saying; Behold I am he that made the thunder,
and created the spirit, and showed unto men their Christ: this word created is
not so to be taken, as that it is to be concluded thereby, that the same was
not before. For God has not so created the spirit, sithence by the same he
has showed and declared his Christ unto all men. Neither was it a thing of
late beginning under the son, but it was before all beginning, and was then
sent, when the apostles were gathered together, when a sound like thunder came
from heaven, as it had been the coming of a mighty wind: this word Created
being used for sent down, for appointed, ordained, etc. and the word thunder
signifying in another kind of manner the preaching of the gospels. The like
saying is that of the Psalmist. A clean heart create in me O God: wherein he
prayed not as one having no heart, but as one that had such a heart as needed
purifying, as needed perfecting: and this phrase also of the scripture, that he
might create two in one new man; that is, that he might join, couple, or gather
together, etc.

Objection. All things were made by the son, Ergo the spirit was also made by
him.
Furthermore, the Pneuma^omachi by these testimonies ensuing endeavor to prove
the holy spirit to be a creature. Out of John the 1. cha. By this word were all
things made, and without it nothing was made; Out of the 1 Cor. 8. We have one
God the father, even he from whom are all things, etc we in him, and one Lord
Jesus Christ, through whom are all things, and we by him. Out of the 1. Coloss.
By him were all things made, things in heaven, and things in earth, visible and
invisible, etc. Now if all things were made by the son, it follows that by
him the holy spirit was also made.

5. Answer. Universal propositions or speeches are to be restrained.
Whereto I answer, that when all things are said to be made by the son, that
same universal proposition is restrained by John himself to a certain kind of
things: Without him (says the evangelist) was nothing made that was made.
Therefore it is first to be showed that the holy spirit was made, and then will
we conclude out of John, that if he were made; he was made of the son. The
scripture does no where say* that the holy spirit was made of the father or of
the son, but to proceed, to come, and to be sent from them both. Now if these
universal proposition are to suffer no restraint, it shall follow that the
father was made of the son, than the which what is more absurd and wicked?

Objection. The spirit knows not the father and the son.
Again, they object out of Matthew. 11. None knows the son but the father, and
none the father but the son; to wit, of and by himself for otherwise both the
angels, and to whomsoever else it shall please the son to reveal the father,
these do know does the father and the son. Now if so be the spirit be not
equal with the father and the son in knowledge, he is not only unequal and
lesser than they, but also no God; for ignorance is not incident unto God.

6. Answer. How exclusive propositions or speeches are to be interpreted.
Where to I answer, that where in holy scripture we do meet with universal
propositions negative or exclusive, they are not to be expounded of one person,
so as the rest are excluded; but creatures or false gods are to be excluded,
and whatsoever else is without or beside the essence and being of God. Reasons
to prove and confirm this interpretation. I could bring very many, whereof I
will add some for example. In the seventh of John it is said; When Christ
shall come, none shall know from whence he is; notwithstanding which words the
Jews thought that neither God nor his angels should be ignorant from whence
Christ should be. In the fourth to the Galatians; A man's covenant or testament
confirmed with authority no body does abrogate, or add any thing thereunto. No
just man does so; but tyrants and truce breakers care not for covenants. In
John eight; Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in the midst. And yet
it is not to be supposed that a multitude of people was not present, and the
disciples of Christ likewise; but the word Solus, alone, is referred to the
woman's accusers, who withdrew themselves away every one, and departed. In the
sixth of Mark; when it was evening, the ship was in the midst of the sea, and he
alone upon land: he was not alone upon land or shore, for the same was not
utterly void of dwellers; but he had not any of his disciples with him, nor any
body to carry him a shipboard unto his disciples. Many phrases or for (...)
speeches like unto these are to be found in the sacred scriptures, and (...)
^^thors both Greek and Latin, whereby we understand, that neither universal
negative nor exclusive particles are strictly to be urged, but to be explained
in such sort as the matter in hand will bear. When as therefore the son alone
is said to know the father, and it is demanded whether the holy spirit is
debarred from knowing the father; out of other places of scriptures judgment
is to be given in this case. In some places the holy spirit is counted and
reckoned with the father and the son jointly; wherefore he is not to be
separated. Elsewhere also it is attributed to the holy spirit that he alone
does know the things which be of God, and seattheth the deep secrets of God;
wherefore from him the knowing of God is not to be excluded.

They do yet further object, Objection. The spirit prays for us.
that it is not convenient or fit for God after the manner of suitors to humble
and cast down himself, but the holy spirit does so, praying and entreating for
us with unspeakable groans; Romans 8. Ergo the holy spirit is not God.

Answer. The spirit does provoke us to pray.
Whereunto I answer that the holy spirit does pray and entreat, insomuch as he
provokes us to pray, and makes us to groan and sigh Oftentimes also in the
scriptures is that action or deed attributed unto God, which we being stirred
up and moved by him do bring to pass. So it is said of God unto Abraham; Now
I know that thou fear God: and yet before he would have sacrificed Isaac.
God knew the very heart of Abraham: and therefore this word Cognovi, I know, is
as much as Cognoscere feci, I have made or caused to know. And that the spirit
to pray and entreat, is the same that, to make to pray and entreat, the apostle
teaches even there, writing that we have received the spirit of adoption, in
whom we cry Abba Father. Where it is manifest that it is we which cry, the
Holy Ghost provoking and forcing us thereunto.

Howbeit they go further, Objection. The spirit is sent from the father and
the son.
and frame this reason, Whosoever is sent, the sache is inferior and lesser
than he of whom he is sent, and furthermore he is of a comprehensible
substance, because he passes by local motion from place to ^lace: but the
holy spirit is foot of the father and the son, John 14.15, and 16. It is
powered forth and shed upon men, Acts 10. Ergo the holy spirit is lesser than
the Father and the Son, and of a comprehensible nature, and consequently not
very God.

Answer. How the spirit is sent.
Whereto I answer first, that he which is sent is not always lesser than he
that sends: to prove which position any mean wit may infer many instances,
Furthermore, touching the sending of the holy spirit, we are here to imagine no
changing or shifting of place. For if the spirit when he goes from the Father
and is sent, changes his place, then must the Father also be in a place, that
he may leave it and go to another. And as for the incomprehensible nature of
the spirit, he cannot leaving his place pass unto another. Therefore the
sending of the spirit is the eternal and unvariable will of God, to do
something by the holy spirit* and the revealing and executing of this will by
the operation and working of the spirit. The spirit was sent to the Apostles*
which spirit was present with them, since it is present everywhere; but then
according to the will of God the Father he showed himself present and
powerful.

Some man may say; if sending be a revealing and laying open of presence and
power, then may the Father be said to be sent, because he himself is also
revealed. I answer, that when the spirit is said to be sent, not only the
revealing, but the order also of his revealing is declared; because the will of
the Father and of the Son, of whom he is sent, going before, not in time, but
in order of persons, the spirit does reveal himself, the father, and also the
Son. The Father reveals himself by others, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, so
that his will goes before. Therefore sending is the common work of all the
three persons; howbeit, for order of doing, it is distinguished by diverse
names. The Father will reveal himself unto men with the son and the spirit and
be powerful in them, and therefore is said to send. The son does assent unto
the will of the Father, and will that to be done by themselves, which God will
to be done by them; these are said to be sent. And because the will of the Son
does go before the spirit in order of persons; he is also said to send the
Spirit.

Objection. The spirit speaks not of himself.
Yet for all this they allege, that if the spirit had perfection, then would
he speak of himself, and not stand in need always of another admonishment:
but he speaks not of himself, but speaks what he hears, as Christ
expressly testifies, John 16. Ergo he is unperfect, and whatsoever he has it
is by partaking, and consequently he is not God.

The 9. answer. Cyrill. lib. 13. the saur. cap. 3.
Whereto I answer that this argument is stale: for it was objected by
heretics long ago against them that held the true opinion, as Cyrill says;
who answers that by the words of Christ is rather to be gathered, that the
Son and the Spirit are of the same substance. For, the spirit is named the
mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2. and therefore he speaks not of his own proper
will, or against his will in whom and from whom he is; but has all his will
and working naturally proceeding from the substance as it were of him.

Objection.
Lastly they argue thus; Every thing is either unbegotten or unborn, or begotten
and created; the spirit is not unbegotten, for then he were the father; and so
there should be two without beginning; neither is he begotten, for then he is
begotten of the father, and so there shall be two sons, both brothers; or he is
begotten of the son, and then shall he be Gods nephew, than the which what can
be imagined more absurd? Ergo he is created.

10 Answer. The spirit proceeds.
Whereto I answer, that the division or distribution is unperfect; for that
member is omitted which is noted of the very best divine that ever was, even
Jesus Christ our Savior; namely, to have proceeded, or proceeding: That same
holy spirit (says he) which proceeds from the Father. Which place Nazianzen
does thus interpret. The spirit, because he proceeds from thence, is not a
creature; and because he is not begotten, he is not the son; but because he is
the mean of begotten and unbegotten, he shall be God, etc.

And thus having avoided all these cavils of the Such were the Arrians, (...)
amosatenians, etc.
Pneumatomachi, a sect of heretics too too injurious to the holy spirit,
insomuch as they seek what they can, to rob and pull from him the right of his
divinity; I will all christians to take heed of their pestilent opinions, the
poison whereof though to them that ^e resolved in the truth it can do little
hurt, yet to such as stand upon a wavering point it can do no great good.
Having thus far waded against them, and overthrown their opinions; I must needs
exhort all to whom the reading hereof shall come, that first they consider with
themselves what a reverend mystery all that hitherto has been said in this
chapter concerns; namely, the spirit of sanctification, and that they so
ponder places to and fro, as that they reserve unto the holy spirit the
glorious title of divinity, Sus magis in coeno gaudet quam font sereno.
which by nature is to him appropriate; esteeming of those Pneumatomachi or
Theomachi, as of swine, delighting more in the durty draffe of their devices
than in the fair fountain water of Gods word; yea, condemning them of grosser
ignorance than the old philosophers, who though they favored little of
heavenly theology, yet some illumination they had of the holy and divine
Spirit, marry it was somewhat misty, dark lan^e, and limping; nevertheless,
what it was, and how much or little soever it was, they gave thereunto a due
reverence, in that they acknowledged and entitled it Animam mundi, The
heathenish philosophers acknowledged the holy spirit. Cyrill. lib. 1. contra
Intianum.
The soul or life of the world, and (as Nazianzen witnesses) (...) The mind of
the universal, and the outward breath, or the breath that comes from without.
Porphyrie expounding the opinion of Plato, who was not utterly blind in this
mystery, says that the divine substance does proceed and extend to three
subsistencies and beings; and that God is chiefly and principally good, next
him the second creator, and the third to be the soul of the world; for he
holds that the divinity does extend even to this soul. As for Hermes
Trismegistus, he says that all things have need of this spirit; for according
to his worthiness he supporteth all, he quickens and susteineth all, and he
is derived from the holy fountain, giving breath and life unto all, and
evermore remains continual, plentiful, and unemptyed.

And here by the way I give you a note worth reading and considering; namely,
how all nations in a manner, by a kind of heavenly influence, agree in writing
and speaking the name of God with no more than four letters. Marsilius Ficinus
in arg. in Cratys. Plot.
As for example, the Egyptians do call him Theut, the Persians call him Sire,
the Jews express his unspeakable as well as they can by the word Adonai
consisting of four vowels; the Arabian^ call him Alla, the Mahometists call
him Abdi, the Greeks call him Theos, the Latins call him Deus, etc. This
although it be not so proper to our present purpose, (yet because we are in
hand with the holy spirits deity) is not altogether impertinent. But why God
would have his name as it were universally bounded within the number of four
letters, I can give sundry reasons, which requires too long a discourse of
words by digression and therefore I will conceal them for this time. These
opinions of philosophers I have willingly remembered, that it might appear, that
the doctrine concerning the Holy Spirit is very ancient; which they have taken
either out of Moses writings, or out of the works of the old fathers, published
and set forth in books, though not wholly, fully, and perfectly understood and
known; and also that our Pneumatomachi may see themselves to be more doltish in
divine matters than the heathen, who will not acknowledge that essential and
working power of the divinity whereby all things are quickened: which the
heathen did after a sort see; after a sort (I say) because they separated the
soul of the world (which they also call the begotten mind) from the most
sovereign and unbegotten God, and imagined certain differences of degrees, and
(as Cyrill says) did Arrianize in the Trinity.

So then I conclude against these Pneumatomachi, that in so much as they
imitate the old giants, Ovid. lib. metamorph. 1. sab. 5, de gigantib. coe^nm
obsident.
who piling up Pelion upon Ossa, and them both upon Olympus, attempted by
scaling the heavens to pull Jupiter out of his throne of estate, and to spoil
him of his principality, and were notwithstanding their strength, whereby they
were able to carry huge hills on their shoulders, overwhelmed with those
mountains and squeized under the weight of them even to the death; so these
Pneumatomachi, being enemies both to the holy Spirit, and no friends to the
holy church (for then would they confess the Trinity in Unity, and the Unity
is Trinity) and consequently also the deity of the holy Spirit) deserve to be
consumed with the fire of his mouth, the heat whereof by no means can be
slacked, quenched, or avoided. For there is nothing more unnatural, nothing
more monstrous, then against the person of the deity (I mean the spirit of
sanctification) to oppose man's power, man's wit, man's policy, etc. which was
well signified by that poetical fiction of the giants, who were termed
Anguipedes, Snakefooted; which as Ioachimus Cameravius expounds of wicked
counselors, to whose filthy persuasions tyrants do trust as unto their feet;
and James Sadolet interprets of philosophers, who trusting over much unto
their own wits, become so bold in challenging praise for their wisdom, that in
fine all turns to folly and confusion; so I expound of heretics and
schismatikes, who' either by corrupt doctrine, or by maintaining precise
opinions, or by open violence, etc. assay to overthrow the true religion, to
break the unity of the church, to deny Caesar his homage, and God his duty,
etc. and therefore let Iovis fulmen, Jacob. Sadol. in lib. de laud. philosoph.
inscrip. Phedius.
wherewith they were slain, assure these that there is Divina ultio due to all
such, as dare in the fickleness of their fancies arrear themselves against the
holy spirit; of whom since they are ashamed hereupon earth (otherwise they would
confidently and boldly confess him both with mouth and pen) he will be ashamed
of them in heaven, where they are like to be so far from having any society
with the saints, that their portion shall be even in full and shaken measure
with miscreants and infidels. And therefore let us, if we will discern and try
the spirits whether they be of God or no, seek for the illumination of this
inlightning spirit, which as it brings light with it to discover all spirits,
so it gives such a fiery heat, as that no false spirit can abide by it for
fear of burning. Howbeit the holy spirit must be in us, otherwise this
prerogative of trying spirits will not fall to our lot.

But here some will peradventure move a demand, Peter Mart. in loc. com. part.
2. cap. 18. sect. 33. page 628.
and do ask how the holy spirit is in us, considering that Infiniti ad
infinitum nulla est proportio, neque loci angustia quod immensum est potest
circumscribi: of that which is infinite, to that which is finite there is no
proportion; neither can that which is unmeasurable be limited or bounded within
any precinct of place, etc. I answer, that the most excellent father for
Christ's sake sends him unto us, John 14.26.
according as Christ promised us in the person of his apostles; The comforter
(says he) which is the holy spirit, whom my father will send in my name. And
as for proportion of that which is infinite to that which is finite, etc. I will
in no case have it thought, that the holy spirit is in us, as a body placed in
a place terminably; but to attribute thereunto, John 16.14. and 14.16.
as duly belongs to the deity, an ubiquity, or universal presence; not
corporally and palpably; but effectually, mightily, mystically divinely, etc.
Yea, and this I may boldly add, that Christ Jesus sends him unto us from the
father: neither is he given us for any other end, but to enrich us abundantly
with all good gifts and excellent graces; and (among the rest) with the
discerning of spirits aright, that we be not deceived. And here an end.

FINIS.
The sum of every chapter contained in the sixteen books of this discovery,
with the discourse of devils and spirits annexed thereunto.
The first Book.
AN impeachment of witchespower in meteors and elementary bodies, tending to
the rebuke of such as attribute too much unto them. Page 1. The inconvenience
growing by men's credulity herein, with a reproof of some churchmen, which are
inclined to the common conceived opinion of witches o^nipotency, and a familiar
example thereof. page 3. Who they be that are called witches, with a manifest
declaration of the cause that moves men so commonly to think, and witches
themselves to believe that they can hurt children, cattle, etc. with words and
imaginations: and of cousening witches. page 5. What miraculous actions are
imputed to witches by witchmongers, papists, and poets. page 6. A confutation
of the common conceived opinion of witches and witchcraft, and how detestable a
sin it is to repair to them for counsel or help in time of affliction.
page 8. A further confutation of witches miraculous and omnipotent power, by
invincible reasons and authorities, with dissuasions from such sond credulity.
page 9. What means the name of witches becomes so famous, and how diversely
people be opinioned concerning them and their actions. pa. 10. Causes that move
as well witches themselves as others to think that they can work
impossibilities, with answers to certain objections: where also their
punishment by law is touched. page 11. A conclusion of the first book, wherein
is foreshewed the tyrannical cruelty of witchmongers and inquisitors, with a
request to the reader to peruse the same. page 12.
The second Book.
WHat testimonies and witnesses are allowed to give evidence against reputed
witches, by the report and allowance of the inquisitors themselves, and such as
are special writers herein. Page 13. The order of examination of witches by
the inquisitors ibid. Matters of evidence against witches. page 15. Confessions
of witches, whereby they are condemned. page 16. Presumptions, whereby witches
are condemned. page 17. Particular interrogatories used by the inquisitors
against witches. pa. 18. The inquisitors trial of weeping by conjuration. page
19. Certain cautions against witches, and of their tortures to procure
confession. page 20. The 15. crimes laid to the charge of witches, by
witchmongers, specially by Bodin, in Demonomania. 22. A confutation of the
former surmised crimes patched together by Bodin, and the only way to escape
the inquisitors hands. page 23. The opinion of Cornelius Agrippa concerning
witches, of his pleading for a poor woman accused of witchcraft, and how he
convinced the inquisitors. page 24. What the fear of death and feeling of
torments may force one to do, and that it is no marvel though witches condemn
themselves by their own confessions so tyrannically extorted. page 33.
The third Book.
THe witches bargain with the devil, according to M. Mal. Bodin, N^der,
Daneus, Psellus, Brastus, Hemingius, Cumanus, Aquinas, Bartholomeus, Spineus,
etc. Page 35. The order of the witches homage done (as it is written by lewd
inquisitors and peevish witchmongers) to the devil in person: of their songs
and danses, and namely of Lavolta, and of other ceremones, also of their
excourses. page 36. How witches are sommoned to appear before the devil, of
their riding in the air, of their accounts, of their conference with the
devil, of his supplies, and their conference, of their farewell and
sacrifices* according to Daneus, Psellus, etc. 37 That there can no real league
be made with the devil the first author of the league, and the weak proofs
of the adversaries for the same. 38. Of the private league, a notable table of
Bodin concerning a French lady, with a confutation. page 39. A disproofe of
their assemblies, and of their bargain page 40. A confutation of the objection
concerning witches confessions. page 41. What folly it were for witches to
enter into such desperate peril and to endure such intolerable torments for no
gain or commodity, and how it comes to pass that witches are overthrown by
their confessions. 42 How melancholy abuses old women, and of the effects
thereof by sundry examples. page 43. That voluntary confessions may be untruly
made, to the undoing of the confessors, and of the strange operation of
melancholy, proved by a familiar and late example. p. 45. The strange and
diverse effects of melancholy, and how the same humor abounding in witches, or
rather old women, fills them full of mavelous imaginations, and that their
confessions are not to be credited. 46. A confutation of witches confessions,
especially concerning their league. page 48. A confutation of witches
confessions, concerning making of tempests and rain; of the natural cause of
rain and that witches or devils have no power to do such things. ibid. What
would ensue, if witches confessions or witchmongers opinions were true,
concerning the effects of witchcraft, enchantments, etc. 50* Examples of foreign
nations, who in their wars used the assistance of witches; of eybiting
witches in Ireland, of two archers that shot with familiars. page 51. Authors
condemning the fantastical confessions of witches, and how a popish doctor
takes upon him to disprove the same. page 52. Witchmongers reasons, to prove
that witches can work wonders, Bodins tale of a Friseland priest transported,
that imaginations proceeding of melancholy do cause illusions. page 53. That
the confession of witches is insufficient in civil and common (...) to take
away life. What the sounder divines, and decrees of councels determine in this
case. page 54. Of four capital crimes objected against witches, all fully
answered and confuted as frivolons. p. 55. A request to such readers as loath
to hear or read filthy and bawdy matters (which of necessity are here to be
inserted) to pass over eight chapters. page 56
The fourth Book.
OF witchmongers opinions concerning evil spirits, how they frame themselves
in more excellent sort than God made us. Page 58. Of bawdy Incubus and
Succubus, and, whether the action of venery may be performed between witches
and devils and when witches first yielded to Incubus. ibid. Of the devils
visible and invisible dealing with witches in the way of lechery. page 60. That
the power of generation is both outwardly and inwardly inpeached by witches,
and of diverse that had their genitals taken from them by witches, and by the
same means again restored. ibid. Of bishop Sylvanus his leachery opened and
covered again, how maids having yellow hair are most combred with Incubus,
how married men are bewitched to use other men's wives, and to refuse their own.
page 62. How to procure the dissolving of bewitched love, also to enforce a man
(how proper so ever he be) to love an old hag: and of a bawdy trick of a
priest in Gelderland. ibid. Of diverse saints and holy persons, which were
exceeding bawdy and lecherous, and by certain miraculous means became chaste.
page 63. Certain popish and magical cures, for them that are bewitched in
their privities. ibid. A strange cure done to one that was molested with
Incubus. page 64. A confutation of all the former follies touching Incubus,
which by examples and proofs of like stuff is showed to be flat knavery,
wherein the carnal copulation with spirits is overthrown. page 65. That
Incubus is a natural disease with remedies for the same, besides, magical
cures herewithall expressed. page 69. The censure of G. Chancer, upon the
knavery of Incubus. page 67.
The fifth Book.
OF transformations, ridiculous examples brought by the adversaries for the
confirmation of their foolish doctrine. Page 66. Absurd reasons brought by
Bodin, and such others, for confirmation of transformations. page 71. Of a man
turned into an ass, and returned again unto a man by one of Bodins witches:
S. Augustines opinion thereof. page 72. A summarie of the former fable, with a
refutation thereof, after due examination of the same. page 74. That the body
of a man cannot be turned into the body of a beast by a witch, is proved by
strong reasons, scriptures, and authorites. page 75. The witchmongers
objections concerning Nebuchadnezzar answerred, and their error concerning
Lycanthropia consuted. page 77. A special objection answered concerning
transportations, with the consent of diverse writers thereupon. page 78. The
witchmongers objection concerning the history of Job answered. 79. What
several sorts of witches are mentioned in the scriptures, and how the word
witch is there applied. page 82.
The sixth Book.
THe exposition of this Hebrew word Chasaph wherein is answered the objection
contained in Exodus 22. to wit: Thou shall not suffer a witch to live, and of
Simon Magnus, Acts. 8. page 84. The place of Deuteronomy expounded wherein are
recited all kind of witches; also their opinions confuted, which hold that they
can work such miracles as are imputed unto them. page 85. That women have used
poisoning in all ages more then men, and of the inconvenience of poisoning.
page 87. Of diverse poisoning practices, otherwise called veneficia, committed
in Italy, Genua, Millen, Wittenberge, also how they were discovered and
executed. page 88. A great objection answered concerning this kind of witchcraft
cal^ed Veneficium. page 89. In what kind of confections that witchcraft, which
is called Veneficium, consists: of love-cups, and the same confu^ed by poets.
ibid. It is proved by more credible writers, that love-cups rather engender
death through venom, than love by ar^; and with what toies they destroy
cattle, and procure love. p. 92. J. Bodin triumphing against I. Wier is over
taken with false ^reeke and false interpretation thereof. p. 93.
The seventh Book.
OF the Hebrew word Ob, what it signifies where it is found, of Pythonisses
called Ventriloquae, who they be, and what their practices are, experience and
examples thereof showed. Page 94. How the lewd practice of the Pythonist of
Westwell came to light, and by whom she was examined; and that all her
diabolical speech was but ventriloquie and plain cousenage, which is proved
by her own confession. page 96. Bodins stuff concerning the Pythonist of
Endor, with a true story of a counterfeit Dutchman. page 98. Of the great oracle
of Apollo the Pythonist, and how men of al sorts have been deceived, and that
even the apostles have mistaken the nature of spirits, with an unanswerable
argument, that spirit, can take no shapes. page 99. Why Apollo was called
Pytho, whereof those witches were called Pythonists; Gregory his letter to the
devil. page 101. Apollo, who was called Pytho, compared to the Rood of grace,
Gregory's letter to the devil co^fused 102 How diverse great clerks and good
authors have been abused in this matter of spirits through false reports, and
by means of their credulity have published lies, which are confuted by
Aristotle and the scriptures. Ibid. Of the witch of Endor, and whetler she
accomplished the raising of Samuel truly, or by deceit, the opinion of some
Divines hereupon. p. 103. That Samuel was not raised indeed, and how Bodin and
all papists due herein, and that souls cannot be raised by witchcraft. page
104. That neither the devil nor Samuel was raised, but that it was a mere
cousenage, according to the guise of our Pythonists. page 105. The objection of
the witchmongers concerning this place fully answered, and what circumstances
are to be considered for the understanding of this story, which is plainly
opened from the beginning of the 28. chapt. of the 1. Samuel, to the 12. verse.
page 106. The 12.13. and 14. verses of 1. Sam. 28. expounded; wherein is showed
that Saul was cousened and abused by the witch, and that Samuel was not raised,
is proved by the witches own talk. page 108. The residue of 1. Sam. 28.
expounded; wherein is declared how cunningly this witch brought Saul resolutely
to believe that she raised Samuel, what words are used to color the cousenage,
and how all might also he wrought by ventriloquie p 109. Opinions of some
learned men, that Samuel was indeed raised, not by the witches art or power,
but by the special miracle of God, that there are no such visions in these cur
days, and that our witches cannot do the like. page 111. Of vain apparltions,
how people have been brought to fear bugs, which is partly reformed by
preaching of the gospel, the true effect of Christ's miracles. page 112.
Witches miracles compared to Christ's, that God is the creator of al things; of
Apollo, and of his names and portraiture. page 113.
The eight book.
THat miracles are ceased. Page 115. That the gift of prophecy is ceased. page
116. That Oracles are ceased. page 117. A tale written by many grave authors,
and believed by many wise men of the devils death. An other storywriby papists,
and believed of all catholics, approving the devils hones^y, conscience, and
courtesy. page 119. The judgments of the ancient fathers touching oracles,
and their abolishment, and that they be now transferred form Delphos to Rome.
p. 120. Where and wherein couseners, witches, and priests were wont to give
oracles, and to work their feats. page 121.
The ninth Book:
THe Hebrew word Kasain expounded, and how far a Christian may conjecture of
things to come. page 123. Proofs by the old and new testament that ce^taine
observations of the weather are lawful. pap. 124. That certain observations
are indifferent, certain ridiculous, and certain impious, whence that cunning
is derived of Apollo, and of Aruspicus. page 125. The predictions of
soothsayers and lewd priests, the prognostications of astronomers and
physicians allowable, divine prophesies holy and good. page 126. The diversity
of true prophets, of Vrim, and the prophetical use of the twelve precious
stones contained therein; of the divine voice called Echo. ibid. Of prophesies
conditional whereof the prophesies in the old testament do entreat, and by
whom they were published; witchmongers answers to the objections against
witches supernatural actions. page 1^7. What were the miracles expressed in
the old testament; and what are they in the new testament; and that we are not
now to look for any more miracles. page 128.
The tenth Book.
THe interpretation of the Hebrew word Onen, of the vanity of dreams, and
divinations thereupon. Page 130. Of divine, natural, and casual dreams, with
the different causes and effects. ibid. The opinion of diverse old writers
touching dreams, and how they vary in noting the causes thereof. p 131.
Against interpretors of dreams, of the ordinary cause of dreams, Hemingibus
opinion of diabolical dreams, the interpretation of dreams ceased. page 132.
That neither witches, nor any other, can either by words or herbs, thrust into
the mind of a sleeping man, what cogitations or dreams they list, and whence
magical dreams come. page 133. How men have been bewitched, cousened or
abused by dreams to dig and search for money. page 134. The art and order to be
used in digging for money, revealed by dreams, how to procure pleasant dreams,
of morning and midnight dreams. ibid. Sundry receipts and ointments, made and
used for the transportation of witches, and other miraculous effects; an
instance thereof reported and credited by some that are learned. page 135. A
confutation of the former follies, as well conce^ning ointments, dreams, etc.
as also of the assembly of witches, and of their consultations and bankets at
sundry places, and all in dreams. page 136. That most part of prophesies in the
old testament were revealed in dreams, that we are not how to look for such
revelations, of some who have dreampt of that which has come to pass, that
dreams prove contrary, Nebuchadnezzars rule to know a true expositor of dreams.
page 137.
The eleventh Book.
THe Hebrew word Nahas expounded; of the art of augury, who invented it, how
slovenly a science it is; the multitude of sacrifices and sacrificers of the
heathen, and the causes thereof. page 138. Of the Jews sacrifice to Moloch, a
discourse thereupon, and of purgatory. ibid. The Canibals cruelty, of popish
sacrifices exceeding in tyranny the ^ewes or Gentiles. page 139. The
superstition of the heathen about the element of fire, and how it grew in such
reverence among them, of their corruptions, and that they had some inkling of
the godly fathers doings in that behalf. ibid. Of the Roman sacrifices, of the
estimation they had of augury, of the law of the twelve tables. page 140.
Colleges of augurors, their office, their number, the signification of augury,
that the practisers of that art were couseners, their profession, their places
of exercise, their apparel, their superstition. page 141. The times and
seasons to exercise angury, the manner and order thereof, of the ceremonies
thereunto belonging. page 142. Upon what signs and tokens augurors did
prognosticate, observations touching the inward and outward parts of beasts,
with notes of beasts behavior in the slaughterhouse. ibid. A confutation of
augury, Plato his reverend opinion thereof, of contrary events, and false
predictions. p. 143 The cousening art of sortilege or lotarie, practiced
especially by Egyptian vagabonds, of allowed lots, of Pythagoras his lot, etc.
ibid Of the Cabalistieall art consisting of traditions and unwritten verities
learned without book, and of the division thereof page 144. When, how, and in
what sor^ sacrifices were first ordained, and how they were profaned, and how
the pope corrupts the sacraments of Christ page 145. Of the objects whereupon
the augurors used ^o progno^ticate, with certain cautions and notes. page 146.
The division of augury, persons admittable into the colleges of augury, of
their superstition. page 147. Of the common peoples fond and superstitious
collections and observ^tions. ibid. How old writers vary about the matter, the
manner, and the means, whereby things augurificall are moved. page 149. How
ridiculous an art augury is, how Cato mocked it, Aristotle's reason against it,
fond collections of augu^ors, who allowed, and who disallowed it. page 150.
Fond distinctions of the heathen writers, concerning augury. page 151. Of
natural and casual augury, the one allowed, and the other disallowed. ibid. A
confutation of casual augury which is mere witchcraft, and upon what
uncertainty those divinations are grounded. page 152. The figure-casters are
witches, the uncertainty of their art, and of their contradictions, Cornelius
Agripas sentence against judicial astrology. ibid. The subtil^y of astrologers
to maintain the credit of their art, why they remain in credit, certain
impieties contained in astrologers assertions. page 153. Who have power to
drive away devils with their only presence, who shall receive of God whatsoever
they ask in prayer, who shall obtain everlasting life by means of
constellations, as nativity-casters affirm. page 155.
The twelfth Book.
THe Hebrew word Habar expounded, where also the supposed secret f^rce of
charms and enchantments is showed, and the efficacy of words is diverse ways
declared. page 156. What is forbidden in scriptures concerning witc^craft, of
the operation of words, the superstition of the Ca^alists and papists, who
creates substances, to imitate God in some cases is presumption, words of
sanctification. ibid. What effect and offense witches charms bring, how unapt
witches are, and how unlikely to work those things which they are thought to
do, what would follow if those things were true which are laid to their charge.e
page 157 Why God forbad'the practice of witchcraft, the absurdity of the law of
the twelve tables, whereupon their estimation in miraculous actions is
grounded, of their wondrous works. page 158. An instance of one arraigned upon
the law of the twelve tables, whereby the said law is proved ridiculous, of two
witches that could do wonders. page 159. Laws provided for the punishment of
such witches as work miracles, whereof some are mentioned, and of certain
popish laws published against them. page 160. Poetical authorities commonly
alleged by witchmongers, for the proof of witches miraculous actions, and for
confirmation of their supernatural power page 161. Poetry and popery compared
in enchantments, popish witchmongers have more advantage herein than
protestants page 165. Popish periapts, amulets and charms, agnus Dei, a
wastcote of proof, a charm for the falling evil, a writing brought to S. Leo
from heaven by an angel* the virtues of S. Saviors epistle, a charm against
thieves, a writing found in Christ's wounds, of the cross, etc. p. 166. A
charm against shot, or a wastcote of proof. Against the falling evil p. 167. A
popish periapt or charm, which must never be said, but carried about one,
against thieves. Another amulet, page 168. A papistical charm. A charm found
in the canone of the mass. Other papisticall charms. page 196. A charm of
the holy chrosse. page 170. A charm taken out of the Primer. page 171. How to
make holy water, and the virtues thereof, S. Rufins charm, of the wearing and
bearing of the name of Jesus, that the sacrament of confession and the
euchraist is of as much efficacy as other charms, and magnified by L. Varus.
ibid. Of the noble balm used by Moses, ap^shly counte^feited in the church of
Rome. page 172. The opinion of F^rrarius touching charms, periapts,
appensions, amulets, etc. Of Homericall medicines, of constant opinion, and the
effects thereof. page 173. Of the effects of amulets, the (...) o^ Argerius
Ferrarius in the commendation of charms, etc: four sorts of Homericall
medicines, and the choice thereof; of imagination. page 174. Choice of charms
against the falling evil, the bitting of a mad dog, the stinging of a
scorpion, the toothach, for a woman in travel, ^or the kings evil, to g^t a
thorn out of any member, or a bone out of ones throat, charms to be said
fasting, or at the gathering of herbs, for sore eyes, to open locks, against
spirits, for the bots in a horse, and specially for the Duke of Albas horse,
for sour wines, etc. page 175. For the faling evil. ibid. Against the biting
of a mad dog. ibid. Against the biting of a scorpion. pa. 176. Against the
toothach. A charm to re^ease a woman in travel. To heal the Kings or Queens
evil, or any other soreness in the throat. A charm read in the Romish
church, upon saint Blazes day, that will fetch a tho^ne out of any place of
ones body, a bone out of the throat, etc. L^ct. 3. ibid. A charm for the
headache. page 177. A charm to be said each morning by a witch fasting, or at
least before she go abroad. Another charm that witches use at the gathering of
their medecinable herbs. An old woman's charm, wherewith she did mu^^ good in
the country, and grew ^amous thereby, ibid. Another like charm. A charm to
open locks. A charm to drive away spirits that haunt any house. page 178. A
pretty charm or conclusion for one poss^ssed. Another for the same purpose.
Another to the same effect, ibid. Another charm or witchcraft for the same.
page 179. A charm for the bots in a horse. ibid. A charm against vinegar.
page 180. The enchanting of serpents and snakes, objections answer^d concerning
the same; fond reasons why charms take effect therein, Mahomets pig^on,
miracles wrought by an Ass a^ Memphis in Egypt, popish charms against
serpents, of miracle-workers, the taming of snakes, Bodins lie of snakes. ibid.
Charms to carry water in a sive, to know what is spoken of us behind our
backs, for bleare cies, to make seeds to grow well, of images made of wax, to
be rid of a witch, to hang her up, notable authorities against waxen images, a
story bewraying the knavery of Waxen images. page 185. A charm teaching how to
hurt whom you lift with images of wax etc. ibid. Sundry spirts of charms
tending to diverse purposes, and first, certain charms to make taciturnity in
tortures. page 187. Country charms against these and all other witchcrafts,
in the saying also whereof witches are vexed, ibid A charm for the choine
cough. For corporal or spiritual rest. Charme^ to find out a thief. ibid.
Another way to find out a thief that has stolen any thing from you. page 189.
To put out the thieves eye. Another way to find out a thief. ibid. A charm to
find ou^ or spoil a thief. ibid. S. Adelberts curse or charm against thieves.
page 190. Another enchantment. page 192. A charm or experiment to find out a
witch. ibid. To spoil a thief, a witch, or any other enemy, and to be delivered
from the evil. page 194. A notable charm or medicine to pull out an
arrow-head, or any such thing that sticks in the flesh or bones, and cannot
otherwise he had out. Charms against a qu^^idian ague. ibid. For all manner of
agues intermittent. Periapts, characters, etc. for agues, and to cure all
diseases, and to deliver from all evil. p. 195. More charms for agues. ibid.
For a bloody flux, or rather an issue of blood. Cures commenced and finished by
witchcraft. pa. 196. Another witchcraft or knavery, practiced by the same
surgeon. page 198. Another experiment for one bewitched. Otherwise. A knack to
know whether you be bewitched, or no, etc. ibid. That one witchcraft may
lawfully meet with another. page 199. Who are privileged from witches, what
bodies are aptest to be bewitched, or to be witches, why women are rather
witches than men, and what they are. ibid. What miracles witchmongers report to
have been done by witches words etc. contradictions of witchmongers among
themselves, how beasts are cured hereby, of bewitched butter, a charm against
witches, and a counter charm, the effect of charms and words proved by L.
Vairus to be wonderful. page 200. A charm to find her that bewitched your
kine. Another, for all that have bewitched any kind of cattle. p. 201. A
special charm to preserve all cattle from witchcraft. ibid. Lawful charms,
rather medicinable cures for diseased cattle. The charm of charms, and the
power thereof. ibid. The charm of charms. Otherwise. ibid. A confutation of
the force and virtue falsely ascribed to charms and amulets, by the authorities
of ancient writers, both divines and physicians. page 201.
The XIII. Book.
THe signification of the Hebrew word Hartumin, where it is found written in
the scriptures, and how it is diversely translated: whereby the objection of
Pharaohs magitians is afterward answered in this book; also of natural magic
not evil in it self. page 203. How the philosophers in times past traveled
for the knowledge of natural magic, of Solomon's knowledge therein, who is to
be called a natural magician, a distinction thereof, and why it is condemned for
witchcraft. page 204. What secrets do lie hidden, and what is taught in
natural magic, how Gods glory is magnified therein, and that it is nothing
but the work of nature. ibid. What strange things are brought to pass by
natural magic. page 205. The incredible operation of waters, both standing
and running; of wels, lakes, rivers, and of their wonderful effects. page 206.
The virtues and qualities of sundry precious stones, of cousening Lapidaries,
etc. ibid. Whence the precious stones receive their operations, how curious
Magitians use them, and of their seals. page 210. The sympathy and antipathy of
natural and elementary bodies declared by diverse examples of beasts, birds,
plants, etc. page 212. The former matter proved by many examples of the living
and the dead. page 213. The bewitching venom contained in the body of an
harlot, how her eye, her tongue, her beauty and behavior bewitcheth some men:
of bones and horns yielding great virtue. page 214. Two notorious wonders and
yet not marvelled at. page 215. Of illusions, confederacies, and legierdemain,
and how they may be well or ill used. page 216. Of private confederacy, and of
Brandons Pigeon. page 217. Of public confederacy, and whereof it consists.
page 218. How men have been abused with words of equivocation, with sundry
examples thereof. ibid. How some are abused with natural magic, and sundry
examples thereof when illusion is added thereunto, of Jacobs pied sheep, and of
a black Moore. page 219. The opinion of witchmongers, that devils can create
bodies, and of Pharaohs magicians. page 220. How to produce or make monsters by
art of magic, and why Pharaohs magitians could not make lice. ibid. That great
matters may be wrought by this art, when princes esteem and maaintain it: of
diverse wonderful experiments, and of strange conclusions in glasses, of the
art perspective, etc. page 222. A comparison betwixt Pharaohs magitians and our
witches, and how their cunning consisted in juggling knacks. page 223. That the
serpents and frogs were truly presented, and the water poisoned indeed by
Iannes and Iambres, of false prophets, and of their miracles, of Balaams ass.
page 224. The art of juggling discovered, and in what points it does
principally consist. page 226. Of the ball, and the manner of legierdemain
therewith, also notable feats with one or diverse bals. ibid. To make a little
ball swell in your hand till it be very great. p. 227. To consume (or rather to
convey) one or many bals into nothing. page 228. How to rap a wag upon the
knuckles. ibid. Of conveyance of money. ibid. To convey money out of one of
your hands into the other by legierdemain. ibid. To convert or transubstantiate
money into counters, or counters into money. page 229. To put one testor into
one hand, and another into the other hand, and with words to bring them
together. ibid. To put one testor into a strangers hand, and another into your
own, and to convey both into the strangers hand with words. ibid. How to do
the same or the like feat otherwise. ibid. To throw a piece of money away, and
to find it again where you lift. page 230. With words to make a groat or a
testor to leap out of a pot, or to run along upon a table. ibid. To make a
groat or a testor to sink through a table, and to vanish out of a handkercher
very strangely. ibid. A notable trick to transform a counter to a groat page
231. An excellent feat to make a two penny piece lie plain in the palm of your
hand and to be passed from thence when you li^t. ibid. To convey a testor out
of ones hand that holds it fast. page 232. To throw a piece of money into a
deep pond, and to fetch it again from whence you lift. ibid. To convey one
shilling being in one hand into another, holding your arms abroad like a rood.
ibid. How to wrap a wag on the knuckles. ibid. To transform any one small
thing into any other form by holding of paper. page 233. Of cards, with good
cautions how to avoid cousenage therein: special rules to convey and handle
the cards, and the manner and order how to accomplish all difficult and strange
things wrought by cards. ibid. How to deliver out four aces, and to convert
them into four knaves. p. 234. How to tell one what card he sees in the
bottom, when the same card is shuffled into the stock. page 235. Another way
to do the same, having your self indeed never seen the card. ibid. To tell one
without confederacy what card be thinks. ibid. How to tell what card any man
thinks* how to convey the same into a kernel of a nut or cheristone, etc.
and the same again into ones pocket; how to make one draw the same or any card
you list, and all under one device. page 236. Of fast or loose, how to knit a
hard knot upon a hanckercher, and to undo the same with words. p. 237. A
notable feat of fast or loose, namely, to pull three beadstones from off a
cord, while you hold fast the ends thereof, without removing of your hand.
ibid. Iuggling knacks by confederacy, and how to know whether one ^ast cross
or pile by the ringing page 238. To make a shoale of goslings draw a timber
log. ibid. To make a pot or any such thing standing fast on the cubboord, to
fall down thence by virtue of words. ibid. To make one danse naked. page 239.
To transform or alter the color of ones cap, or hat. ibid. How to tell where
a stolen horse is become. ibid. Boxes to alter one grain into another, or to
consume the grain or corn to nothing. ibid. How to convey (with words or
charms) the corn contained in one box into another. page 240. Of another box
to convert wheat into flower with words, etc. ibid. Of diverse petty juggling
knackes. ibid. Tr burn a thread and to make it whole again with the ashes
thereof. page 241. To cut a lace asunder in the midst, and to make it whole
again. ibid. How to pull laces innumerable out of your mouth, of what color or
length you li^t, and never any thing seen to be therein. page 242. How to make
a book, wherein you shall show every leaf therein to be white, black, blew,
red, yellow, green, etc. ibid. Desperate or dangerous juggling knacks, wherein
the simple are made to think, that a seely juggler with words can hurt and
help, kill and revive any creature at his pleasure: and first to kill any kind
of pullen, and to give it life again. page 244. To eat a knife, and to fetch it
out of any other place. ibid. To thrust a bodkin into your head without hurt.
ibid. To thrust a bodkin through your tongue, and a knife through your arm: a
pitiful sight, without hurt or danger. page 245. To thrust a piece of lead into
one eye, and drive it about (with a stick) between the skin and flesh of the
forehead, until it be brought to the other eye, and there thrust out. ibid. To
cut half your nose asunder, and to heal it again presently without any salve.
ibid. To put a ring through your cheek. page 246. To cut off ones head, and to
lay it in a platter, etc. which the iuglers call the decollation of John
Baptist. ibid. To thrust a dagger or bodkin into your guts very strangely, and
to recover immediately page 247. To draw a cord through your nose, mouth or
hand, so sensible as it is wonderful to see. ibid. The conclusion wherein the
reader is referred to certain patterns of instruments wherewith diverse feats
here specified are to be executed. page 248.
The xiiii. Book.
OF the art of Alcumystry, of their words of art and devises to bleare men's
eyes, and to procure credit to their profession. Page 249. The Alcumysters
drift, the Canons yeomans tale, of alcumystical stones and waters. page 250. Of
a yeoman of the country cousened by an Alcumyst. page 254. A certain king
abused by an Alcumist, and of the kings fool a pretty jest. page 252. A notable
story written by Erasmus of two Alcumysts, also of longation and curtation.
ibid. The opinion of diverse learned men touching the ^^lly of Alcumystry. page
260. That vain and deceitful hope is a great cause why men are seduced by
this alluring art, and that their labors therein are bootlesse, etc. page 261.
A continuation of the former matter, with a conclusion of the same. p 262.
The xv. Book.
THe exposition of Iidoni, and where it is found, whereby the whole art of
consuration is deciphered. Page* 265. An inventary of the names, shapes, powers,
government, and effects of devils and spirits, of their several s^igniorities
and degrees: a strange discourse worth the reading. p. 266. The hours wherein
poincipall devils may be bound; to wit, raised and restrained from doing of
hurt. p. 277. The sorme of adjuring or citing of the spirits aforesaid to arise
and appear page 278. A confutation of the manifold vanities contained in the
precedent chapters, specially of commanding of devils. page 279. The names of
the planets, their characters, together with the twelve signs of the zodiake,
their dispositions, aspects, and government, with other observations. page 281.
The twelve signs of the zodiake, their characters and denominations. etc.
ibid. Their dispositions or inclinations. 282. The disposition of the planets.
page 282. The aspects of the planets. ibid. How the day is divided or
distinguished. p. 283. The division of the day and the planetary regiment. page
283* The division of the night, and the planetary regiment. ibid. The
characters of the angels of the seven days, with their names; of figures,
seals and periapts. page 284. An experiment of the dead. page 285. A license
for Sibylla to go and come by at all times. page 290. To know of treasure
hidden in the earth. ibid. This is the way to go invisible by these three
sisters of fairies. page* 291. An experiment of Citrael, etc. angeli di^i
dominici. page 292. The seven angels of the seven days, with the prayer called
Regina linguae. ibid. How to enclose a spirit in a crystal stone. page 293. A
figure or type proportional, showing what form must be observed and kept, in
making the figure whereby the former secret of enclosing a spirit in crystal is
to be accomplished, etc. page 295. An experiment of the spirit Bealphares. page
296. The two and twentieth Psalm. page 299. This psalm also following, being
the fifty one psalm, must be said three times over, etc. ibid. To bind the
spirit Bealphares, and to lose him again. page 300. A license for the spirit to
depart. page 301 A type or figure of the circle for the master and his fellows
to sit in, showing how and after what fashion it should be made. page 302. The
making of the holy water. page 303. To the water say also as follows. ibid.
Then take the salt in thy hand, and say putting it into the water, making in
the manner of a cross. page 304 Then sprinkle upon any thing, and say as
follows. ibid. To make a spirit to appear in a crystal. ibid. An experiment
of the dead page 305. Now the Pater noster, Ave, and Credo must be said, and
then the prayer immediately following. page 306. A bond to bind him to thee,
and to thy N^as follows. page 307 This bond following, is to call him into
your crystal stone, or glass, etc. page 309. Then being appeared, say these
words following. page 310* A license to depart. ibid. When to talk with
spirits, and to have true answers to find out a thief. page 311. To speak
with spirits ibid. A confutation of conjuration, especially of the raising,
binding and dismissing of the devil, of going invisible and other lewd
practices. ibid. A comparison between popish exorcists and other conjurors, a
popish conjuration published by a great doctor of the Romish church, his rules
and cautions page 313. A late experiment, or cousening conjurati^n practiced at
Orleance by the Franciscane Friars, how it was detected, and the judgment
against the authors of that comedy. page 315. Who may be conjurors in the
Romish Church besides priests, a ridiculous definition^ of superstision, what
words are to be used and not used in exorcismes, rebaptisme allowed, it is
lawful to conjure any thing, differences between holy water and conjuration.
page 317. The seven reasons why some are not rid of the devil with all their
popish conjurations, why there were no co^jurors in the primitive church, and
why the devil is not so son cast out of the bewitched as of the possessed
page 319. Other gross absurdities of witchmongers in this matter of
conjurations. page 320. Certain conjurations taken out of the pontifical and
out of the missal. page 321. A conjuration written in the mass book. Fol. 1.
ibid. Oremus page 322. That popish priests leave nothing unconjured, a form of
exorcisme for incense. ibid. The rules and laws of popish Exorcists and other
conjurors all one, with a confutation of their whole power, how S. Martine
conjured the devil. page 323. That it is a shame for papists to believe other
conjurors doings their own being of so little force, Hippocrates his opinion
herein. page 325. How conjurors have beguiled witches, what books they carry
about to procure credit to their art, wicke assertions against Moses and
Joseph. page 326. All magical arts confuted by an argument concerning Nero,
what Cornelius Agrippa and Carolus Gallus have left written thereof, and proved
by experience. page 327. Of Solomon's conjurations, and of the opinion conceived
of his cunning and practice therein. page 328. Lessons read in all churches,
where the pope has authority, on Saint Margarets day, translated into English
word for word. page 329. A delicate story of a Lumbard, who by saint Magarets
example would needs fight with a real devil. 330. The story of S. Margaret
proved to be both ridiculous and impious in every point. page 331. A pleasant
miracle wrought by a popish priest. page 332. The former miracle cou^uted, with
a strange story of S. Lucy. page 333. Of visions, noises, apparitions, and
imagined sounds, and of other illusions, of wandering souls: with a
confutation thereof. ibid. Cardanus opinion of strange noises, how counterfeit
visions grow to be credited, of popish appearances, of pope Boniface. page 335.
Of the noise or sound of echo, of one that narrowly escaped drowning thereby,
etc. page 336. Of Theurgie, with a confutation thereof, a letter sent to me
concerning these matters. ibid. The copy of a letter sent unto me R. S. by T.
E. Master of art, and practiser both of physic, and also in times past, of
certain vain sciences; now condemned to die for the same: wherein he opens
the truth touching those deceits. page 337.
The xvi. Book.
A Conclusion, in manner of an epilog, repeating many of the former absurdities
of witchmongers conceits, confutations thereof, and of the authority of James:
Sprenger and Henry Institor inquisitors and compilers of M. Mal. Pa. 339. By
what means the common people have been made believe in the miraculous works
of witches, a definition of witchcraft, and a description thereof. page 340.
Reasons to prove that words and characters are but bables, and that witches
cannot do such things as the multitude supposes they can, their greatest
wonders proved trifles, of a young gentleman cousened. page 341. Of one that
was so bewitched that ^^ could read no scriptures but canonical, of a devil
that could speak no Latin, a proose that witchcraft is flat cousenage, page
343. Of the divinatio^ by the sive and sheeres, and by the book and key,
Hemingius his opinion thereof confuted, a babble to know what is a clock, of
certain iuggling knacks, manifold reasons for the overthrow of witches and
conjurors, and their cousenages, of the devils transformations, of Ferrum
candens, etc. p. 344. How the devil preached good doctrine in the shape of a
priest, how he was discovered, and that it is a shame (after confutatio^ of the
greater witchcrafts) for any man to give credit to the lesser points thereof.
page 347. A conclusion against witchcraft, in manner and form of an Induction.
page 348. Of natural witchcraft or fascination. page 349. Of enchanting or
bewitching eyes. ibid. Of natural witchcraft for love. etc. page 351. A
Discourse upon devils and spirits and first of philosophees opinions, also the
manner of their reasoning hereupon, and the same confuted. Page 352. Mine own
opinion concerning ^his argument, to the disproofe of some writers hereupon.
page 353. The opinion of Psellus touching spirits, of their several orders,
and a confutation of his errors therein. page 354. More absurd assertions of
Psellus and such others, concerning the actions and passions of spirits, his
definition of them, and of his experience therein. page 356. The opinion of
Fascius Cardanus touching spirits, and of his familiar devil. page 357. The
opinion of Plato concerning spirits, devils and angels, what sacrifices they
like best, what they fear, and of Socrates his familiar devil. page 358.
Platos nine orders of spirits and angels, Dionysius his division thereof not
much differing from the same, all disproved by learned divines. page 359. The
commencement of devils fondly gathered out of the 14. of Isaie, of Lucifer and
of his fall, the Gabalists, the Thalmudists and Schoolmens opinions of the
creation of angels. page 360. Of the contention between the Greek and Latin
church touching the fall of angels, the variance among papists themselves
herein, a conflict between Michael and Lucifer. page 361. Where the battle
between Michael and Lucifer was fought, how long it continued, and of their
power, how fondly papists and infidels write of them, and how reverently
Christians ought to think of them. p. 362. Whether they became devils which
being angels kept not their vocation, in Jude and Peter; of the f^nd opinions
of the Rabbis touching spirits and bugs, with a confutation thereof. page 363.
That the devils assaults are spiritual and not temporal, and how grossly
some understand and those parts of the scripture. page 365. The equivocation of
this word spirit, how diversely it is taken in the scriptures, where (by the
way) is taught that the scripture is not always as literally to be interpreted,
nor yet allegorically to be understoed. p. 366. That it pleased God to manifest
the power of his son and not of witches by miracles. page 367. Of the
possessed with devils. pa. 368. That we being not thoroughly informed of the
nature of devils and spirits, must satisfy our selves with that which is
dilivered us in the scriptures touching the same, how this word devil is to be
understood both in the singular and plural number, of the spirit of God and
the spirit of the devil, of tame spirits, of Ahab. page 369. Whether spirits
and souls can assume bodies, and of their creation and substance, wherein
writers do extremely contend and vary. pa. 370. Certain popish reasons
concerning spirits made of air, of day devils and night devils, and why the
devil loves no salt in his meat. pa. 371. That such devils as are mentioned
in the scriptures, have in their names their nature and qualities expressed,
with instances thereof. p. 372. Diverse names of the devil, whereby his nature
and disposition is manifested. page 373. That the idols or gods of the Gentiles
are devils, their diverse names, and in what affairs their labors and
authorities are employed, wherein also the blind superstition of the heathen
people is discovered. ibid Of the Romans chief gods called Dii selecti, and of
other heathen gods, their names and offices. page 375* Of diverse goods in
diverse countries. page 376. Of popish provincial gods, a comparison between
them and heathen gods, of physical gods, and of what occupation every popish
god is. page 377. A comparison between the heathen and papists, touching their
excuses for idolatry. page 379. The conceit of the heathen and the papists all
one in idolatry, of the council of Trent, a notable story of a hangman
arraigned after he was dead and buried, etc. page 380. A confutation of the
fable of the hangman, of many other feigned and ridiculous tales and
apparitions, with a reproof thereof. page 381. A confutation of Johannes
Laurentius, and of many others maintaining these sained and ridiculous tales
and apparitions, and what drives them away* of Moses and Helias appearance in
mount Thabor. page 383. A confutation of assuming of bodies, and of the serpent
that seduced Eve. page 384. The objection concerning the devils assuming of the
serpents body answered. page 385. Of the curse rehearsed Genes. 3. and that
place rightly expounded, John Calvines opinion of the devil. page 386. Mine
own opinion and resolution of the nature of spirits, and of the devil with
his properties. page 387. Against fond witchmongers, and their opinions
concerning corporal devils. page 388. A conclusion wherein the Spirit of
spirits is described, by the illumination of which spirit all spirits are to be
tried: with a confutation of the Pneumatomachi flatly denying the divinity of
this Spirit. page 389.
FINIS.

