The Power OF THE LORDS and COMMONS IN PARLIAMENT In point of JUDICATURE
briefly discoursed. At the Request of a Worthy Member of the House of Commons.
SIR,
TO give you a short an account of your Desires as I can; I must crave leave to
lay you, as a Foundation, the Frame or First Model of this State.

When, after the Period of the Saxon Time, Harald had advanced himself into the
Royal Seat; the Great men, (to whom but lately he was no more than Equal either
in Fortune or Power) disdaining this Act of Arrogance and Ambition, called in
William Duke of Normandy, (the most Active Prince of any in these Western
Parts, and renowned for the Victories that he had successfully Achieved
against the French King, then the most Potent Monarch in Europe.)

This Duke led along with him to this work of Glory many of the Younger Sons of
the best Families of Normandy, Picardy and Flanders; who, as Volunteers,
accompanied the undertaking of this Fortunate Man.

The Usurper being Slain, and the Crown, by War, gained; to ^^cure Certain to
his Posterity what he had so Suddenly gotten, he shared out his Purchase
retaining in Each County a Portion, to support the Sovereign Dignity, which was
styled Demenia Regni; (now the Ancient Demesnes) and assigning to others his
Adventures such Proportions, as engaged to himself the Dependency of their
Personal Service (such Lands only ezcepted, as in Free Alms, were allotted to
the Church) These were termed Barons Regis or the Kings Immediate
Freeholders; for the word Baro imported then no more.

As the King to These, so These to their Followers, Subdivided part of their
Shares into Knights-Fees, and their Tenants were called, Barons Comitis, or
the like; for we find, as in the King's Writ, so in Theirs, Baronibus suis al
Francois and Anglois, to their Barons, as well French as English; the Royal
Gifts, for the most part, extending to whole Counties or Hundreds; an Earl
being Lord of the One, and a Baron of the Inferior Donations to Lords of
Townships or Mannours.

And as the Land, so was also the Course of Judicature divided, even from the
Meanest to the Highest Portion; each Several had his Court of Law, preserving
still the Custom of our Ancestors the Saxons, who jura per Pagos reddebant,
distributed Justice throughout each Village: And these were termed Court
Barons, or the Freeholders Court, (twelve usually in number) who with the
Them, or Chief Lord, were Judges.

The Hundred-Court was next, where the Hundredus, or Aldermanus (Lord of the
Hundred) with the chief Lord of each Township within their Limits, judged.
God's People observed This Form; in the Public Centureonis and Decam
Judicabant Plebem omni tempore. Hundreds and Decennaties administering Justice
to the People at all times.

The County Court, or Generale Placitum, was the next; This was to supply the
Defect, or remedy the Corruption of the Inferior: For Vbi Curioe Dominorum
probantur defecisse, pertinet ad Vice Comitem Provinciarum; where the
Hundred-Court was found Defective, matters were referred to the Lord of the
County, The Judges here were Comites and Barons Comitatus, qui Liberas, in
hoc, Terras habeant; Earls and Barons of the County, that were Freeholders in
the same.

The last and Supreme Court, and proper to our Question; was Generale Placitum
apud London, the General Council at London; Vniversalis Synodus, the Universal
Synod, in Charters of the Conqueror, Capitalis Curiae, the Capital Court; by
Glanvil, Magnum and Commune Concilium coram Rege, and Magnatibus suis; the
Great and Common Council before the King and his Nobles.

In the Rolls of Henry the Third, It is not Stative, but summoned by
Proclamation. Edicitur Generale Placitum apud London (says the Book of
Abingdon) whither Duces, Principes, Satrapae, Rectores, and Causidici ex omni
part conftuxerunt ad istam Curiam, says Glanvil, the General Assembly was
called at London; whether Dukes, Princes, Peers, Rectors, and Lawyers resorted
from all Quarters: And Causes were referred propter aliquam dubitationem quoe
emergit in Comitatu cum Comitatus nescit dijudicare; upon any Question or
Difficulty which the County Court was not able to solve. Thus did Ethelweld,
Bishop of Winchester, transfer his Suit against Le ostine from the County ad
Generale Placitum, or the General Assembly: In the time of King Etheldred,
Queen Edgine against Goda, from the County appealed to King Etheldred at
London, Congregatis Principibus and Sapientibus Angliae; where the Princes and
Wise Men of the Land were met together. A Suit between the Bishops of
Winchester and Durham, in the time of S. Edward, Coram Episcopis and Princibus
Regni in praesentia Regis ventilata and finita; was handled and determined by
the Bishops and Princes of the Realm in the presence of the King. In the 10th
year of the Conqueror, Episcopi, Comites and Barons Regni potestate adversis
Provinciis, ad Vniversalem Synodum, pro causis audiendis and tractandis,
convocati; the Bishop, Earls and Barons of the Realm, etc. being assembled at
the Universal Council to hear and determine Controversies, (says the Book of
Westminster.) And This continued all along in the succeeding Kings Reign, until
toward the end of Henry the Third.

AS this Great Court or Council, (consisting of the King and Barons) ruled the
important Affairs of State, and controlled all Inferior Courts; so were there
certain Officers, whose transcendant Power seemed to be set for the
circumscribing the Execution of the Pinces will; as the Steward, Constable, and
Marshal, fixed upon Families in Fee, for many Ages. They (as Tribunes of the
People, or Ephori among the Lacedaemonians) growing by unmanly Courage terrible
to Monarchy, fell at the feet and mercy of the King, when the daring Earl of
Leicester was slain at Ev^sham.

This Chance, and the dear Experience H. the Third himself had made at the
Parliament at Oxford, in the fortieth year of his Reign; together with the
Memory of the many straits his Father was driven unto, especially at Rumny-Mead
near Stanes; brought this King to begin what his Successors fortunately
finished; in lessening the Strength and Power of his Great Lords. And this was
effected by searching into the Regality they had usurped over their peculiar
Sovereigns, whereby they were found to be (as the Book of St. Albans terms
them) quot Domini, tot Tyranni, how many Lords, so many Tyrants; and by
weakening that Influence and Sway which they carried in the Parliaments, by
commanding the Service of many Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, to the Great
Council.

Now began the frequent sending of Writs to the Commons; Their assent not only
used in Money, Charge, and making Laws, (for, before, all Ordinances passed by
the King and Peers) by their Consent also in Judgments of all Qualities whither
Civil or Criminal. In proof whereof I will produce some sew succeeding
Presidents out of Record.

When Adamor (that proud Prelate of Winchester, Lib. S. Alban. f l. 20. 7. An.
44. H. 3.
the Kings Half Brother) had aggrieved the State by his formidable Insolence;
he was banished by the joint sentence of the King, the Lords, and Commons. And
this appears expressly, by the Letter sent to Pope Alexander the Fourth. who
expostulated a Revocation of him from Exile because he was a Churchman, and so
not Subject to any Censure: In This the answer is Si Dominus Rex aut Majores
Regni hoc vellent (meaning his Revocation) Communitas tamen, Ipsius Ingressum
in Angliam jam Nullatenus sustineret; though the King and Lords should consent
to his Revocation, yet would the Commons never allow of it. The Peers Subscribe
this Answer with their Names, and Petrus de Mountford vice Totius Communitatis,
as Speaker, or Proctor of the Commons.

For by that Style Sir John Tiptoft (Prolocutor) affirms under his Arms the
Deed of Entail of the Crowns by King Hen. the fourth, Charta Orig. sub Sigil.
An. 8. H. 4.
in the eighth year of his Reign, for all the Commons.

The Banishment of the two Spencers in the fifteenth of Edw. 2d. Prelates,
Comites, and Barons, and les autres Peers de la Terre, and Communes de
Royalme, the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, and the rest of the Peers of the
Realm, and Commons of the Land, do give Consent and Sentence to the Revocation
and Reversement of the Former Sentence; the Lords and Commons accord; and so it
is expressed in the Roll.

In the first of Edw. the 3d. when Elizabeth the Widow of Sir John de Burgo,
complained in Parliament, Rot. parl. 15. Ed. 3, vel. 2,
that Hugh Spencer the Younger, Robert Boldock, and William Cliffe, his
Instruments had by Duresse forced her to make a Writing to the King, whereby
she was despoiled of all her Inheritance; Sentence is given for her in these
words; Pur ceo que avis est al Rvesques, Counts, and Barons, and autres
Grandes, and a tout Cominalte de la Terre, que le discript est fait contre Ley
and tout manner de Raison, si faist le dit Escript per agard del Parliament
dampue alloquens al livre a la dit Elixabeth, Forasmuch as it appears unto
the Bishops, Earls, and Barons, and all the Comonalty of the Land, that the
said Writing was made against all Law and Reason, it is adjudged by Parleament,
etc.

In An 4 Ed. 3 it appears by a Letter to the Pope that to the Sentence given
against the Earl of Kent the Commons were Parties as will as the Lords and
Peers for the King directed their Porcedings in these words Comitibus
Eagnatibus Baronibus and aliis de Communitate dicti Regni ad parliementum illud
congregatis injunximus ut super his discernerent and judicarent quod Rationi
and justitioe conveniret habere proe Oculis solum Deum qui eum concordi unanimi
sententia tanquam Reum criminis lo so Majestatis mori adjudicarent ejus
sententia etc. Prela. Parliam. 1. Ed. 3. Rot. 11.
We have commanded the Earls Peers Barons and others of the Commonalty of the
said Realm assembled in Parliament to determine in this matter according to
Reason and Justice having only God before their Eyes; and by an unanimous
consent they have sentenced him to death as guilty of High Treason

When in the 50th year of Ed. 3. the Lords had pronounced the Sentence against
Richard Lions otherwise than the Commons agreed, Parl. An. 5. Edw. 3.
they appealed to the King, and had Redress, and the Sentence entered to their
Desires.

When, in the first Year of Richard the Second, William Weston, and John
Jennings, were Arraigned in Parliament for surrendering certain Forts of the
King's; the Commons were Parties to the Sentence against them given, Parl. An.
1. Rich. 2.11.3.8. and 3.5.
as appears by a Memorandum annexed to that Record, In the first of Hen. the
Fourth, although the Commons refer, by Protestation, the pronouncing of the
Sentence of Deposition against King Richard the Second unto the Lords; yet are
they equally Interressed in it; as appears by the Record: For there are made
Proctors, or Commissioners, for the whole Parliament, one Bishop, one Abbot,
one Earl, one Baron, and two Knights!Gray and Erpinghan) for the Commons. And
to infer that because the Lords pronounced the Sentence, the point of Judgment
should be only Theirs, were as absurd, as to conclude that no Authority was
vested in any other Commissioner of Oyer and Terminer, than in the Person of
that Man only that speaks the Sentence.

In the 2d. of Hen. 5. The Petition of the Commons imports no less than a
Right they had to Act and Assent to all things in Parliament; and so it is
answered by the King. And had not the adjourned-Roll of the Higher-House been
left to the sole Entry of the Clerk of the Vpper-House, (who, either out of
neglect to observe due Form, or on set purpose to obscure the Commons Right,
and to flatter the Power of those who he immediately served, omitted them,)
there would have been frequent Examples of all Times to clear this doubt, and
to preserve a just Interest to the Commonwealth. And how conveniently it suits
with Monarchy to maintain This Form, lest others of that well-fram'd Body knit
under one Head, should swell too great and Monstrous, may be seen with half an
Eye; it being (in my Opinion) at least equally Liable to suffer a fresh under
an Aristocracy, as a Democracy,

SIR, I am Your most humble Servant. H. S.

FINIS.

