ROMULUS AND HERSILIA; OR, THE SABINE WAR.

A TRAGEDY Acted at the Dukes THEATER.

Militat omnis Amans, and habet sua Castra Cupido. Ovid. LONDON, Printed for D.
Brown, at the Black-Swan and Bible without Temple Bar, and T. Benskin in St.
Brides Churchyard, Fleet Street, 1683.

PROLOGUE
Spoken by Mrs. Butler.
HOw we shall please ye now I cannot say;
But Sirs, 'Faith here is News from Rome to day;
Yet know withal, we have no such Packets here,
As you read once a Week from Monkey Care.
But 'stead of that Lewd Stuff (that clogs the Nation)
Plain Love and Honor; (tho quite out of fashion;
Ours is a Virgin Rome, long, long, before
Pious Geneva Rhetoric called her Whore;
For be it known to their Eternal Shames,
Those Saints were always good at calling Names:
Of Scarlet Whores let 'em their Wills devise,
But let 'em raise no other Scarlet lies;
Lies that advance the Good Old Cause, and bring
Into Contempt the Prelate with the KING.
Of what will such vile Brutes be now afraid,
When Rats and Weazles gnaw the Lyon's Beard?
And then in Ignoramus Holes they think,
Like other Vermin, to lie close, and stink.
What have ye got, ye Conscientious Knaves,
With all your Fancied Power, and Bully Braves?
With all your standing to it; your Zealous Furies;
Your Lawless Tongues, and Arbitrary Juries?
Your Burlesque Oaths, when one Green-Ribbon-Brother,
In Conscience will be Perjured for another?
Your Plots, Cabals; Your Threats, Association,
Ye shame, Ye very Nuisance of the Nation,
What have ye got but one poor Word? Such Tools
Were Knaves before; to which you have added Fools.
Now I dare swear, some of you Whigsters say,
Come on, now for a swinging Tory Play.
But, Noble Whigs, pray let not those Fears start ye,
Nor fright hence any of the Sham Sheriffs Party;
For, if you will take my censure of the story,
It is as harmless as e're came before ye,
And writ before the times of Whig and Tory.
The PERSONS.
Romulus, King of Rome. Hostilius, A Noble Roman his Friend. Spurius Tarpeius,
Commander of a Fort in Rome. Tatius, General of the Sabines. Curtius, A
Commander of Note in the Sabine Army.
WOMEN.
Hersilia, Daughter of Tatius, and Wife to Romulus, Feliciana, Her Sister,
young and Innocent, Tarpeia, Daughter of Tarpeius, Sabine Ladies attending
Hersilia.
Portia, Cloe, Cornelia,
Soldiers, and Attendants.
The Scene Rome. Romulus and Hersilia, OR THE Sabine War.
ACT. I.
SCENE I.
Romulus, Hersilia, Hostilius, and Attendance. Romans WHY weeps Hersilia? What
malicious sorrow envies the world the luster of those eyes, and draws a Cloud
over beauties richest treasure? Has love appeared injurious? Do you repent the
blessings you have given your Romulus? And do I seem to you too, the hated
Ravisher your severe Father makes me?


Hers. Pardon my dearest Lord, pardon these tears, it is the soft flame of love,
here at my heart, makes these warm drops distillt is for you! Had I less value
for my Romulus, I had not known these sorrows. Witness you Heavens! I wish I
had a voice might reach the ear of every Roman, every Sabine, nay through all
Italy, while thus I vindicate my Romulus from any force on, me, but that of
love. You Gods! was this a Rape! no it was all consent; and all mutual design.
But what is love? what is Truth? what is Justice? when my Flint-hearted Father
calls it a Rape, and vows revenge?


Romans And is this all, my Love, are these the fears that cause the precious
shower? If this be all, stay those dear streams, whose every drop's a pearl of
value to redeem a Captive King. I Honor Tatius as Hersilia's Father; but if he
brings us War, and as a Foe approaches Rome, swelling with empty threats, I Will
tell him, in the language of my Father Mars, I slight his anger, smile at his
Revenge.


Hers. But I must be unhappy; whoever wins, you must lose sufficiently: Whether
my Father or my Husband bleeds, still I am wounded, good Heavens! why have you
made the sweets of love ever to be allayed with so much bitterness?


Romans You kill me with your tears: My love, my love, would you have me weep
too? Forbear, or I shall lose my Manhood, while all that is Roman in me melts
away to see you thus desolved in sorrows; what would you have me do? Sweetest
of all thy Sex, at your Command I Will fall at Tatius feet, and bid him cut my
head off, because I love his Daughter more then ten thousand lives.


Hers. Forbid it all you Gods; no, live my Lord, live to defend Hersilia, your
Hersilia, from a cruel Father, who would not let her live, that is, not love
her Romulus: Live to defend that Romulus, Hersilia's better self, from an
unjust invader: Methinks I feel inspired a courage truly brave and truly Roman;
let the malicious world assault me with all its fury, while I am thus enthroned
in your dear Arms, I am secure of Fortune.


Romans Ay! now I Am blessed; now, now I Reign indeed, now at this omen, I see my
Infant Rome lift her aspiring head above the Nations, while all the Ocean and
the remotest Isles dance at her smiles, and tremble at her frowns. O thou
brighter Venus, thou more Majestic Juno, can you say this to me and not
transfer at the same time the whole worlds Empire hither? Hostilius! Friend!
why are you silent? speak my best Friend, am I not truly great, can there be
greater?


Host. (aside) Oh tormenting Question! How shall I answer this and not discover
a base unfriendly envy? Away degenerate Passion, I Will tear thee from my long
abused heart, or tear that heart out.


Romans What means this silence? Does ill fate appear, in all its various forms
of sorrow to me? Here drowned in tears, and there in silent groans. She cannot
sure keep long from me, since she has made so near approaches. You two divide
my Soul: The best of Women, and the worthiest Friend; and do you strive whose
grief shall most afflict me?


Host. Forgive me, Sir, or rather pity me, it is I am only wretched amidst this
common Joy, oppressed with an ill timed and causeless Melancholy. It Is a disease
I know; let it not be infectious, why should you be concerned to hear me sigh.
Are not you blessed in your Hersilias love; you are an Emperor, a God in that,
and you deserve it which of all the immortal beings would not change Heavens
with Romulus? Would you contemplate the Celestial Glories? You have 'em here.
Would you see brighter Stars than those above? behold 'em in these eyes. Would
you have Music far beyond that of the higher Orbs? Hersilias voice shall give
it. Would you be immortal and taste Ambrosia? You have it in these Lips:

The diet of the Gods is palled and course to that,
But I Am a Devil, damned to despair and silence.
[Aside.
Romans Can I be happy, and Hostilius wear a Mourning look? My Joys should be all
yours, or mine your sorrows, if I Am thus highly blessed, (and sure I am) partake
of all my Fortune. Command, Rule, Reign, over my Rome and me. Have I a City,
Subjects, Crown, and my Friend not the same? Is not Hostilius Romulus, and
Romulus Hostilius? Take and enjoy then all that makes me happy, but leave your
mournful silence.


Host. (Aside) Oh Royal bounty! oh unheedful kindness, he knows not what he
says, nor I to answer to this invidious Friendship.


Enter Feliciana. Feli. Oh Sister, O dear Hersilia, what will become of us.


Hers. Why Sister, what surprising fright has caused this Question?


Feli. The City's all alarmed: While from the Tarrace yonder, I saw the
distant-hills toward the west-gate covered with Armed Sabines drawing this
way: I hear they come to have us back, alive or dead; are these the effects of
your Heroic Passions! indeed Hersilia, tho I respect you dearly, you had not
had my Company, if I had thought I shoud have dyed for Love.


Romans Innocently pretty! fear not, Feliciana, these are but shows of terror,
there is nothings real in 'em. Come Hostilius, let us go view the Enemy, and
give such orders as may secure the Ladies fears, and make the Sabines know,
Romans and Lovers are not to be Conquered.


[ Exeunt Romans Host. Feli. Sister, how great a change do we find here from the
still life we amongst the Sabines led, while at our Fathers Silvan Palace,
there, frighter from love, and seldom seen of Men, we spent so many days in
the adjoining Groves, that all the wild Inhabitants knew us as part of them,
the Thorstle, Nightingale, and little Redbrest, with all the other pretty
feathered Quire, at our approach would flock about, and fill the Air with a
complete and cheerful consort: The speckled Dear would fearless bring their
Fawns, and seek their food from me.


Hers. True Feliciana, those were our softer hours.
Thoughtless in that calm state we past the year,
And knew not what it was to love or fear.
But now I have learnt both; since the brave Romulus first met me in those
shades: (Ah fatal hour, yet hour I still must love) we often met, and full of
angry tears at the approaching night as often parted. You know Feliciana, how
we dispairing ever to procure the severe Tatius to approve our love, the
generous Youth of Rome, by my consent, forced us, and all our Train of Sabine
Ladies, from the great feast and Sacred Rights of Consus.


Feli. I know too much: Would I had never known more then the harmless joys of
our own dwelling. Widdow'd for loss of me; how will the Turtles grieve, which I
so often fed, and kissed in feeding? Were they now here, methinks, I could
instruct 'em to sigh, and Coo, and mourn, with better Emphesis, then their own
feathered Parents in a Grove of Cypress.


[Weeps. Hers. Alas my pretty Sister, weep not however. If the sweet toiles of
Lovers are uneasy to you, you may return. Command a Chariot and a Convoy when
you please; why shoud I force my Sister to partake my troubles.


Feli. Sure Hersilia cannot have so mean a thought of me, to think I Would leave
her, no I Will die here: Yet wear you not my Sister, I coud not go from Rome. I
know not what it is, but something here, about my heart, afflicts me, and often
pants, and heaves, and almost stops my breath; and will not suffer me so much
as wish to be again amongst the Sabines and my once loved pleasure: Of late I
always weep and sigh when private, yet know not why: I seek to be alone, hate
Company, yet know not well the cause of this uneasy humor.


Hers. Why these are all the innocent signs of stifled Love.


Feli. (sighing) Indeed it may be so: Had it been any thing but that, I might
perhaps have known the cause, and sought a cure; but love's so great a
stranger, I cannot: So much as guess at his proceedings.


Her. How long have you been thus?


Fell. E're since the willing force that brought us hither. I need not tell you
(for you well remember) how at those public Shows where we were taken,
Prisoners of Love, when at the signal given Your Romulus seized you, and every
Roman youth, that Lady whom his choice or chance presented: Hostilius, for my
quality no doubt, as being your Sister, not for my person, made me his care,
and entertained me then with so much gallantry, and such obliging kindness,
that I have never since had any ease but when I see him, yet I had rather die
than he should know it.


Hers. Fear not dying my Felciana, I know Hostilius, by his silent sighs, melts
with loves kindly flames as much as you.


Fell. That, that is my torment --: for silly as I am, I see he loves, but see
withal, I Am not the Object. Since that dear time of our first encounter, he
never treated me with one kind word; But wheresoever I Am present, he looks
another way, and sighs, and never speaks to me.


Hers. Pretty Feliciana weep no more; but trust your Cares to me, I will find
out a Cure, for this sweet innocent Passion. Mean time, let us seek my Romulus:
I have not patience to endure his absence: I know his friend is with him too:
Come Sister, you shall see Hostilius.


Fell. O hold, I dare not Sister: Since I have told you all my weakness for
Hostilius, I am ashamed to let you see me see him.


Hers. Away you foolish Innocent, remove
Such idle scruples, or never thrive in Love.

[Exeunt. ACT. I. SCENE II.
Enter Romulus, Hostilius, Spurius Tarpeius. Romans THE Western Gate that fronts
the Enemy, with the adjoining Fort, Tarpeius, I commit to your experienced
Loyalty and Conduct.


Sp. Tar. It is an honor Sir, which when I give you cause to wish undone, take
off my head.


Romans Hostilius, to you belongs all the Command I have my self in my own City.


Hostil. Why should you be so prodigal of favors! Why should you lavish thus,
my best of friends, what Heaven and your own merits have conspired to make you
only worthy of! On me, on me too: One that can taste no happiness, one whose
dull sense has lost all relish of a blessing, one born to be a wretch, a cursed
unhappy wretch!


Romans This is extravagancy, sure friend you are not well.


Hostil. My tongue too much betrays me, would I coud spit it out -- I must
confess, great Sir, my mind of late is much distempered: Which often makes my
language out of order. It is a causless transiant Cloud, I know, and soon will
over. I beg you take no notice of it. I am too sensible of my own imperfection,
and am ashamed to have it known to others.


Romans It Is reason nobly urged, I Am silent -- but see Hersilia. --


Enter Hersilia, Feliciana, Tarpeia, etc. Romans Be safe my Love as your own wish
can fancy: Nor let the pretty Feliciana fear, since Rome is now so guarded,
that the Sabines may as well hope to storm the Cloud as prevail here: No arms
but those of friendship can pass these Walls.


Her. I think, my Lord your cause will raise an Army even of Women. Tarpeia
talks so bravely here, and in such Martial Language, that were we all like her
we alone were sufficient, not only to defend our selves, but to subdue all the
adjacent Enemies of Rome.


Romans Your Conquest, sweet Hersilia, have been already greater: And for the
fair Tarpeia since she appears so brave, she too shall have a share in our
Command -- Tarpeius, let your Daughter act as Leiutenant in your absence: This
is the Ladies War, and why should then that Sex be barred to share the honors
of it?


Enter a Soldier. Sol. Sabinus Curtius Sir, sent from the Enemy, attends
without.


Romans Admit him.


Fell. Now Sister should this War, scarce yet begun, end in a treaty?


Hers. As I Am a Sabine by my Birth, I wish a Peace with honor, but I am more a
Roman by my inclination than to desire it basely.


Enter Curtius. Cur. Tatius the just, to the great Romulus, has sent these
terms of Peace --


Host. He speaks as if we were already Conquered!


Romans Suffer him, good Hostilius. -- Go on Sir


Cur. He says the Sabines never yet loved war merely for the inhumane act of
killing. It Is your own selves then that destroy your selves, if you refuse him
Justice; he offers therefore, e're yet the Sword has been unkind to Roman
Mothers, e're widdowed Matrons, with hands up heaved to Heaven, name you, and
curse the cause that robbed them of their Husbands, e're Orphan Babes, like
Callow Birds, the old one killed abroad, dye mourning for their food; 'ere
these and thousand worse events of war arrive, he offers to withdraw his arms,
if you restore Hersilia and the other Ladies.


Host. Restore Hersilia?


Cur. Who against the Law of Nations, against all the rights of Civil life, you
first invited to your public Entertainments, and then from thence so foully
ravished. Our General farther says, if after this your merits can prevail with
their respective Parents, to gain 'em for your Wives, you shall have liberty to
use such formal means in your address, as peace and Love, not brutal force
allow of.


Romans Tell the most Noble Tatius, he is now our Father-in-law, and we as such
shall treat him; how e're his, passion bids him act with us. Hersilia's not
ashamed to call her Romulus Husband; and can her Romulus fear to call her Wife,
and as such keep her here? No, should he bring a greater force than that which
made the ten years Seige at Troy, here she shoud live and Reign, secure, and
better guarded then their Palladium: And for the other Ladies, (in all but
thirty, and most Attendants to Hersilia) they have all found by their own free
Election, Husbands or humble Lovers of the best of Rome; I cannot force the
property of others, nor can I in civility bid 'em remove, where their own
choice and love has made 'em settle; besides it were impertinent and base for
us to quit the love which they themselves have given, and make a new Court over
again to their old Parents; as for the foul act which you charge me with, and
call a Rape, Hersilia's self, whose every sillable's a sacred truth, can purge
that scandal.


Hers. Yes; Heaven and I can Witness, so can Feliciana, that 'twas no force but
a confederate plot 'twixt my loved Lord and me I knew too well how little kind
my Father was to all the Romans, how vilely he has spoke of their original, and
the Asylum, with reason therefore my Lord and I despaired of his assent, and
used this means to Crown our loves: Are your demands then just or Honorable
that seek to make a Husband quit his Wife?


Host. Restore Hersilia? Did he not say e're while restore Hersilia? No, I will
first my self fight your whole Army, take all the wounds ten thousand swords
can give me, challenge every weapon in all your Camp to do its office here,
Cut, Gash, and mangle every part about me, till there is not left one place to
make a wound on, and I at last drown in a Sea of my own blood, e're you shall
have Hersilia.


Feli. (aside) Sure he mistakes the name, he shoud have said Feliciana; my love
would have it so. How happy had I been, if this concern, this high excess of
favor had appeared for me, but now how wretched; O I shall faint, conduct me,
sweet Cornelia, to my Chamber.

[Exit.
Romans Your friendship, dear Hostilius, carries you beyond your temper; my cause
too far transports you.


Cur. If these be your resolves, I have command to tell you, War must force the
right which you deny us.


Romans If we must fight, where we had rather Love, and use those arms to kill
which should embrace, know Curtius we are ready either way: Nor let your
Sabines think to find our courage less than our love successful. We know the
way to make your Men as well as Women Captive. Tarpeius see him safe without
the walls: Farewell Sir.


Host. Since you demand to have Hersilia back, I am no Man of words, I cannot
argue whether the thing be just which you demand, but if you are brave meet me
in the next skirmish, and then like Men and Soulders we will dispute it. This if
you dare. --


Cur. I smile at these last words; I dare do more than I dare speak, I am a
Coward in my boasting. I long to meet you, Sir, till then I am your Servant.


[ Exit Cur. and Tarpeius. Tarp. Gallantly answered, and with temper; methinks
I love him for it, I wish I were a Sabine Maid, or he a Roman.

Aside.
Romans Come my Hersilia, while we have you, we cannot doubt the fate of Rome;
Fortune and Victory must act for us, having so dear a pledge: The love inspired

By you, a stronger power and more assistance brings
To our Triumphant cause, than all the aid,
I justly may expect from Mars my Father.
Then how successless must the Sabines prove
Opposing both the Gods of War, and Love.

[Ex. all but Hostilius. Host. But more successless I, who fight against
Two such almighty passions as Love and Friendship:
Ye Gods! What have I done to merit such a torment?
While these two Heavenly flames strive in my breast,
It Is hell to me: I Am damned in the contest.
But why should I look on, as unconcerned
While Civil War within me rends me peice-meal;
No, I will be a Monarch over my self,
And crush the Rebels. Away thou soft seducer Love,
Tyrant and Traitor; I am a Roman,
And will keep my Friendship sacred.
Who can offend in thought, so sweet a Friend
As is the Mighty Romulus? How blind is real kindness,
He could not see my Passion for Hersilia,
When my love raved but thought it his concern:
O innocent obliging Goodness! I wish
The Sword of Curtius, when we shall meet,
May find a way to revenge Romulus,
And peircing this offending bosom, end
Those thoughts that dared to injure such a friend.
[Exit.
ACT. II.
Scena Prima.
A Field before the Walls of Rome. Drums and Trumpets. Enter Curtius and other
Sabines. Cur. I Would not have this skirmish grow into a Battle,
Ho, Lausus,
Bid those Rutilian succors halt till further Orders.

1. Sab. The Romans, Sir, draw from their works apace*

Cur. No matter, I know they are too brave
To use their odds, --
O are you come Sir.

Enter Hostilius and other Romans. Host. (To his party) Stand here; approach no
nearer
As you respect your lives.

Cur. (To his) Withdraw to the same distance,
And leave me single to my Generous Enemy.

Host. Curtius, I see you are Noble and dare be brave;
I ought in Justice then to ask your Pardon,
That I e're questioned it: they were rash words,
And I repent 'em.

Cur. Spare your Apologies. First try what truth
Is in the appearance. If I indeed have Courage,
You may have cause enough, Sir, to repent,
But if you find me shrink chastize me for it.

Host. The same for me -- Come, Sir, this is for Romulus
The best of Men, and sweet Hersilia's cause.

[They fight, and pause. Cur. Sure Hostilius, you but dally, and hardly think me
Such an Enemy as may deserve you utmost force.
Know then if you are Romulus Champion,
I am his secret Rival. I love Hersilia,
Tho she her self yet never knew it,
And with so strong a Passion,
That were not Tatius for this war; should he
Forget his Daughter, yet I my self
Would raise an Army to redeem my Mistress,
This sure will make you fight in earnest.

Host. Unhappily discovered! O, I am wounded
In the most tender part about me; thou have
Unkindly robbed me of my Honor;
That which I late designed my dear Friends quarrel
Is now my own; my boasted Friendship, spite
Of all my reason, basely yields to love,
The near extinguished flame rages again,
Now I have found a Rival. Hold Curtius;
Let me reward your secret with a another,
That Is yet unknown to all the world;
I love Hersilia, (I wish I could not say)
Equal to Romulus; and if my flame
So hardly yield to what I owe to him,
The Good, the Great, the God-born Romulus,
How can I hear thy Claim? Have at thy heart.

Cur. Guard well thy own, Hostilius, my heart can know
No wounds; but what Hersilia gave,

[Fight, both Wounded. Cur. How just and how invincible so e're,
You think your cause, I see, 'twill not protect you:
You are not invulnerable. You can bleed,
As well as I.

Host. It is my glory, Curtius!
I never loved my blood till now, that it appears
So ready to be spent in her dear cause
For whom I have it. Flow, flow for ever
You immortal Fountains; the streams you see, O Sabine,
Are not the Ebbs of life but springs of love.

Cur. That shall be thus determined: --

[Fight. 1. Sab. Should we stand here and see the noble Curtius
Fight to death?

2. Sab. It is not reason, His life's not all his own but partly ours.

1. Romans See, yonder Sabines move to assist their Leader:
We must not see the brave Hostilius fall oppressed by number.

[The Soldiers draw to their Principals, and all engage. Enter Romulus. Romans My
Friend engaged and wounded; it was a lucky
Chance that brought me to this quarter.

[He engages; the Sabines beaten off. Host. Ill timed assistance! had not he
appeared
Either I might have killed or dyed;
Fortune I cannot thank thee for this kindness.
[Aside.
Romans Still brave and still in noble danger, why
Are you so covetous of Honor, Friend,
As thus to steal it from your Romulus,
And not acquaint me with the envied purchase?
Why that emphatick sigh? I know it is not your wounds.

Host. A wound how deep soever, was never worth it.
But these are slight.

Romans Slight as they are, I Will urge the cause no further
Till I have seen 'em dressed, --

Host. I Would rather make 'em wider; why do we not
Pursue the Enemy? Let me but once again
Engage with Curtius, and I will never ask
Another favor.

Romans You shall not go --
[Holds him. I never used my power upon my friend till now:
Indeed you shall not go.

Host. Under how grievous a restraint am I,
Who can with pleasure neither live nor dye?

[Exeunt. SCENE II. The Palace.
Enter Tarpeia, Portia. Port. WHat a sad sight Tarpeia have we had
From yonder Tarrace? The memory still afflicts me.
Methinks it is a most undecent thing,
To see brave men, whom nature sure ordained
For better ends, and more to her advantage,
Like Tigers fight and wory one another.

Tarp. You tremble Portia, that which chills your blood
Has heated mine to noble Emulation,
Had I been man I had not stood with you,
Idle spectator of the brave engagement
But run among 'em, wild, to the thickest action.

Port. Sure you but jest, can any woman have
Thoughts so extravagant --

Tarp. Nature as wronged me when she made me Woman:
Or else when I was formed, she heedless and hastily,
Snatched the next Soul for me, and left my Sex Imperfect.

Port. Love is our Province, Women know no Wars,
But of the passions: Hope, Fear, soft desires,
Sorrows and sudden joys, make all our Battles.
Happy are you Tarpeia, since your heart,
Thus armed, seems proof against that passion
Which kills, and even damns so many of us.

Tarp. Would it were so, my Portia, as you fancy. --
But waveing this, I prithee tell me freely,
Which you esteem the most deserving Men,
Our Romans or your Sabines?

Port. Ay this I like indeed, I Would rather talk
Of gallant Men, than see 'em fight and kill. --
By Juno, then Tarpeia, I esteem
Your Roman Mien; it speaks a Soul more great,
A finer shape, a face more pleased, a look
More amorous than ours.

Tarp. Come, this is all but Complement to me.
Methinks your Sabines much excel our Men,
Solid, Majestical, of such a look
As speaks 'em truly just, and even tempered,
More noble than to give a wrong, but when
Received, duly requiting.

Port. Call 'em severe, Tarpeiu, and revengeful.
O did you know how strict they guard their Women,
Seldom or never seen abroad, but at
A Sacrifice or public Rites to Heaven:
Thus Tatius kept his Daughters, a Man so just
He knows no mercy. --

Tarp. -- But what of Curtius, prithee?

Port. You have named the only he of all our Nation,
That's like a Man indeed, such as I Would have him:
Young, Courtly, Brave, well made, and Noble born,
Mighty obliging, and of as mighty Courage.

Tarp. She reads my closer thoughts, before she spoke
My Soul had framed this Character of Curtius.
[aside.
Port. But for that one we have a world of others,
Who though indu'd with virtue upon virtue,
Are yet of such a sullen gravity,
And so morosely wise you would think 'em out
Of humor with the world, yet more contented
In a small House and Garden, than Kings in Courts.

Tarp. But Curtius --

Port. Seems more a Roman, than a Sabine; he
Scorns the low thoughts of dull Philosophy;
And since the Gods gave him a Princes Soul,
He overlooks the fate of a Plebeian, --
Rome, Rome must Rule the World! it cannot be otherwise,
Since she alone can show a thousand such.
I fancy Romulus. --

Tarp. More, more, of Curtius: I love to hear thee speak;
You paint so prittily the Man your favor.

Port. I favor him, Tarpeia? alas that needs not;
He little values any of our favors.
For he had never any Mistress yet;
(At least, that we can guess) that is his chief fault.

Tarp. I like this best of all; I have no Rival.
[aside.
Enter Cornelia, Singing. Use your Youth, use your Youth and happy hours,
while they remain:
Cheerfully, Cheerfully, while they are ours,
the blessings entertain,
For time once lost can never be found again.
For time once, etc.
Tarp. See Portia, see, how unconcerned she seems,
Careless of fate while the alarms of war,
Or feircer love, disquiet all her Sex.
Have you no heart Cornelia?

Cor. Not to admit of love, or fear, Tarpeia:
The Boy-God never dared to wound my breast:
And if I Am armed against a God, why should
I fear a Soldier, -- Portia the Queen asks for you.

Port. Then we must part: Farewell Tarpeia.

[ Ex. Port. Cor. Tarp. Farewell; farewell Conelia, ah happy Girl,
In her own Childish innocence secure;
She never dreams the smart which I endure.
[Exit
SCENE. III.
Romulus, Hostilius. Romans HOW long, Hostilius, must I sue in vain,
To know the cause why I am thus afflicted,
That is, why you are thus afflicted? Could I
Have kept a secret from my Friend so long?
Could I have let him beg so long for that
Which should be his without so much as asking?
(For every Friend, or is, or ought to be
A confident) nor should I care to know it,
But only in design to ease your sorrow;
Had you a secret cause of joy, I should
Not then have importuned you for it.
Why stand you thus, silent, and almost senseless,
As you would say, I cannot answer what
You urge, and will not what you ask?

Host. O worthyest of Mankind! O Prince too good
To be my Friend! I would not have you love,
But pity me, and let me still be silent.

Romans I cannot, must not, dare not, suffer it,
Good Hostilius. --

Host. Then you will not pity me,
I see I must appear foul and unworthy
In denying, or still more foul and more
Unworthy in Confessing. O mistaken goodness!
When you shall see my Soul naked and bare,
Of all its silent vernish, when you have stripped
Off the disguise, you will find so base an object,
So poor and so degenerate a Roman.
And such a Monster of abused Friendship,
You Will start at the discovery, and curse me for it.

Romans Who but Hostilius, durst have said this of Hostilius?
Or do you aim the unworthy Character,
At some less dear and less deserving Roman?

Host. I do not know another Roman that deserves it.
No Sir, it is I: I am the unworthy owner.

Romans Come all this is false, and feigned to put me off:
I see through your pretenses, if will not do
Hostilius; and I must know your discontent.

Host. Suppose then --
(For such a Crime, from one obliged like me
Ought not to be discovered but by supposition)
Suppose I had agreed with Tatius,
To give the City up, betray the Army,
And make my Friend his Prisoner --.

Romans I could forgive it.

Host. Suppose I had designed, prompted by my Ambition,
To stab my Friend basely, and when ungarded,
Usurp his Crown, and make my self the head of Rome --

Romans It Is all impossible, but still I should forgive it.

Host. Higher yet: Suppose I love Hersilia,
Your, your Hersilia, love her to enjoy her,
For that dear end, suppose I Would be a Traitor,
A Devil; repine and covet those sweet joys,
Which only you can merit, envy all
The Heaven which you possess in her embraces.
How say you now? Now am not I a Villian?

Romans No, but a foul desembler of a foul, false scandal,
Do not I know Hostilius? I Am sure he cannot
Think a Crime like these; I know he cannot,
Since my Remus dyed,
I never had so near a Friend; Remus and I,
Were not such Twins in blood, as we two in
Affection. Are not we Aeneas and Achates?

Host. It Is true, I know you are God born like him,
As good, as great a friend as he; you are
The more Divine Aeneas: But where is now,
Faithful Achates? O I am not worthy.
I must confess all that I said was false,
But that which most concerned you; I love Hersilia:
Aye, there it is, that strikes the very root
Of friendship; now I Am sure you cannot forgive me,
Nor is it fit you should, I cannot forgive my self.
As good and God like as you are you should
Not stand unmoved thus, like a Temple Idol;
But draw and sheath your Sword here in this breast,
That dared to harbor such injurious passion:
Come, Sir, you see how wide my bosom opens
To receive your Justice; I Will meet your Sword,
And pull it home with my own hands, --
Are you still motionless? I shall not think
You love Hersilia as you ought, unless
You kill me.

Romans A Friend, who can confess offending thoughts
And, like you, hate 'em, e're they grow to action,
Pleading against himself, with so much Rigor,
Is still a friend. Our inclinations
Are not at our Election; but he, that can
Like you govern his rebel thought by the
Strict rules of Justice and true reason,
Ought to be loved, and honored as a King.
Be reconciled Hostilius to your self,
For you are still as dear to me as ever:
Hostilius's Honor and Hersilia's Virtue,
Admit no Jealous scruples.

Host. Is this your Sentence on Hersilia's Lover!
Do you thus treat a Rival? unheard of friendship!
Mark then what I decree with better Justice,
For my own Penance. Since you now have known
How false my passions are, how strong that love
That ought not to be named; to free you of suspicion
I Will leave your Rome, for voluntary Exile,
And never see again my Romulus, nor his Hersilia.

Romans Must I be punished then, because you say
You have offended; must I lose so dear
A Friend, because that Friend thinks he had wronged me?
We will not part, I Will lose an eye before
Hostilius; no, I will hazard all the ills
His love can do me.

Host. Will you out-rival me in Honor too?
Will you not let me have that Mistress free?
O, you are cruel; --
If you were kind you would not keep me here,
Ever in sight of Heaven, yet in a state
Of such Damnation, I cannot hope
(Nor ought I) to enjoy it.

Romans I Will woe Hersilia to smile upon you;
I know she will for my sake, --

Host. I dare not trust my self before her smiles,
They will unhinge my virtue, besides
A smile, tho much above my merit, yet to
A love like mine, gives little satisfaction, --
And yet she ought not to give more, -- and yet, --
O I am wild, the more I think of this
The more I am confounded. Thus low I beg
[Kneels. You Would let me leave you. By all the ties
Of friendship; by all the love you owe
Hersilia, allow my absence; for only that
Can cure my phrenzy:

Romans To beg with such concern is to command,
Where the request is to a love like mine.
If you will go Hostilius, you have your liberty;
But let this dear embrace, and this, convince you,
That when we separate, you carry with you
The better half of your loved Romulus.

Host. Witness, sweet Heavens, with what constraint I leave him!
No cause but one could make so sad divorce.
To be a Friend, I leave my Friend for ever.
I Will now to unfrequented Woods, and seek
To lose Mankind; for after Romulus,
Who would know other Men? and who would see
A Woman that has once known Hersilia?
Farewell thou God of Friendship; once more Farewell.
[Embrace. I go imperfect, You keep back my heart:
With such a groan the Soul and body part.
[Exit.
Romans He Is gone.
O sacred power of Love! was e're affection
Like this of his? to quit his Mistress, for his Friend,
Nay more, to quit both Friend and Mistress rather
Than injure me? O truly Noble Roman!
Who can his passion in due terms express?
Had he not loved amiss, his love were less.

Enter Hersilia and Feliciana, Attendants. Feli. Why did you bring me hither
Sister? Here Is no Hostilius.

Hers. Would you have dyed in silence! Should I let you
Weep by your self, till I had lost my Sister,
And in a Fountain full of Maiden tears
Found all the poor remains of my Feliciana.
You must not grieve so much, indeed you shall not:
Do not I stand engaged to make you happy?

Feli. Softly, for Heavens sake: Your Lover's there,
I would not he should hear you for the world.

Romans My dear Hersilia! O my only comfort,
I have a Pitious tale to tell my Love,
Hostilius my best friend, is now my Rival.

Hers. Hostilius?

Romans Yet so admired a Friend he still remains,
That to secure my love, and ease his own,
He has forsaken Rome, and given himself
To a perpetual Exile. --

Feli. (aside) Heart hold a little: Life do not yet forsake me:
The other killing word, and then farewell.

Romans I Will borrow a few minutes of my Love
To view the works, and give abroad new orders,
And then you shall have all the wondrous story.
[Exit.
Hers. Feliciana! Sister! do but here me,
O she faints --
[ Feliciana faints back into one of her Women's Arms. Cornelia, Portia, Cloe,
Give all you help here quickly: O she is gone!
The fatal news was too too rough, her ear
Too tender to endure it: Bend, Bend her forward;
Give her more air: kind Heavens she comes again.

Feli. O too unkind, O cruel Romulus,
Was it not death enough for him to tell me
Hostilius loves my Sister --
But he must kill me over again and say,
He Is gone for ever? Why do you thus torment me?
Why do you show me Rome again, and not
Hostilius in it? But I will follow him.
If he be yet in this vexatious world,
I Will find my Love, or lose my self in searching,
If to the world below he be retired,
I shall be there almost as soon as he;
The way is easy thither, and I cannot miss it.

Hers. Conduct her gently to repose Cornelia.
What a surprising turn was this? Poor Sister?
I have engaged beyond performance for her.
Ye Gods, that favor innocence, be kind;
Keep her wits safe, and cure her troubled mind.

[Exeunt. ACT. III.
SCENE I.
Scene, the Sabine Camp. Enter Tarpeia in Man's Apparel. Tarp. FOrgive me Maiden
shame, that in this Habit
I seek to ease a Passion, for whose sake
The Gods have taken, more undecent forms.
Yet still I am resolved to keep my Honor
Safe and entire, I would but see him once
Again, and then farewell the thought for ever.

Enter a Centry. Cent. Stand and reveal your self; who are you there?
From whence, and whither going?

Tarp. I come from Rome, my business to Lord Curtius.
If you can bring me Soldier to his presence,
Take this and this for expedition.

Cent. Gold as I live; if that be all, Sir, follow me.

[Exeunt. Enter Curtius. Cur. Hard fate of Lovers! The wounds that I received
From that Hostilius, far less afflict me
Than to discover that he is my Rival;
In vain, I fear, have I procured this War
Of Tatius, in vain, did I exasperate
The good old Prince against his Daughters Lover,
And vilified the Noble Romulus,
If thus the Roman Hydra, Love, produces
New heads to be cut off before we Conquer.
Think Curtius, think in time, not only how
To gain Hersilia, but to save thy Honor.

Enter Soldier. Sold. A Youth attends without from Rome, he says
He has affairs to you, and prays admittance.

Cur. Let him Enter, and do you withdraw.

[Exit Sol. Enter Tarpeia. Tarp. Would I were off again; now I should speak,
Heavens! how I am confounded?
[Aside.
Cur. Would you with me, young Roman?

Tarp. I am employed Sir, from the Sabine Ladies,
Now Roman Wives, Hersilia and --

Cur. Oh speak that Name again, sweet youth, and win
My Soul for ever! Is this Hersilia's message,
And to me? -- There Is Music in thy voice.

Tarp. (aside) What means this transport? The happy lie, it seems,
Is well accepted. -- Hersilia, Sir, and all
Your other Sabine Beauties now in Rome,
Have bid me tell you, and by you, Tatius;
Since the kind ties of Love are stricter far
Than those of blood, they cannot leave their Husbands;
Nor will they ever think of coming back:
If by your Arms (which yet they cannot fear)
You conquer Rome, and make 'em yours again,
You Will force their wills, and do a fouler Rape,
Than that which brought 'em thither.

Cur. Unkind! -- thou art a cunning and dissembling Boy;
Fie on such early falsehood. Would any one
But such a smoothdeceitful thing as you,
Have raised my hopes, to glorious Expectations,
And so soon dash 'em all again to nothing?
Away then Syren-Traytor;

Tarp. Would I had never seen him,
O I love him more than ever: --
[Aside.
Cur. And is this all you have in charge?

Tarp. No my Lord, I bring you news of Love.

Cur. The Villain mocks me!

Tarp. By all the Gods -- kill me if I dissemble --

Cur. O Venus, should this be from dear Hersilia!
Love find your eyes again, but this short minute
And be hereafter blind for ever, (aside.) -- Tell me
Thou Charming Boy; tell me, my better Genius,
What is the sweet Intelligence: Speak, while
A thousand Cupids hovering in the air
Snatch at thy words, and bear 'em, all perfumed,
About the Heavens.

Tarp. Oh I am ruined now beyond all cure:
His tender words strike through my very Soul.
[Aside.
Cur. Will you not speak? Why will you torture me
With these delays?

Tarp. Whither will this tumultuous passion drive me?
Now I am in, it thrusts me headlong on;
And bids me stop at nothing: --
[Aside. The Love, my Lord, comes from a Roman Lady,
My unhappy Sister. --

Cur. It Is gone again the empty shadow leaves me,
Thy fortune Curtius laughs at all thy wishes,
And scorns thy Expectation. --
[Aside.
Tarp. She saw you Sir, when you was last at Rome.
You came, she saw you there, and was overcome.
Since as a Captive to your Name and merits,
She knows no joys, but what must come from you.
Yet is she Noble born, and for her Beauty
Natures not in her debt, nor Fortune for estate:
It Is she that sent me now to let you know
All her Command and interest in the City,
You may dispose of.

Cur. Hah, this may be of use to my designs. --
[Aside. Must I not know her name?

Tarp. When you shall please first to discover, Sir,
Whether your heart be free of other love.

Cur. I am as free as air. -- Forgive me truth!
Forgive me more Divine Hersilia! --
[Aside. Now, Sir, her Name?

Tarp. Tarpeia.

Cur. Her Father has Command over the West-Gate, --

Tarp. He has, my Lord, and she as his Lieutenant.

Cur. This is exceeding lucky, --
[Aside. Tell the dear Creature, your adored Sister,
I am all hers; but know not if I have
Enough of interest with her to demand
One real favor. --

Tarp. O speak, my Lord, I have a full Commission;
What e're I grant, she will confirm with joy.

Cur. Be sure of what you say; I may perhaps
Demand a kindness of too great a value:
And yet I would not hazard a denial --

Tarp. Be bolder Sir, I Am sure you cannot ask
What she can scruple, --
Come Sir, what is the mighty trial?

Cur. It is indeed a trial of her Love;
Which if she grants, her passion if as mighty,
And well deserves my Love, my Life, my Soul --
But still I Am not assured that she will do it,
And I cannot ask in vain.

Tarp. My love grows wild!
I know not how to blush: O fatal hour --
[Aside. By Venus and her Son! By all the Oaths
Man can invent, you cannot ask that thing --

Cur. Hold; I believe you Sir. Now I Will demand
With confidence; I ask, or rather beg
That she would deliver up her Gate
To my possession --

Tarp. You had reason Sir, indeed; so long to question
Whether it would be granted: Who could suspect
That your request should be of such a Nature?
Do Men demand of Maids that would oblige 'em
Favors like this? How e're since my engagement
Has run so high, and her Love, much, much higher,
It shall be done; with only this condition,
That when she gives the Gate to you, you then
Shall give your self to her, for ever, --

Cur. With Justice: O I will Love her, Marry her,
Adore her, had she no other merits;
She shall be my everlasting Mistress, --
Give her from me, loved Youth, this Ring, pledge of
My heart; and this, this dearer kiss. My Soul's
On torture till I see Tarpeia, -- Hark
Be this the hour, and this the word.

Whispers. Tarp. Enough: I Will cause a Soldier to attend your motion,
Beyond the Counterscarp, exactly at the minute.

Cur. We Will lose no time: I Will go immediately,
And form a party, and give abroad new orders: --
Another kiss to my dear Mistress, and then Farewell, --
I come Hersilia! I am false for you;
Forgive me sacred Honor.
[Aside. [ Exit Curtius.
Tarp. What have I done?
Betrayed my City and my Honor too.
Unhappy answer. But what is the reward?
The Noble Curtius Love. For his dear sake
I Would do it over again: Betray a hundred Romes
As many worlds, -- where have thou lost thy self
Tarpeia? Is this a Roman mind? O I am ruined!
Yet since I have begun I must go through,
And will; the Dye is cast, what e're event
Succeeds, fear now is causless, or too late.
Was this to see him once, and only see him?
Would I had never made this fatel Journey:
O cursed Female curiosity,
Thou have demn'd half my Sex, and half demn'd me!
[Exit.
SCENE II. The Palace.
Hersilia, Portia Cloe, Hers. Is my dear Romulus still absent, does he
Not yet return? Sure he forgets Hersilia:
I could not be so very long from him.
Portia, how long is it since my Lord parted?

Port. Scarce an hour, Madam.

Hers. An hour, O false dissembler!
It is a day, a year, an age to me.
How many ages does one hour contain,
When Lovers part! something sits heavy here;
O Portia, Cloe, help me to remove it:
A case of Lead claps round about my heart,
So cold and heavy. Avert the Omen heaven:
What means this sudden darkness? Do you not
Perceive it?

Cloe. No Madam, it is as light to us as ever.

Hers. It Is night then in my eyes; and well it may
Since they can find no pleasing object here.
How can I view my Sister drowned in tears?
Tears that would soften Rocks: How can I hear
Her tender innocent heart break with more groans
Than come from a whole Army dying?
Can I with patience suffer this, and yet
My Romulus, my only comfort, absent?

Port. Be less afflicted, Madam: Why should you make
Your fate worse than it is, why should you meet
The evil hour and help it forward, thus?
Misfortune is too quick in her approaches: --
Feliciana cannot long continue
In this condition, and for the King,
We know, he is prosperous and well, and not
Far distant.

Hers. O Portia, Portia! my ill boding thoughts
Carry but too much reason --
I had the other night a fatal dream;
Which tho I slighted then, it now returns
Fresh to my memory with all its terrors, --
Methought my Romulus and I wandered alone
A long a Meadow, near the silver Tiber;
Millions of flowers, and numberless their colors,
Both by their odor and delightful object,
Inviting us to rest on the soft Verdure,
We sat; and in a wanton emulation,
Culling the guady treasure of the Mead,
We decked each others head and bosom with 'em,
Mixing for every flower as many kisses.

Cloe. Thus far it is kind; a mere Elizian dream.

Hers. True Cloe: But that which follows dismal --
The cruel River, envyous of our Loves,
Swelled over his banks, with such a sudden flood
We could not possibly avoid its fury:
In vain I called for help, in vain I strove
To save my dear Lords life, as vainly he
To save my dearer life, despised his own,
At last, both tired with ineffectual pains,
We sunk and dyed Embracing.

Port. It has indeed a sad conclusion, Madam,
But dreams, they say, have a quite different meaning
From what they promise; we may then conclude
Much joy from this, because it seems unhappy.

Hers. Away, and do not flatter me to ruin.
There Is but one way I know to turn the Omen,
I Will expiate the fatal dream from my sick fancy. --
Have to the Temple, Cloe, bid the Priest
Prepare the due Lustrations instantly.
[ Ex. Cloe. When I have cleans'd my self of this foul dream
I Will Sacrifice to all the Genial Powers,
That favor Nuptial Vow's and virtuous Love,
For Romulus, my self, and hapless Sister. --

Port. Heaven cannot be unheedful of such merrits,
When fair Hersilia prays the Gods must hear,
Her virtue takes by force what they can give.

Hers. Profane impertient, I merit nothing,
Yet sure they will hear me, tho it only be
For Romulus, and poor Feliciana, --
Come Portia, let us follow to the Temple,

[Exeunt. SCENE III. A Fort in Rome.
Romulus, Spuruis Tarpeius. Romans I Like your diligence, Tarpeius, well:
You keep your Forts well Manned, and in good order.
The Enemy can never force us here.

Tarp. I would not live too see that fatal hour,
When all my faculties of soul and body,
Should not appear continually employed
To do my Prince and Country their best service,

Romans Spoke like a worthy Soldier, and true Roman.
Oh, Tarpeius, how great a loss have I?
Were it not for my dear Hersilia,
Who still remains, this world had nothing in it
VVorth a man's living for. My friend! my friend!

Tarp. Hostilius?

Romans Who but Hostilius?

Tarp. He is not dead?

Romans To me and Rome he is, or rather we
Are dead without him, he was the very soul
Of friendship, life of Love, and the true Sun
Of Noble action. O! he has left us now
Tarpeius, but in so generous a manner,
That even his absence speaks more love to me
Than all the ever dear Remembrance
Of his past actions, sumn'd together. -- Hah!
What sudden noise is this?

[A noise without, clashing of Swords, and crying Treason, etc. Enter a
Soldier bloody. Sold. O save your self betimes, great Sir; away,
Or you are lost for ever, the Forts betrayed:
The out-Guard, corrupted by some treacherous Devil,
Let in the Enemy, who pouring on us
With treble numbers, cut to pieces all
That will not yield to mercy --

Romans Tarpeius! --

Tarp. I cannot answer Sir, to your too just
Suspicions, but I can dye to show
I am no Villain -- (Draws --) I abhor their favor.
And scorn my life, since it is now unuseful

[Is going to fall on his Sword. Romans Hold --
If you are Loyal as you would make me think,
Why should not we two beat a thousand Traitors.
Second me --

[Draws. Enter Curtius and Soldiers. Cur. Romulus here! Fortune thou art too
kind!
I have not only won the stake intended,
But got a By more worth than all the City,

Romans Stay degenerate, Sabine:
Base as thou art to gain advantage by
Unmanly Treason, you have not yet
Subdued the Fort, while I am here and can
Command a Sword, you will find one Romulus
More than a hundred narrow soul'd Plebeians.

Tarp. Nor shall my Prince engage or fall alon
He still has left one Soldier who desires
No greater Glory than to dye thus,
Fighting by his dear side, for whom he lived.

Cur. ( To Rom.) I know you have been always brave, and now
Are desperate: I know you both would die
Like Soldiers fighting; but you shall not --
Take 'em alive, and disarm the Madmen,
[To his Soldiers. [They all fight, Romans and Tarp. are encompassed and
disarmed. Convey 'em now to stricter Guards, and keep 'em several.

Romans Poor and ignoble! Thou art below a Man:
I scorn to lose my words on such a Brute.

[Rom. and Tarp. are led off. Cur. Be it your Province, Fabius, to acquaint
The General with our success: Tell him
That I desire he would be with us quickly:
Tell him the Cities all alarmed and the
Streets barricado'd, yet if he lose no time
There Is such confusion, they cannot possibly
Hold long against us; but delay is fatal --
Away with speed: Fly --
[Ex. Soldiers. Did he not say I am below a Man,
Poor and ignoble? Is that my Character?
Too true, alas, I find it, --
Thou have too much of reason, Noble Roman.
Methinks I hate my self, for the vile office.
And yet I Love Hersilia to madness:
To gain that mighty prize, I must be deaf:
To the nice rule of honor, made by fools,
Thus I must win her or for ever lose her.

Enter Tarpeia in her own Apparel. Tarp. My Lord the Fort is now entirely
yours, and all
The Guards secured. Yet still there does remain
One dear Command that waits for your possession.

Cur. Where? Show me the place --

Tarp. It Is no part of the works, but she that did Command 'em.
Be not so strange my Love, it is I, that made
The Fortress yours, wait to be yours my self.
Come my brave Conqueror: My greater Mars,
Receive those Joys from me which Venus gave
Her God of war, when he arrived at Paphos --
What means this silence, sure you do not know me.
I am Tarpeia: She that gave you all
You now possess in Rome, her Fathers Gate,
Her Father, self, and honor, yet thinks not all
Too dear to buy your Love, -- Sure now you know me.

Cur. Yes I do know you, Madam, you have given more
Than I indeed could hope, and still would more
Than I desire.

[Coldly. Tarp. How, Sir, have you already lost
The memory of your late vows? Is it so long
Since you obliged your self, (if words have force)
On the condition, which you now possess,
To make me yours by Marriage? Am not I
The same Tarpeia still?

Cur. You are; but I
Not the same Curtius. Your beauty is your blemish,
And what you urge for merit shows you foul,
I cannot love a Traytress.

Tarp. Let me hear this from Rome, and from my Father,
From you it is inhumane! I could endure your Sword
With better ease, kill me, and expiate thus
The Crime of too much Love.

Cur. Kill you? I would not be so base to rule
The world: No, live, live to repent your shame
But do not think of me, I cannot Love
And therefore will not marry.

Tarp. Thunder is music in my ears to this --
Thou most unkind yet best beloved of Men
What have I done to be so soon forgotten?
[Weeps. Are my obleigments less by being acted?
Has some Serene blasted my Maiden beauty?
Am I grown old oth' sudden, my eyes dead
My cheeks all withered, nothing of the Rose
Left there, but wrinckles? -- Come my Lord, I know
This is not real, you do but try my temper, --
When will you smile?

Cur. I am in earnest, do not torment your self
Or me, with further pleading, your words are lost.

Tarp. Are neither words nor tears of force to make you kind?
Look Sir, a Lady kneels, thus low,
She sues to you, she for whose Love of late,
The bravest Youth of Rome have sued in vain.

Cur. Hersilia, may not this deserve you? who
But I could have neglected such an object?
[Aside.
Tarp. Thou Rock! thou more inflexible than destiny!
Say, cruel man, if it becomes thee well
To see a Loving Lady kneel so long,
Any yet -- and yet, not raise her.

Cur. Pray rise --

Tarp. Shall I, to your affection? will you Love me?

Cur. No; I cannot.

Tarp. Then I will grow a Statue, and kneeling thus
Be an eternal Monument of your injustice,

Cur. Pray leave me, and forget me ever; hence forth
I will endeavor never to see you more.

Tarp. Never to see me more, O perjured man!
False as the winds and Seas, which every minute
Alters! Thou rude Babarian! A Roman would
Have sooner dyed, than thus, have wronged one of my Sex.

Cur. This is too much for man to hear unmoved,
Something within pricks at my heart, I feel
It made of flesh --
[Aside.
Tarp. Have I for this betrayed
My Country, Father, nay by the event, my Prince,
And made the sweet Hersilia a Widow?

Cur. Ha! that name revives me, and clears up all
The clouds of pity, that begun to geather --
[Aside. How long will you torment me? Leave for shame
To be impertinent, unwelcome Woman.

Tarp. Will thou not break with this? O heart, too, too
Enduring.

[Still on the ground and weeping. Enter Tatius. Tat. Your Messenger has told
me, Curtius,
Of your success, and how you are successful:
I like the event, but disaprove the means:
It Is base to gain by Treason: But since it is done,
We must not lose the advantage. --
What Woman's this, and why in such a posture?

Cur. Neglect her Sir, she is not worth your knowledge.

Tarp. O do me justice, Sir, if you Command
The Sabines, show your self fit for rule and do me Justice.

Tat. Rise, and now speak with assurance; should your cause,
Concern my self, I Would do you right severely.

Tarp. I am the unhappy Daughter of Tarpeius,
I need not tell you that he held this Fort,
Till I betrayed it to this perjured Man,
Who now denis me his dear purchased Marriage.

Tat. Thou have condemned thy self, unworthy Maid.
Why should you hope that Faith or Love from him
Which you denied your Father and your Country!
A Traitors Sentence should be your, in Justice
It Is mercy lets you live, and gives you freedom --
Show me the works, and then to Romulus.

[To Curtius. [ Exit Tatius, Curtius. Tarp. Slighted, despised, unpityed, and
is this
All the reward the Sabines give for treason?
O cursed deceiver, cursed be the hour I saw him;
And cursed be I for seeing! O damned, damned Love
That found out such a Villain! but this is idle;
So are all words; blood and revenge inspire me,
Something I Will do to cleanse my sullied name,
Or with my life lose all the the sense of shame.
[Exit.
ACT. IV.
SCENE I. A Prison.
Romulus Solus. THE world and I should be at even terms,
Weary of one another, wear it not for
My dear Hersilia: While she is here
I cannot think of dying: My Heaven's in Rome.
It Is she that holds my hand, and bids me live,
Or else I Will quickly give my self the freedom,
Which these false Sabines have denied me. -- Ha!
Do I dream waking? Or am I really asleep
And fancy this fair vision, like Hersilia?
Enter Hersilia. Hers. My dearest Lord! are you not much surprised,

[Embracing. Romans Extremely, almost as much surprised as pleased,

Hers. Ill news has wings: I soon heard this misfortune.
It Was death to me to be a minute from you.
Attended by one Servant only, I flew hither,
Some small acquaintance, and a greater bride
Opened the Guard, and once again I see
My Romulus, my life! but time admits
Few words, you shall not dwell in this Confinement:

Romans Had you the Prison keys, I know I should not.

Hers. Let us retire, and change our habits quickly:
You shall return in mine, and leave me here.

Romans Never till now could I deny Hersilia;
I must not now obey you, Sweet; nor Love,
Nor honor will permit it, No, I will dye
A thousand deaths, a thousand several ways
Sooner than leave you here.

Hers. I beg it.

Romans O do not beg that I should Love you less,
Ask not so much injustice.

Enter Tatius, Curtius. Tat. Did you not say he was alone, how came
This Woman with him?

[ To Curtius. Cur. Ha! Hersilia? I am amazed.
[Aside.
Tat. My Daughter here! Heavens, I am more successful,
Than I expected, -- Curtius the war is ended
Nothing remains but Execution now,
In those two Criminals. -- Do you not feel
A terror at my sight, can I appear
Less frightful, then your evil genius to ye!
Have you forgot the injured Tatius, or
The Crime which you so late committed?

Romans I never knew what terror was; less now
Than ever, --
If it becomes you to insult on this
Base gained advantage, it does not me to fear.

Tat. It least of all becomes a Man of Honor,
To do like Romulus; Ravish invited Maids,
And then out-brave the Justice, that attends,
The foul, false, treacherous act.

Romans Speak better of such acts since they are yours.
You had not now been here, nor I compelled
To hear such Language, were it not for Treason.
Tho you, I see, have lost your temper, Sir,
I must not lose the due respect I owe
Hersilia's Father, else I should tell you
How falsely that it called a Rape, which was
Consent, free and without Compulsion.

Tat. That which you call consent, does not at all
Make you less guilty, but my Daughter more.
It shows her to have been Confederate
In her own Rape, a party in the Crime,
Equally guilty with her Ravisher:
And since by natures Law the Parent has
An absolute Dominion, over his issue,
How could she give her self away to any,
And not rob me? this is your Sentence then,
(And were you both as dear to me as my two eyes,
I would not bate the rigor, of true Justice)
Since you have both been actors in a Crime
Abhorred by Nature, ye shall both die together.
You for your Rape, You for your Disobedience.

Hers. Both die, O cruel Father! Sir, I yield
To your just sentence on your Daughter: I know
I have offended: much, much offended,
In daring to bestow my Love without
Your knowledge; nay, where I knew you hated.
I Am very guilty, Sir, and over me,
I know, you have the power of life and death,
Use it freely. You have condemned me justly,
But on my kees I beg, that I alone,
May dye, and not the noble Romulus.
'T was I that moved him to the Rape you mention.
Who would refuse a Ladies offered Love?
Besides consider, Sir, he is a Prince,
At least, your equal, his life's not in your power:
The Law of Arms allows him to be ransomed.

Romans Hear this you Goddesses, and take Example
From a weak mortals Love! thou Miracle,
Of Conjugal affection, why should you injure
Your own innocence so highly, and all
To favor one, who ought not to be pitty'd,
Since he has been the occasion of your ruin? --
It Is I, great Sir, it is I am only guilty;
Take in my blood your full revenge, but spare
The innocent; I gladly yield to death,
I Will quit you too from all aspertion,
I Will say you are not cruel, not unjust,
If she may live --

Tat. My Sentence is irrevocable,
And you have both confessed enough to clear
Me of injustice: You shall both die.

Romans Spare your own blood, Sir, Tigers will not prey
On their own young one's; let it not be said
By mourning Lovers, who shall hear this story.
Hersilia, sweet Hersilia had no fault.
But that she was the inhumane Tatius Daughter.

Hers. O plead no more for me my d earest Husband,
If you must die I will not live, without you.
'Twere cruelty to think it, -- ( To Tatius) Sir, I beseech you,
Regard not what he says, if when he dies
You will be so unkind to spare my life,
I can find ways enough to follow him:
Should you be still more cruel, and prevent me,
Yet grief would quickly break my heart, in pity.

Tat. It shall not need: -- No, you shall die together.
Trust me I am afflicted for you both,
But I must grieve in silence; sacred Justice
Is far more dear to me than my own life: --
See the effects of Rash, unthinking Love!
Take your eternal farewell of each other
This hour is yours, the next you are no more.
Curtius attend me.

[ Exeunt Tat. Cur. [Romulus and Hersilia remain silent a while. Romans Tatius,
(I cannot say your Father) Madam,
Permits me the sad favor, e're we part,
To take my everlasting farewell of you.
But with what face can I approach Hersilia?
Or with what eye can she behold the wretch
Unto whose fatal Love she owes her ruin?
O had you rather chosen a poor Cottage,
Than my unhappy Palace, a Sabine Shepherd
Before the King of Rome, you had not then
Known this sad change, nor I the sense of such
A guilt, that wracks my very Soul to pieces.

Hers. How long has Romulus lost that great Soul,
Which he received from a Celestial Father?
For yielding thus to fate, sure he has lost it.
Unduly should we use, my dearest Lord,
Those small remains of life, that still are left us
By such ill timed complaints, as these, to whet
That grief, which has but too much edge already.
What have I done, that you should think I value
This severe turn of fortune, when compared
To your dear Love? O banish the false thought.
My passion sees in you something more great
Than Crowns, something above the power of fate:
It Is Romulus I Love, and not Dominion.

Romans Ye Gods! why should I live beyond this moment?
Let me die pleased, now, now, before her feet,
From whom I hear such words. When I consider
The never equaled Love of my Hersilia,
And what I lose, rage and despair possess me.
What man can think that so Divine a Soul
Must leave that fair abode, unjustly too,
And in his heart at the same time not feel,
Compassion sharper than the Tyrants Steel?

Hers. Why should you be concerned, where I am not?
I kiss my Sentence, whatsoever it be,
To live or die, it is the same thing to me.
Should I appear to weep, Judge when I do;
Whether those tears fall for my self or you.

Romans No more, my Love; O spare a breaking heart,
You pierce my Soul in the most tender part.
O rather flatter my credulity,
Tell me to save your life, that I must die:
If at that price your safety could be bought,
How blessed were I! there is Heaven in such a thought?

Hers. My Romulus is in his Love fevere,
He Would be a God alone, and leave me here;
Much kinder was my Father in that breath
That spoke our fate; he Married us in death.
O happy, happy Sentence! when we die,
With equal pace, we will both ascend the sky:
While, as we mount, Mortals, that see the Ray
Of our United flames outshine the day,
Shall call us happy Lovers, envy us,
And think no joys of Love like dying thus.

Romans The Gods, the Gods invite us up, I know:
Something within me says it must be so.
Let us make haste my Love, and leave behind
The names to which this world as been unkind:
I will be thy Quirinus, thou shall be
Heber, the ever fair, and young to me.
When seated in our new Celestial state,
How we shall smile at Tatius and his hate.
All Romans with our favors we will bless,
But be most kind to Lovers in distress.

Hers. No mournful youth in vain shall shed a tear,
No hapless Maid shall sigh, but we will hear.

Romans We Will ease their inward wounds, heal their despair,
And against fate fight for the brave and fair.

Hers. But where a matchless pair of Lovs I find
Wronged by a Parent, cruelly unkind,
I Will her Hersilia call, him Romulus:
We needs must favor them, for they are us.

Romans We wrong our selves, and all our joys delay,
Let Us seek out death, and meet fate half the way.

Hers. Come my dear Lord --
[Taking his hand. Thus Joined we will rise to a Divinity,
It Is death to live, when it is so sweet to die.

[Exeunt. SCENE II. Scene the Palace in Rome. A Couch.
Cornelia, Cloe. Cloe. What Is to be done, Cornelia? We are left
Methinks like travelers, that lose their guides,
Unknowing both the Language and the Country:
Romulus they have made Captive, Hersilia
Will have no Liberty without him, but gives her self
To the same Prison freely; yet should I tell
Her Sister this, it would but more undo her.

Cor. Poor Lady! since Hostilius went from Rome,
She is no longer she, we have lost her too.

Cloe. I have a Captain, my most obedient servant,
Tho I confess he does me little service,
He being now continually on duty,
I Would be content to lose my man for ever
Could I but bring Hostilius back to give
The harmless Maid her pretty wits again.

Cor. In an ill hour the Romans have committed
That which our Parents call a Rape, if thus
Our, men themselves so soon are Ravished from us.

Cloe. But who Ravished Hostilius? Nothing but his own
Heroic Friendship, a shame take these Honorable intrigues,
They cause more harm than good, all our misfortunes
Are owing to his absence,

Cor. Cloe, no more --
See where she comes with such a pitty'd air,
In her distracted innocence, that makes me weep to see her.

Enter Feliciana. Feli. Why did you tell me, Cornelia, that my Sister
Is rid away behind Hostilius? Indeed you are to blame,
For tho I know, he does not love me, I Am sure
Hersilia would not do it for a kingdom.
Yet were it true, could you be so unkind
To tell it me?

Cor. I never said it, Madam.

Feli. I ask your pardon heartily, Cornelia:
It was not you indeed. -- See where my Sister
Stands yonder, sorting pretty Pinks, and Dasies,
With Violets and yellow Crocus's,
To make a wedding Garland for Hostilius,
Yet will not give me one poor flower among 'em.
No matter, I have Roses of my own
Enough to strew me when I Am dead.
SINGS.
White as the Lilly will she lie
When the foolish Maid shall die,
For she carried with her, her Viginity:
O fie, O fie.
-- Is not that Cloe?

Cor. Yes Madam.

Feli. Then it is not my Sister, I knew so much
Already, tho you think I know nothing.

Cloe. When will you try to sleep dear Madam!

Feli. O Cloe I shall never sleep again.
Hostilius will not let me sleep, least I
Should dream of him -- Is not that unkind?

Cor. Pray try what charms there are in Music, Madam.

Feli. Let it be mournful then, for should they play
A Cheerful air, and I so merry as I am,
It Would make me mad -- ha, ha, ha, ha, --
But it is no matter, I Will sit down here and weep.
[Soft Music. No more, I hate these Viols: Hostilius is a Soldier
Let me hear voices: Sing a Trumpet to me.
[To a Martial Air. SONG.
Make have fair Queen of Cyprus, tarry not:
Have-you the impatient Love of Mars forgot?
He bleeds, he bleeds, from wounds unseen,
That know no cure but such a Queen.
You are the only Surgeon has the art
To cure a God' that is wounded in the heart.
See, the fair Queen of Cyprus does appear,
While all the withered beauties of the year
Start up and smile, to feel her bring,
Something more welcome than the Spring.
The Rose and Iessamine, perfume the air,
Yet do her Garlands take their sweetness from her hair.
She comes, she comes, she comes a Lovers pace
With all the smiles of Heaven in her face.
Chorus.
Why should not than the brave be fortunate?
Why should the fair be hapless in their Love?
When the Celestial powers that rule their fate
Keep such a kind intelligence above?

Feli. Fetch me a Roman Pile, and Sabine Shield,
I Will after the ungrateful Runegade,
[Starting up. And force him back to duty -- alas, alas,
Laugh at me good Cornelia, prithee laugh.
Can I force him whom mighty Cupid could not?
I saw the little God shoot all his Arrows at him,
And still Hostilius fenced, and fenced, and fenced
'Em all away; and still as they came,
He filcht them all into his own Quiver.
At last the boy sat down and wept for having lost
His Arrows: But what did I?
I went up boldly to the pretty Child,
And strok't him thus; be comforted said I,
[ Strokes Cor. I Will give thee new Artillery, sweet infant:
I Will give my boy a Quiver full of sighs.
At this the Urchin smiled: Ah! foolish Girl, said he,
Sighs are indeed sort of Arrows, but they
Can only wound her breast that shoots 'em.

Cor. and Cloe. Dear Madam try to sleep once more.

Feli. I will, I will, I will, I will, --
[Sits down again. But then you must not sing another Trumpet;
I hate the thought of war, Hostilius is
Too much a Soldier! Sing any thing but that,
And I will try to sleep in earnest.
SONG.
Where art thou God of dreams; for whose soft chain
The best of Mankind ever do complain;
Since they affect to be thy Captives before Liberty
Unkind and disobliging Deity!
He flies from Princes and from Lovers Eyes
Yet every night with the poor Shepherd lies?
II.
Show thy self now a God, and take some care
Of the distressed Innocent and fair.
To rest, to rest, dispose the pitty'd Maid, her eyelids close
Gently, as evening dews shut up the Rose:
Then bear in silent whispers to her ear
Such pleasing words as Virgins love to hear.

Cloe. She sleeps, she sleeps, Cornelia! Happy minute.
Let us withdraw, for fear we should disturb
The blessed slumber.

[They come forward, and the Scene shuts upon Feliciana. Cloe. But while our
care's employed her for Feliciana,
We must not lose the memory of Hersilia.
We are obliged in Honor to find some means
To free the Noble Lovers.

Cor. Poor Cloe, what are we weak helpless Maids
To attempt so brave and act, when all the force
In Rome can hardly, hope to do it?

Enter Portia, weeping. Port. If you have any tears in store, now, now
Is the sad fatal hour arrived to spend 'em,
If you have eyes, show it, and weep, for mine
Already are quite lost in sorrows --
The Noble Romulus, and his Hersilia,
That Glorious pair of Captives, are by Tatius
(O cruel Sabine, O scandal of our Nation)
Sentenced to death, and now the cursed minute
Comes on apace, when the inhumane Sentence
Must have a more inhumane Execution.

Cloe. So sad a tale, as this, tho but a fiction,
Cannot be heard without some tears?
[Weeps. For sure, my Portia, you but dissemble with us,
Or if you be in earnest, yet Tatius, is not:
He cannot be so barbarous.

Port. Oh never hope it, he is grown a Monster:
Justice the best of virtues is in him
The worst of vices, since he can act
A cruelty like this, and call it Justice.

Cloe. And is this true? Happy Feliciana,
Whose want of sense secures her from this new sorrow:
Would I too were distracted.

Cor. I will not be so vain to wish, where I
Can rule my fate: I Will die with my dear Lady:
I need no other Tyrant then my grief,
Sorrow shall do the part of Tatius to me.

Port. I love my Queen as much as any can;
I could endure a thousand prisons for her;
Suffer a thousand sorrows, nay I could wish,
Wish heartily, that I were dead to save her.
But when I think I am a dying, --
Oh how I tremble: death is a thing of such
An ugly form, so old, and full of horror,
It never can agree with a young Virgins fancy.

Cloe. How poor a thing it is to be a woman;
Ah helpless sex! we have desires, yet still
Want power to act them. Come my sad Companions,
Let us all try to melt away in tears:
In such a death no frightful shape appears,
Insensibly we shall be eased from care,
As Echo once, in sighs dissolved to air.

[Exeunt SCENE III. The Street.
Enter Hostilius. Host. I Cannot go out of the sight of Rome,
How long have I been wandering to no pupose?
Like strangers straying in a wood, I think
To Travel forward, but am indeed
Brought back, insensibly to my first station.
Sure something is forgot; should not I see
Hersilia, 'ere I part? It must be so,
Goodmanners say I should. O I dare not
To see her, O to stay for ever here
And lose my generous thought; my boasted friendship.
No, I will on: I Will spur my testy Nature,
And make the dull Jade travel forward, forward;
It is a glorious journey, and I will go.
[Exit.
Enter Tarpeia, in Man's Apparel, but different from the former. Tarp. It Is
requisite, I should redeem my honor
In the same garb I lost it; my design,
Is much too Masculine for my own habit.
O Curtius, Curtius, that I could remove thee
From Rome, and from the world, with as much ease
As from Tarpeia's, much abused affection.
But let it be: The greater difficulty,
The greater glory. Were thou armed with thunder,
Fenced with a wall of Adamant, and Seas
Deeper and feircer, than the Adriatic,
I Would find a way to thy perfidious heart;
And tell thee there what is due from injured Love.

Enter Hostilius. Host. How much in vain do we resolve to act
What fate forbids? The Gods have drawn a line,
And tho I strain and summon all my powers,
They hold me back; and laugh at my endeavors:
I must not, cannot pass the fatal limits.
Rome I am thine again! The Gods that bring me here
Let them preserve my Honor.

Tarp. Now fortune, if thou art a Goddess, help me.
Honor, if thou art more then a bare name,
Assist me, since I act not for revenge
Alone, but Romulus my injured King.

Host. Ha! did not that boy name Romulus? I cannot
Hear that dear name, but I must wish to see him --
You mentioned, Youth, the King: Is he this way?

Tarp. Where has the brave Hostilius been to ask
That question? Can Romulus be a Captive,
And he, his nearest friend, not know it?

Host. What do I hear? Speak out thou fatal Messenger
Of killing news; delay me not with questions,
But answer mine directly. Where is my King, My Romulus?

Tarp. In the West-Tower, a Captive there to Tatius.

Host. Was this the cause I could not go from Rome?
Was it for this my steps forsook my conduct,
And erring right, have wandered back again?
O sacred Providence, I now adore thee! --
Admire not boy, that I Am a stranger here,
I have been absent, a Truant from the City;
And now returning, yet for a private reason
I Have shunned the sight and speech of all I met. --
But one word more for I am called to action
How has this news agreed with fair Hersilia?
And where is she?

Tarp. A Prisoner with her Husband.
Freely she gave her self to the same fetters.
She loved too well to be at large without him:

Host. And is the sweet Hersilia too a Captive?
What Romulus, and his Hersilia too!
Fortune invites me to the greatest Glory,
To Sacrifice my life, or free at once,
The two most loved by me of all Mankind.

Tarp. (Aside.) I Have ruined my own project; O! he will prevent me,
And I shall never get again my houour,
Nor give a due revenge to injured Love,
Should I be thus defeated. ( To Hostilius,) However, tho
Affairs are very desperate, yet I
Have formed a way to free the Noble Lovers:
I beg the brave Hostilius would permit it.

Host. Heavens! This is another Rival: Hersilia's beauty
Makes all Mankind, of every age, adorers.
How fate has spited me? although I know
He loves my Mistress, yet such a Rival Child
Is much below my notice. --
[Aside. Thou form a way to free 'em, -- alas, poor boy!
Who owns this straggling Child? --
Thou free the Noble Lover's: What dare thou do to free 'em?

Tarp. Sir, tho I think, I dare as much as any,
Encounter fire and water, fight against all
The Elements, endure a thousand wounds,
And every wound, a several death; yet what
I have designed is not to be effected
By over daring, but by address and wit.
Force is too desperate, my way is sure,
If you, not ruin all by acting rashly.
Suffer me then to act alone, I beg it:
The Honor, Sir, of my whole life's concerned.

Host. His honor? it is so, aye he must love Hersilia,
He could not else be so concerned and earnest. --
[Aside. Thy Honor Boy! what is that, who ever heard
Of a Boys Honor?

Tarp. My Love, my life, and my revenge will suffer.

Host. His Love, Horror!
[Aside. It is an impudent request, that I
[ To Tarp. Should stand unactive in a cause like this. --
Thy honor suffer! Dam it: Mine will more*
As infinitely more,
As there is difference 'twixt my Love and thine.
Go poor effeminate Creature, use thy ways
Of fraud and treachery, fit for boys or women.
I Will be a Man, and force the prison open.
[Exit.
Tarp. He Will ruin my design infallibly,
Unless I give it speedy Execution:
I must effect it then, while he is drawing
A party up for the assault, or never.
He must lose time, but I cannot spare one minute.
Fortune assist me: Revenge and hate inspire me.
[Exit.
Scena ultima, The Fort.
Enter Curtius and Tarpeius. Cur. I Have opened all my heart Tarpeius to you,
Because I know your interest with Romulus:
You can prevail with him: You see what power
I have to make my offers good. -- Tatius
Has given this Fort to me, and I have here
An absolute Command, since he returned back to the Camp.

Tarp. You have indeed made me a large Confession,
But I Am not sure I understand you right,
I think you say you love the fair Hersilia;
And as a means to gain her wrought this war,
And got my Fort by Treason. --

Cur. True.

Tarp. You tell me, she and Romulus are both
To die, Condemned by Tatius for the Rape;
But notwithstanding, if I Will prevail with him
To quit Hersilia to your love, you will give
Him Liberty, and me my Fort again. --

Cur. Most willingly.

Tarp. I think you said you never loved the Treason
But for Hersilia's sake. That 'twas my Daughter
Betrayed the Gate, for which alone you hate her,
And fain would give it back on these conditions --

Cur. Most true.

Tarp. No, hate my Daughter still, hate her as much
As I do; It is the only act of all thy Life,
That shows thee good or brave: Know thou most vile
Of all the Sabines, that the King of Rome
Has not so poor Soul, but he had rather
Lose twenty thousands lives, than but one thought
(The least of all his thoughts) for his Hersilia.

Cur. And will you not persuade him?

Tarp. Yes: Where he not already fixed I would
Persuade him, and use all means, all Arguments
To settle him in such a Resolution. --
It Is well for thee, I am thy Prisoner, Curtius:
Had I my Liberty, and Sword again
I Would answer in another phrase, and tell
Thy heart, what it is to tempt a Roman to
So base an action.

Cur. Are you so brave; Ho there without; who waits
Enter Guard Take him and guard him strictly, on your lives
Let him not speak to any, nor be seen.
[Exeunt Guard and Tarp. I Am at a loss, my best design is blasted,
Yet I Will not give it over, Hersilia's Love
Has joys enough to recompense, a thousand crosses.

Enter a Soldier and Tarpeia. Sol. Yonder Is my Captain, Sir, at leisure too,
But you must leave your Sword with me.

Tarp. Take it. --
[Gives her Sword. Hail to the Noble Curtius, if you be he?
I have affiars that touch you very nearly.

Cur. I am the man, if they concern my life;
Speak boldly.

Tarp. They do, and what is more near, your love.

Cur. Speak softly, Boy. The very name of love
Has something in it so sacred, it requires
A private ear and ought not to be heard
By any unconcerned; the profane vulgar.
Withdraw, and suffer none whoever, to
[To the Soldier. Approach this way, till I give notice.

[Ex. Sold. Tarp. It is indeed a mighty secret Sir,
And we cannot be too private.

Cur. True Boy, --
[Locks the door. Now speak.

Tarp. I am sent hither from the famed Sybilla --

Cur. About my Love? Ay, Ay, I do not doubt it.
It Is such a strong and violent passion, Boy,
The Gods may well take notice of it.
What says the Prophetess? Did she not name
Hersilia in the Message? If she did not,
O never speak it to me; all other words
Are discords in my ear.

Tarp. She did, she did,
She named the sweet Hersilia often,
And said, -- But first, see my Credentials, Curtius. --
Look Sir, this is her hand, and this; no, this --
She gives him a Letter, and as he is opening it to read, she comes up, and
looking over his left Shoulder, as if she would instruct him in something,
whips out his Sword. Turn hither Monster, and behold thy Hell,
Before you feel the flames, -- I am Tarpeia. --
Nay stir not, or by all the Gods, and all
The Devils, like thy self, I Will nail thee to
The ground: tho I am a Woman, yet I am
Inspired with all the force and fury now of twenty men.

Cur. It is the very she;
What a dull beast was I not to suspect
That face! my Love transported me to ruin.
[Aside.
Tarp. Tremble, and hear me thou inhumane Villain.
I come prepared to take a full revenge
For all my slighted Love, my ruined honor,
For Romulus, my Country, and my Father.
I value not my life, when I have thine
I Will give mine freely up to any torment.

Cur. How have I wronged you, Madam? You know too well,
Our passion's not at our own choice, if fate
Has pointed your love this way, mine to another,
It is your fate has wronged you, and not I.

Tarp. Unheard of impudence! face of a Devil!
Can you say this to me? To me who have
Betrayed my King, my Country, Father, All,
For thou perfidious wretch? It Is not thy Love
I value now, but seek for my lost honor: --
Did thou not swear, thy Love was free? and by
That specious bait tempt me to be a Devil?
Give me my faith again I owe my Country:
Give me again my Innocence, false man,
Make me no traitor. -- O it can not be!
My names all over fully'd, black, black, as Hell, --
But I will wash it in thy blood: I Will search
The fountain of thy veins, suck thy hearts blood,
Then know the flesh into a thousand pieces,
And grieve the diet will not last for ever.

Cur. Where are my Guards? O that they knew my danger!
Will no kind Demon tell 'em. -- Ho! without.

Tarp. Nay if you open, Hell-hound, then have at thee.

[Makes at him, he strives to defend himself, but is wounded. Cur. Yet spare my
life and I will pardon all.
I Will Love thee too, give back the Fort and Prisoners.

Tarp. Abhorred Creature! no: I now hate more
Than I e're loved, tho I loved more than any.
Were thou more suppliant at my feet, than I
Too lately was at thine, I Would spurn at thy
Petitions, thus; and be more cruel,
If it were possible, than thou were, Devil.
As for the Fort, I Will quickly take that back.
But first thy life. --

[Assaults him again. Guard. To Arms, to Arms: Where are you Curtius?
[Without: Captain to Arms, to Arms, we are surpised.

[Knocking. Cur. Make have and break the door.

Tarp. I Will open first a door to thy false heart.
[Curtius closes Tarp. and as they are striving, the Guard enter.

Guard. Ha! Curtius, unarmed and wounded? See the young Traitor.
Oh Murderous Villain! --

[The Guard wound Tarp. Cur. Forbear, it is a Woman, --

[Curtius disarms her. Guard. O Sir, the Forts in danger, -- the Romans headed
By their Hostilius, pour like a torrent on us.
We want your Countenance and conduct.

Cur. I am much wounded, but I think none mortal:
On to the danger, --
[To Tarp, as he goes off. Despised thing, false both to Rome and me,
Make use of these few minutes I Will but secure
My Guard, at my return expect
The due reward which all thy Treasons Merit.
[Ex. Cur. cum suis
Tarp. Yes, I will use the time -- I bleed: It Is nothing,
The sight does but encourage me to action.
O that I had a Sword! I Will to the assault
While all is in Confusion, I cannot miss
A weapon on the place: My Country calls;
My help, though weak* will yet assist her something.
Could I die fighting for her, I were happy.
When life's a burden, all our fortune cross,
To lose it Nobly then; how sweet's the loss?
[Exit.
ACT. V.
SCENE I. The Fort
Hostilius, Soldiers, Tarpeia. Host. THE Fort is ours again: But we have
strangely
Mist the Commander.

Sol. Sabinus Curtius, Sir, when he perceived
All past Redemption, with some few Officers,
Forced their way through us, and fled safely over
To their own Camp: the rest are Prisoners.

Host. My little Rival there, and bloody too?
I see he is more a Man than I expected,
[Aside. Know you that Boy?

[To the Soldier. Sol. I found him, Sir, amidst the thickest danger,
Fighting on our side, fiercely, till spent with loss
Of blood, a rough old Sabine, had seized
And would have kill the fainting Youth, when I
Stepped in and saved him.

Host. It was well done, and I Will reward you for it:
All favour's due to such an early Courage. --
Thou art a Gallant Boy, and I repent
[ To Tarp. I chid thee lately, prithee reveal thy Name,
That we may know, to whom we give our praises.

Tarp. It is not worth your knowledge, brave Hostilius,
My Name's dishonorable, worse than none,
Unless I get a Name that is worth the speaking
I beg to die unknown. --

Sol. See Sir, the Royal Prisoners come to meet you,

Enter Romulus, Hersilia, Spu. Tarpeius. Romans Do we see our Hostilius once
again?
I cannot say, in which I am most happy,
To see my friend restored, or Liberty. --
O, my Hersilia, now we cannot die;
This world is too inviting: All our joys
Return, and we shall now be Gods in Rome.

Host. The happiness is mine, blessed am I,
That I am pointed out to serve my King,
My best of Friends, and (whom I blush to name,)
The sweet Hersilia: It is a glorious office!
The very boys have so much sense of Honor;
And think it Heaven to die in such a cause.
This youth endeavored it as well as I.

[ Pointing to Tarp. Sp. Tarp. Ha! my Daughter in disguise! O thou shame
Of Roman Maids. Take this reward of Treason --

[ Draws and runs at her, Hostilius steps between. Host. Hold! What means the
Madman? Would you reward
With death, him, who still bleeds from all these wounds
Received so lately in his Countries quarrel?

Sp. Tarp. Persist not in an Error, good Hostilius,
This is no Boy, but my accursed Daughter, --
Withold me not, I have a Parents Right,
And claim to take her life at my own freedom.

Romans That Argument I never will allow of,
'Twas used against Hersilia.

Host. I am amazed! can any woman have,
A Soul so Masculine?

Sp. Tarp. Say rather, so degenerate, and full of horror,
Since this is that false Devil that betrayed
The Fort, her King, and Father, to the Sabines.

Romans This is all Riddle, how could she betray
Her Prince, who has exposed her life to save him.
I must examine this more strictly, --

Romulus goes over, and discourses with Tarpeia, and her Father, while
Hostilius and Hersilia come forward. Hers. Hostilius you have merited from me
so highly
In freeing my dear Lord, from instant death,
That I should be confounded much, to make
A due acknowledgment of such a service:
Did I not know of a reward will please you.

Host. I Am stupifi'd. I know not what to answer.
I dare not look: I dare not trust, my eyes
With the dear object. --
[Aside.
Hers. Do you not mind me Sir, Why do you look
Another way? -- Yours merits are too modest.

Host. In vain I guard my eyes: In vain I keep
That Post secure: My ear, my ear betrays me. --
Aside. Too much reward it is already, Madam,
[ To Hersilia. For me to hear such words from fair Hersilia.
What man can merit such kind words, and live?
If I had dyed in such a cause, as this,
Perhaps the sweet Hersilia might have then
Applauded me with better Justice.

Hers. No more of this. --
As soon as we return back to the Palace
Be you in the Court Garden:
I Will meet you there in the close Mirtle-walk,
And then confer, the dear reward I mention.

Host. I dare not understand her meaning. --
Now, now, Hostilius, summon all thy virtue,
Call all thy Honor to thy help, for all
Is much too little. --

Romans So brave an act, after so base a Treason
I never knew the same hand guilty of.

Sp. Tarp. I cannot yet receive her for my Daughter,
The stain of Treason is indelible,
Nor has she purged her Crime by her late service.
Since she was bound to that, tho she had never
Offended. -- She ought to die.

Romans Spurius Tarpeius, no: You give your Prince
Dishonorable Counsel. Should I forget
Her wounds still bleeding? Ingratitude's in me
Almost as great a blemish as her Treason.

Tarp. If you intend me any favor Sir?
If I have merited in my last action?
Do as my Father urges. Take my life:
Since I mist that of Curtius, mines a Burden,
A shame, a Torment to me. Had I but
Recovered my lost Honor: Had not my
Revenge, my Glory, my intended service
Been all defeated by Hostilius coming,
I then could have endured to live,
Or any fate, life had not been uneasy. --
If you will not give me death as a reward?
If I appear to ask too great a Boon?
Confer it as a Punishment for Treason.
If neither way I can have what I beg:
Sullen, and out of favor with my fortune,
I Will try to give my self what you deny me.

Hers. Will you, Tarpeia, stand to my decission?

Tarp. With all my Soul: I Am sure the sweet Hersilia
Will give me what I ask, a speedy death;
Since by my act, she and her Romulus
Were both so very near it.

Hers. Then, with my dear Lords leave, this is my Sentence.
Tarpeia, you shall live: And yet to please you,
I will inflict a Civil death, you shall,
During your life, be a devoted Recluse,
A Vestal, ever serving at the Altar,
And Sacrifice for us whom you have wronged.

Romans Now to Mount Palatine: Come my Captive Queen,
And change a Prison, for a Court, Joys taste
More sweet, when relisht by afflictions past

[ Ex. Omnes. Preter Tarpeia. Tarpeia alone, two of the Guards at a distance.
Tarp. A Nun! O no: The thought is worse than death.
Can I, I who have felt so many fires
In my own breast, whose heart has burnt so long
In Love and fury, that I am now all ashes?
Can I --
Tamely submit to guard the Vestal Flames?
Pardon me Goddess; Pardon me Hersilia;
I have not Soul enough to live at ease. --
O Earth, Earth, Earth! Take me to your Embraces.
[Lies down. Why should I use the air? My Soul's all fled,
Spent and evaporate in fruitless Passion.
There Is nothing left to poor Tarpeia now
But a base fordid Lump of worthless mould.
Color, that fleeting Summer shade, and all
That little Beauty I once had, has left me:
Like a false dream, it is vanished in a moment.
Yet I have still a name remains: Ah, less
Then nothing! unless it could survive with Glory.
To cleanse thy spoted name, die then, Tarpeia;
Nothing but death can give a life to fame.
[Seeing the Guards. (Rising) Ha! my Sorrows are betrayed: -- Unmanner'd
Villains,
Do you stay here as Spies upon my action?

[Draws. Guard. We wait here, Madam, by the Kings Command:
Our duty is to see you safely lodged
In Vesta's Temple. --

Tarp. Forbear: And know your distance, base Plebeians;
I have not leisure yet to be Religious. --
O! I am much oppressed: Too much black blood
[Aside. Lies heavy at my heart, and drowns my Spirits.
But I will give it vent. -- Stay, I have here,
Full on my breast, a Sabine wound imperfect.
What Curtius Soldiers have begun, I Will finish:
Through the same Orifice I Will send my steel
Into that wound which Curtius gave my heart.
O loved and hated Name! Since he refused
The Joys of Love, thus I Will remove the pains.

[Falls on her Sword. 1. Guard. O she has killed her self! the mad Virago
Has out done all her former actions, here.
Call for more help. --

2. Guard. Help, there within; Tarpeia bleeds to death!

Enter Tarpeius, Attendants. Sp. Tarp. What means this sudden outcry? Ha!
Is still Tarpeia here? My shame still here? Not yet a Vestal?

1. Guard. O Sir, behold your Daughter lies expiring:
Wild with her discontents, from her own Sword
She took that death which you so much desired,
And Romulus denied.

Sp. Tarp. She bleeds: Kind Heavens! from her own hand she bleeds.
O truly Roman! Let me embrace my Daughter:
I am not now ashamed to be her Father.

[Kneels by her. Tarp. Forgive me Sir, the scandal I have given
Both to my Parents, and my dearer Country.
I am unworthy to be called a Roman.
A Roman is no Traitor! A Roman's brave,
Just, true, and of a mind above Corruption.
But I have been so false I cannot speak it.
The Soul of my good name's long since expired,
And why should I survive?

Sp. Tarp. True, true, my lovely Daughter! O thou art now
In this last ebb of life, more fair than ever.
Others may think thy former beauty fadeing,
Languid, and dying-pale as a cropped Lilly;
To me the Roses of thy Cheeks still flourish,
Fresh as the blooming Spring, sweet as the East:
These closing eyes are real Jewels now;
Poetic fury cannot make 'em brighter.

Tar. O tell me, Sir, truly, as you are noble.
Do not dissemble: Have I redeemed my Crime,
And with my blood cleans'd the foul stains of Treason?

Sp. Tar. Believe me then, --
Thou art all white again, my dear Tarpeia;
This glorious Act restores thy innocence,
And from this hour, thou art new born to me
A spotless Roman Virgin.

Tar. It is enough! Have I all this for dying?
O Glory cheaply bought! Come Death, come quickly;
Come thou, more loved than Curtius; haste to meet me.
The grim Man hears me. See! he comes; I feel him.
Farewell: I go in haste; with greater Joy,
Than love sick Virgins lose their name to Hymen.
Farewell for ever.

[Dyes. Sp. Tar. Farewell my shame, and glory! --
[Rising. Nature would show it self; it whispers me,
She was my Daughter; True, but she died bravely.
I ought not then to shed one tear, but triumph.
Take up the Body, Soldiers, as one of us;
For tho she were a Virgin, she was martial.
Such Obsequies as are to Hero's given,
Shall be my Daughters: A Maid of manly courage:
A Soul opposed to destiny: Her shame
Was Love and Life, Revenge and Death her fame.

[Exeunt Omn. SCENE II. The Palace.
Portia, Cloe. Por. THis welcome news must sure restore her.

Clo. I doubt it not at all: Her late sleep too contributes.

Por. Where not you present, Cloe, when Cornelia
Made the Relation to her?

Clo. Yes.

Port. How did she receive it?

Clo. As one of us would a surprising Story,
When half a sleep: She started, blushed, then asked
A thousand little questions, to no purpose,
Then blush't again, and turned away her eyes,
As conscious and ashamed of her late weakness.

Port. These simptoms show returning sense, tho slowly,
And by degrees, as harmless. Virgins wake
From pleasing dreams. --

Enter Feliciana, Cornelia. Feli. O Portia! O my Cloe, witness all
What here Cornelia tells me. She says Hostilius,
She says my Sister, too? And not she only,
But Hostilius are coming hither. --

Port. It is most true.

Feli. Go you would all deceive me: You tell me Heaven
Will come to me, and all the upper world
Stoop to a silly Girl. Fie on you all!
How can I think it? Go, you are all deceivers.

Cot. Look, Madam, trust your eyes. --

Enter Hersilia. Hersi. Feliciana! O my long-mist Dear.

[Embracing. Feli. O my Sister!

Hersi. My haste to see my sweet Feliciana,
Transported me, and would not let me rest,
Till thus I settle in her dear embrace. --
Why are you silent, sweetest! sure some vast joy
Stifles her words. -- What does this mean, Cornelia?

Cor. O Madam, since you went, all her fair senses
Have been as absent, as your self, and her
Much loved Hostilius.

Clo. No wonder then the way being thus disturbed,
If her returning Wits appear to wander.

Hersi. I Will guide them right, for I have joys in store,
Great, as her past affectons. Come with me
[ to Fell. Sweet innocence! Fortune's not always angry
She now is pleased again, and bids you too
Smilelike herself, the happy hour's arrived:
The happy hour, that gives your Sister means
To pay what she has stood so long engaged for.
I Will make Hostilius yours: For I can give him.

Fell. I dare not trust you.

Her. You must: You shall this once, and never after.
Have, my Feliciana: Let us fly,
On the soft wings of Love, to meet Hostilius.

[Exeunt omnes. SCENE III. A Garden.
Enter Hostilius. THis is the place, and this the time appointed.
As soon as I arriy'd back at the Palace, --
These were her words. -- I Will then and there said she.
Confer the dear reward I mention. --
What can that be? but what, it should not be.
She knows, she knows, I value no reward,
But only what, she should not give, her Love.
O Romulus! my friend! how can I think,
That name, and yet wait here for his dishonor. --
Yet I am innocent, -- I Will back again.
She is not here: Than why should I expect,
And do so foul an action, in cold blood?
No, I will back again: -- I cannot go.
Methinks I should attend a Ladies motion,
Much more a Queens, a Goddess, such as Hersilia.
Deceitful Love! O thou false impostor!
O my my lost friendship! Lost! I will not lose it.
But one turn more, and I will, will go.
[Exit. Enter Hersilia, and speaks entering. Hers. Stand you all out of sight;
there at that turning,
And when I call appear. -- I see him yonder,
Pensive he walks, as if he feared to meet
What he expects. I know he thinks my Love,
The promised Recompense, for his past service,
I Will soon transfer his thoughts to the right object.
He sees me.

Enter Hostilius. Hers. Does not Hostilius wonder to what end
I meet him thus, and in a place so far
Removed from sight and interruption?

Host. Not at all, Madam: Hersilia cannot have
A thought unworthy of her self, and Honor:
( Aside) What a soft charming look has she put on?
Oh I am ruined! --

Hers. I told you Sir, I knew,
Of a reward that I am sure will please you:
It Is Love, and such a Love you must not slight.

Host. Ay: It is so: My fears, and my desires
Are joined to make me wretched: I am lost:
Lost past recovery.
What Man can stand against such sweet temptation?
[Aside.
Hers. It Is from no Common beauty; but one adorned
With all the advantages of Birth and Fortune,
Young, witty, noble, innocent, and fair,
As the first smiles of Summer Mornings are:
Cheerful as April Suns, fresh as the Spring. --

Host. It must be she her self, the Character
Suits with no other Woman. --
[Aside.
Enter Romulus, ( unseen.) Romans Ha! my Hersilia, and Horsilius here
Alone too --
[Stands aside.
Hers. Such is the Lady that has loved you long,
Hostilius: She has loved you to excess,
But hitherto unknown; her flame has lasted
Silent and to her self, as Lamps in Tombs. --
I am amazed to see you thus unmoved.
Can you hear this Intelligence, from me too,
And give it no more welcome?

Romans What do I hear? What, do I see? I will
Not trust my senses, they are all deceitful
No, in despite of my own eye and ear,
I Will observe on: Down, down, rebellious thought. --
It Is false, Hersilia cannot wrong me.

Host. These are too quick advances: And less than
Decent, Methinks, she is not so fair as lately.
A Cloud is drawing over her eye, I see it.
Now love, where art thou? the Coward Boy's retiring.
Honor I am all thine. --
[Aside. Madam, I must confess, it is a vast
Reward you offer for a little service.
So vast, and so surprising is the offer,
I scarce have sense enough left to refuse it.
Had your words been less clear, I should not then
Have dared to know their meaning; But now
They are so plain, I must not understand 'em.

Hers. I am o'rejoy'd to find him answer thus.
I see he thinks it is my Love I offer;
And by my conduct I have cured his phrenzy,
[Aside. Extinguished all the Rebel flame for me,
And made him capable of a new passion.
[Aside. -- And can you then refuse the Love I bring you?
Can you, Hostilius, when Hersilia says
Love and be happy, slight the precious news?
How have I been deceived? 'Twas falsely said,
Hostilius honored, loved, adored Hersilia,
Since she commends a Ladies Passion to him?
And yet Hostilius stands as unconcerned.

Romans I Will hear no more: My patience is abused.
False, False Hersilia.

[ Romans comes forward. Hers. My Lord, I have been making Love here. --

Romans And can you own it too? But you 're already
Too much dissembled. O that I had died
By Tatius juster sentence; not lived to see
His Daughter, thus much worse than kill me.

Hers. Nay, than it is time to disabuse you both --
Feliciana: Sister! Where are you?
Enter Feliciana and Attendants. Look, Hostilius --
This is the Lady, for whose sake I woe you.
Has not my Character, short of her Beauty,
Wronged her, by an imperfect commendation?
Take her, brave Man, and here bestow that love,
Which erred to me; nor was your Error lost,
When you imagined I could wrong my Lord
But in a thought: 'Twas all designed for this.

Romans How base do I appear! Poor, and unworthy;
And how divine Hersilia: yet I am pleased.
Take from my Character ye Gods: Take, take,
Yet more, and add it all to hers; for she
Alone merits to be; nay is perfection.
Let after Ages copy from Hersilia,
When they would learn what is good, or chaste, or noble.
But let the name of Romulus be odious,
Since he could wrong her love by base suspicion.
Can you forgive? -- O I want assurance
To ask. So much injustice you ought not,
You must not pardon. Such a Crime as mine
Exceeds, if it were possible, your Goodness. --

Hers. O hold, or I shall doubt with better cause
Your love, than you did mine. Can Romulus
Be kind to me, and yet forbid my kindness?
You speak of pardon, where you never offended.
My dearest Lord, I Am pleased at your suspicion.
If (as th'appearance was) you had not been moved,
Sure you had loved me less.

Romans O wondrous goodness! Miracle of women.
Can you still love me?

Hers. My life, I can, I do!

[Embracing. Host. But, Madam, what must I return, for this dear blessing?
I Am so confounded with the mighty favor,
I know not where first to bestow my thanks;
To my sweet Mistress, here, who thought me worthy,
Or to your self, who formed my erring heart,
For such a Heaven,

Hers. Pay 'em to her: Only her love deserves them.
See, Sir, her blushes keep her speechless; but
That very silence tells you, she merits more
Than you can pay her. --

Enter a Soldier. Sol. To, Arms, to Arms: O! quick, or Rome is lost.
The Sabines enter at Port Ianualis
Led on by Tatius: Curtius too half desperate,
Since his late loss, fights now with double Courage.
The Guards give ground apace, and they are near
Possessed of all that Quarter.

Row. A truce with Love Hostilius, we are called
To bolder actions. --

Host. -- Were all their Army present
I have no power to stir, till thus I pay,
At this soft shrine of Love and innocence
My first Devotions.
[ Kisses Feliciana's hand. From this dear touch, I take new life, new Love,
And thus inspired to certain conquest move.

[ Ex. Romans Host. Feli. He Is gone: while he was here I had no power
To speak, to move, or any thing but blush.
My overflowing joy met every thought,
And choked my words e're they could reach my tongue.
My fears, my fears, now give me Elocution.
O I shall lose your Present Sister. In vain,
You gave me the brave Man: The cruel Sabines
Will rob me of Hostilius.

Hers. Why should you fear
Success? have not I made a greater venture,
My Soul, my Romulus, my All I hazard
In this engagement. -- But if I hazard all
Why stand I here? Can I be safe, when he,
My better self's in danger? Cloe, run,
Gather the Sabine Women in a body:
Bid 'em all meet with speed at Juno's Temple. --

Feli. What means my Sister?

[ Exit Cloe. Her. I feel unusual joy shoot through my heart:
Something within me whispers, that as I
First caused this war, so it is I must end it.
Swell noble thought, That I may something do
Worthy a Roman Wife, and Sabine Daughter.

Enter Portia. Port. Be happy Madam: Heaven declares for Rome.
The Gods fight for us. When your Romulus
Found his men flying, and that no persuasions,
Nor threats, nor his example could prevail,
To stay the Coward Fugitives, to all
His friends above, the pious Roman calls,
And vows a Temple in the place to Jove.
Behold a Miracle! they, who but now
Fled as so many Hares, turn on the sudden. --

Hers. I Am seized with joy and wonder.

Port. But this is, Madam, wonderful indeed.
While the prevailing Sabines bore all before 'em,
Pursuing fiercely along by Ianus Temple,
A stream of Sulphur flowed more fiercely on 'em,
From the offended God: Drowning and burning them,
But giving us more time and means to rally.

Hers. Shall the two ever jarring Elements
Of Fire and Water, lay by their enmity,
Uniting both their powers for Rome, while I,
The Wife of Romulus, stand unconcerned?
No, I will lose my Nature too; cast off
The fears of Woman, and with a Troop
Of my own Sex, confront the thickest danger.
But stay you here, my sweet Feliciana,
Thy years are much unfit for such a hazard.

Fell. Unkind Hersilia! Why should you under-rate
My love, and think it less than yours?
Young as I am, I dare as much as you.
For love and my Hostilius, I am all fire:
And yet I durst not go, were not he there;
But to meet him, tho in a Grave, I dare.

[Exeunt omnes. SCENE Ult. The Scene draws, and discovers the Romans and
Sabines ready to engage. Drums and Trumpets.
Romulus, Hostilius, Tatius and Curtius come forward. Tat. Forbear a while. --
Since, Romulus, we meet
So opportunely, let us two, who have
The chief concern in this unhappy War,
Decide the quarrel singly. Why should we
Profusely cast away a thousand lives
Harmless and unconcerned? when we may better
Stake all the event of war on our own heads.

Romans The offer's just and noble: I accept it.

Tat. Give your command then, to your Roman party,
As I to mine (who I 'm sure will obey me)
That they remain spectators only, and
Both sides yield to him that conquers.

Host. Sure Tatius, never heard Hostilius named.
Am I so great a stranger, to your ear?
Or has report, never mentioned the strict friendship.
With which the God like Romulus has graced me.
It Is time you know it now, if yet you have not.
I cannot see my King engaged,
And I unactive. --

Cur. -- Nor I my General.
Once more, Hostilius, fortune presents my sword
To oppose yours; sure now we may decide
What late we left imperfect.

Host. With as much joy as absent Lovers meet.

Tarp. Is there not yet one Sabine more that dare
Contest with me the Justice of this War?
Must I be so unhappy to stand idle,
A poor Spectator of brave deeds, and want
One noble Enemy among so many?

[Two or three Sabines are coming forward io answer. Tat. Retire and keep your
places. -- You see Tarpeius
Here are enough, that strive for the like honor;
But since your King agrees to fight me single,
I Will have no more engaged than are already:
Hostilius has indeed put in no common claim.
Or else he too had been refused.

Romans Be not displeased, thou brave and worthy Roman.
It Is sit I leave one friend alive, to tell
[ Embracing Tarp. Posterity, how much I die Hersilia's:
How much my heart abhorred to live,
Unless in her: How my last syllable was here is,
And how my Soul flew in a trembling sigh
Up with her name to Heaven.

[Tarp. retires. Tat. We lose too many minutes; Roman advance,
And meet me as a Foe implacable.
Respect me not, as Father to Hersilia,
Rather than so, I cancel all Relation,
Quit my Alliance, and disown my blood.

[They all pass. Enter Hersilia, Feliciana, and other Women, who all run in
between 'em. Hers. Do, -- kill us first, and then your selves. Add this
To the great List of all your Glorious Acts,
That you have Murdered all these unarmed Women:
Where am I now arrived? Is that my Father?
He is or should be: This I Am sure's my Husband. --

Feli. And this to me more dear, than thousand Husbands.
I Will be Hostilius shield, weak as I am,
He that wounds him must do it through my breast.

Hers. Sir,

[ To Tatius Kneeling. Tat. Woman away.

Hers. Have I no nearer Name?

Tat. Hersilia, --

Hers. Still that has too much distance: methinks
I hear my Mothers Soul, from her blessed seat
Of rest, call out and say, I am your Daughter.

Tat. You were; till disobedient Love blotted that name,
And rendered all my blood degenerate,

Hers. -- My Lord, --

[ To Romulus. Romans My better life! Retire Hersilia.
[Raising her. O do not thus expose to the blind Sword,
A life inestimable: To see you bleed
Would kill my very Soul. Should I lose you
I lose a thousand lives, a thousand worlds.

Hers. Perish a thousand Worlds, before I see
My Father kill my Husband; He my Father.
You both devide my Duty: I live in both,
And die in either: why should you then endeavor?
To murder me twice over in your selves.
I had rather once in my own person die
Than twice in yours: Begin, begin with me:
Take my life he that pleases; take it freely.
But spare each other. --

Tat. These, Romulus, are your security:
I Will draw my Party off; some other time
We'll find an hour more masculine and noble,
When we may act like men, not talk to women.

Hers. O stay; for to part thus has something in it
Worse than my present fears. O hear me Sabines!
Hear me you noble Romans! If for my sake
This war was first begun, why for my sake
May it not now be ended? Am I Hersilia?
Have I a Father and a Husband here,
And yet want interest to mediate with you?
Sure Nature cannot be so far defective;
I know my Father cannot be obdurate;
I know it by my self; if he were cruel
I could not be compassionate and kind:
No, he was never cruel; 'twas but dissimulation.
When lately he condemned my Lord and I.

Tat. Thus far it is true, tho I condemned you justly,
I never meant the threatened Execution.
Curtius knows it, --
But what is that to this? We now meet equal,
And I to vindicate my Right, and Honor.
Hersilia, give us way; when Kings dispute,
Swords are their Arguments, Force their persuasion.

Hers. No, make your way to him through me. -- Yet hold,
Your Sword is needless, I feel a sharper weapon;
The thought of your unkindness kills me surer.

[Faints Romans O stay fair Soul! If but one minute longer,
Stay but to take me with you -- No, she is gone!
Look back Hersilia, I shall soon over take you.

[Offers to fall on his Sword. Hostilius holds him. Hersilia recovers. Hers.
What pleasing voice unkindly calls me back
From the eternal rest of injured Lovers?
Sure it is my Lord; it must, it must be he;
No Tongue but his can draw Souls from Heaven.

[ Embracing Romans Tat. I am overcome. He that can see such Love
And yet not melt, is not a Man but Devil.
I yield, O Divine power of Love,
That can subdue a fury such as mine!
[He Embraces Romulus and Hersilia. Be happy in each other, best of Lovers,
My Daughter, and my Son! I Am doubly blessed;
Since now in knowing you, I know my blessing. --
Sheath all your Swords: give the Command abroad,
That like me, each embrace his Enemy.

[Curtius and Hostilius Embrace, etc. Hers. O happy change,

Romans Blessed be Hersilia, ever!
Since to her Piety we owe this change.
Never was War so ended!

Host. Yet one more blessing, Sir, and we are all happy.
[ To Tat. [ Approaching with Feliciana. Our hearts are both united: We only
want
Your favor to complete a Glorious Hymen.

Tat. This is my second comfort. Take her Hostilius,
For you deserve her. Thou second Romulus!
Live, Love, and be as happy as the first.

Cur. Tarpeius you alone know my dishonor.
[ Aside to Tarp. My false, base, Treason, and the Love that caused it:
My mind is now reformed: I am no more,
Rival to Romulus, but his admirer.
When I behold his flame my own expires,
As brighter Suns put out the lesser fires.
As you are Noble, then conceal my shame,
For I repent it much. --
And I am now prepared by future kindness
To pay off all that mighty Debt of Love,
Which I have too long owed to your much injured Daughter.

Sp. Tarp. Your Debts discharged, Sabinus, and hers already paid
To Nature: Tarpeia is no more.

Cur. Tarpeia dead? Forbid it Heaven!

Sp. Tarp. Unable to endure the sense of such dishonor
As her unhappy Love contracted, by her own hand
She washed the spots of Fame in her own blood.

Cur. Ah Noble Maid! too brave, and too unhappy!
Heroes and Demy-Gods shall Celebrate Tarpeia.
Queens when they would Name a Maid of mighty Courage,
And vindicate their Sex above the Male,
Will say Tarpeia: But most the hapless Lover,
When he complains of Cross and Cruel Stars,
Shall weeping mention her sad fate and call it his.

Sp. Tarp. Curtius no more: Let us forget our sorrows.
We injure much our Countries public Joy:
No Passion now should Reign, but Love and Triumph.

Tat. Romans and Sabines are no longer two,
But the same Nation, now: Where such a Love
Has showed the way to Rome, we must all follow.

Romans Renowned for ever be this day and place:
Here for all Ages, let the Roman Tribes,
Fix their Comitium, for more solemn meetings.
Here every year let all the blooming Youth,
And tender Virgins, of our now own people,
In Songs and Revels Celebrate this day:
And as a Monument of the late wonder,
Let Ianus Temple, ever open stand
When Rome has War, the God for us will fally.
Happy the Nuptials, when two Kingdoms Wed:
Empire and Crowns spring from that Marriage Bed.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE Writ By Mrs. A. Behn.
Spoken by Tarpeia.
FAir Ladies, pity an unhappy Maid,
By Fortune, and by faithless Love betrayed.
Innocent once -- I scarce knew how to sin,
Till that unlucky Devil entering in,
Did all my Honor, all my Faith undo:
Love! like Ambition, makes us Rebels too:
And of all Treasons, mine was most accursed;
Rebelling against a King and Father first.
A Sin, which Heaven nor Man can e're forgive;
Nor could I Act it with the face to live.
My Dagger did my Honors cause redress;
But oh! my blushing Ghost must needs confess,
Had my young Charming Lover faithful been,
I fear I Would died with unrepented Sin.
There Is nothing can my Reputation save
With all the True, the Loyal and the Brave;
Not my Remorse, or Death, can expiate
With them a Treason against the KING and State.
Some Lovesick Maid perhaps, now I am gone,
(Raging with Love, and by that Love undone;)
May form some little Argument for me,
TO excuse m' Ingratitude and Treachery.
Some of the Sparks too, that infect the Pit,
(Whose Honesty is equal to their Wit,
And think Rebellion but a petty Crime,
Can turn to all sides Interest does incline,)
May cry "I gad I think the Wench is wise;
"Had it proved Lucky, it was, the way to rise.
"She had a Roman Spirit, that disdains
"Dull Loyalty, and the yoke of Sovereigns.
"A Pox of Fathers, and Reproach to come;
"She was the first and Noblest Whig of Rome.
But may that Ghost in quiet never rest,
Who thinks it self with Traitors Praises blessed.
FINIS.

