

ITALY, IN ITS ORIGINAL GLORY, RUIN and REVIVAL, Being an Exact SURVEY Of the
Whole GEOGRAPHY, AND HISTORY Of That FAMOUS COUNTRY; With the Adjacent Islands
of SICILY MALTA, etc.

And what ever is Remarkable in ROME (The Mistress of the WORLD) And all those
Towns and Territories, mentioned in Ancient and Modern Authors.

Translated out of the Originals, for General Satisfaction. By EDMUND WARCUPP,
Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by S. Griffin, for H. Twyford, Tho. Dring, and I: Place, and
are to be sold in Vine Court middle Temple, at the George in Fleet street, and
at Furnevals Inn Gate in Holborn, 1660.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM Lord LENTHAL.
My Lord.
TO repeat your Lord-ships Tytles, and the Merits by which you achieved them,
and your just Administration under them, requires a larger volume then I here
present you, nor had you received any other demonstration of my duty, till I
had paid it in that kind, could I believe my self fit for so great an
enterprise. To contract them into the narrow compass of an Epistle, is a
diminution I dare not think of, since no Reader capable of this treatise can be
ignorant of more then I could here tell him, should I extend it much beyond the
ordinary limits: and Posterity can turn over no leaf in the English History
(during our last twenty years transactions) wherein he will not find frequent
mention of your Lord-ships name so involved in the principal affairs, that no
alteration the Island can suffer (whilst inhabited by men) can extinguish your
memory. A change of language in our Nation by foreign Conquest or confusion
like that of Babel, would for a short time obscure it; but retained by all
other parts of the knowing world in their memorials of our stupendous changes,
how soon will the next commerce bring it back again? and consecrate your name
to the utmost extent of time. Amidst these considerations I make humble tender
of all I can. The Itinerary of Italy, translated long after my return thence,
in those vacant hours which I allowed to diversion, without farther intention
then to renew that language by a retranslation (which occasioned my so close
keeping to the Italian names and Idiome) and once more to travel that celebrate
Country in this exact description, whither in my earlier years your Lordship
addressed me. Taking wing therefore from your Lordships Hand, and persuit from
your direction, the Quarry (such as it is) ought to be your Lordships at the
retrive; and though perhaps you will not esteem it fit to range in the first
course of Books on your Lordships well furnished Table, yet it may deserve a
share in the second, affording a pleasant repast even to those, who require a
more substantial meal. To advance that thought a little, and call it Manna
(such in every man's mouth as he best liked) though proper enough to the
Country where it abounds in great perfection, and agreeable to this work,
where all appetites, all tastes, may be delighted, would perhaps appear
arrogance in me, who deliver it not pure from the tree (on which it falls) but
as from an Apothecaries shop, where it may have received some taint. Yet those
imperfections your Lordship will pardon, and for your Lordships sake this
Nation, (at least in some measure) because devoted to you upon the score of
public gratitude as well as the particular obligation, of

My Lord, Your Lordships most affectionate Nephew, and most obedient Servant
EDMOND WARCUPP.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
YOU have here the Itinerary of Italy, a guide to all that travel thither, a
memorial after their return, a just entertainment to the learned, and a
pleasing diversion to those who have not given themselves the trouble of
unnecessarie letters; whilst with easy Journies they pass through the most
celebrate part of the habitable Earth, directed by this Treatise to the view or
contemplation of all that is excellent in art, or nature. Such indeed is the
situation of the Country, such the nature of the soil, such the ancient
manners of the people, as gave them a just Prerogative to the Empire of the
world: proportioned to their dominion were their actions, the great examples of
ensuing ages in all that was imitable, their wonder and amazement in what
exceeds the hope of imitation. Of both you have a transitory account so
interwoven with the general survay, that it is scarce possible a volume of this
size, can contain more, or more worthy remarques of persons, places, things,
from the remotest of times to this instant. For beside the necessary
instruction in the number of miles, and conveniences of passage from Town to
Town, through every part that can recompense the trouble of a journey, you find
a brief and yet a lively description of their several scituations, a repetition
of their History, Government, capital Families, eminent persons, ruined
Amphitheaters, Arches, Bathes, old Temples, later Churches, Palaces of both
sorts with their various ornaments; what they have bin and what they are, when,
and by whom founded, ruined, or restored. Not any thing ancient or modern,
which a man upon the place ought to understand, seems omitted, nor is there any
thing inserted to the unnecessary burden of his memory: no Treatise in the
Italian tongue was everso acceptable to strangers, none on this subject
deserved so well from the natives. Whatever therefore the success be in the
translation, you cannot but commend this Gentleman's choice, who after many
years return from that pleasing journey, intended only a recollection of the
language, and review of the Country, without any design of making his papers
public, till assured by his friends they would in all hands meet a favorable
reception; since the early progress of our English youth, and short abode
there, seldom gives them opportunity to arrive to any perfection in that
speech, till they are ready for departure, nor do many of them long retain it.
Of those how few are there that prefer not discourses in their own? especially
on a subject which. admits no continued elegancie of style, or contains any thing
not easily reducible to another Idiome* Such as have traverst the History only,
will find in every leaf a new delight by the brief recitals of the best
Authors, enlightened with Chronology, and many doubtful passages reduced to
certainty by the site and distance of the most memorable Cities, Fields, and
villages celebrate in Latin and Italian stories. Those who are hitherto
unacquainted with either, will here find enough to inform themselves, and
satisfy others, that they are not ignorant of any thing worth knowledge in
that Country. Nay even to them who little regard the History or Geography,
devotion will render it acceptable, the most important ceremonies of the Roman
Church being briefly discoursed, and exposed to the different censures of those
that read them with scorn or reverence. If there are any in the number of
Readers who believe themselves unconcerned in all that is hitherto offered,
there yet remains for them sufficient entertainment, in the magnificent
buildings, elegant Gardens, Statues, Embosments, Paintings of all sorts, and in
every sort more excellent then all the other parts of Europe pretend unto.
Hence did the barbarous Britains, Gauls, Germans, etc. derive their first
civility, and hence in all succeeding ages received their best supply. Who in
these nations less barbarous then their Ancestors, can think of that Country
without revere^ce? who can peevishly resolve to be ignorant of their story by
refusing this Treatise? though I confess the Originals whence this Gentleman
derives it, are not without manifold errors by the translation of Greek and
Latin names into Italian, and extreme negligenee in the impressions, so that
the english version wants a double Apology, whilst it oft-times follows those
mistakes, and is in the phrase far from the perfection it had appeared in, had
our Translator intended it for public view. Yet is there no real lapse in the
main, and every where intelligible: the faults of the press are as carefully
corrected as the Printers imporunate have will permit. And whatever
imperfections the curious Readershall after these reasonable excuses discover,
it is to be hoped he will gently pardon, or vouchsafe to the Bookseller
something of his own more excellent then what he now recommends to the Nobility,
Gentry, and Merchants of the Nation.

Farewell.

A TABLE OF THE FIRST PART
A
ANcona. 125 Arezzo. 100
B
BAssano. 3 Brescia 56 Bergamo 60 Bologna 87 Bresigella. 106 Brittonor^. 119
C
Crema. 62 Como, 75 Cotignola. 105 Cremona 107 Chioza 113 Cervia. 118 Cesena.
120
F
Florence. 93 Faenza. 106 Ferrara. 111 Forli. 118 Forlimpopoli. 180 Fano 123
Fossumbruno. 124 Foligno. 131
G
GEnoua. 138
I
IMola. 105
L
LOreto 127 Lodi. 80 Lake Garda. 55 Lu^ca. 135
M
MArostica. 4 Milan. 64 Modena. 85 Mautoua. 109 Macerata. 131
N
NOcera. 124 Narni. 133
P
PAdoua. 17 Pavia. 77 Piacenza. 81 Parma. 82 Pistoia. 99 Pisa. 99 Pesaro. 122
R
REggio. 84 Ravenna. 114 Rimini. 121 Recanati. 130
S
SCarperia. 98 Sienna. 101 Sarfina. 120 Spoleto. 132
T
TReviso. 5 Trente. 1 Terni. 133 Territory of Verona. 53
V
VEnice. 6 Vicenza. 39 Verona. 49 Valleys of Brescia. 58
Voyages or Journeys.
FRom Trent to Venice. 1 From Milan to Pavia. 76 From Brescia to Milan. 59 From
Milan to Bologna, by the Via Emilia to Florence and Rome. 79 From Bologna to
Florence Sienna and Rome. 93 From Milan, to Cremona, Mantoua, Fer rara and
Rimini. 107 From Ferrara to Venice. 113 From Ferrara to Ravenna and Rimini. 113
From Fano to Fuligno by the Via Emilia. 124 From Fano to Fuligno and Rome. 125
THE SECOND PART contains the Description of ROME:

THE TABLE OF THE THIRD PART.
A
Aversa. 259 Attella de gli Osci. 260 Lake Avernus. 297
B
BAia. 295
C
CApua. 257 Cuma. 299 Catana. 323
F
FOndi. 251 Formia. 303
G
GAeta. 252
L
LInterno 301
M
MOnte Vesuvio. 268 Messina. 321 Minturne. 302 Malta. 327
N
NAples. 260
P
POzzuolo. 279 Port of Pozzuolo. 285 Promontory of Miseno. 291 Palaces of the
Romans. 291 Pelestina. 306 Palermo. 323
S
SUessa. 256 Sicilia. 318 Syracusa. 323 Synope or Sinvessa. 301
T
TErracina. 249 Tivoli. 309
V
Voyage from Naples to Pozzuolo and return to Tivoli. 247 Villa Academica
Tullii Ciceronis. 293 Velletri. 305
THE POSTS and STAGES TO diverse Parts of ITALY.
Posts from Rome to Naples.
The City Rome. Posts To the Tower Mezza Via, 1 To Marino, 1 To the City
Velletri, 1 To Cisterna where pass the River Astura, 1 To Sarmonetta, 1 To Casa
Nova, 1 To Badia, 1 To Fondi. 1 To Molla behind Marina, 1 To Garigliano where
you ferry over the River Garigliano, 1 To the Bagni 1 To the Castle Castello, 1
There pass the River Volturnus, 1 To Patria, 1 To Pozzuolo, 1 To Naples a most
famous City and fair Port, 1 Posts 16 Posts from Naples to Messina.
The City Naples. Near whereto pass asmall Rivolett -- To the Torre del Greco,
1 To Barbazona, 1 There pass the River Sali. To the City Salerni 1 To Taverna
pinta 1 To Rivole, 1 To the Duchessa, 1 To the Castle Gole^ta, 1 To Sala, 1 To
Casal Novo, 1 Near whereto pass the River Molfe, 1 To Rovere Negra, 1 To
Alpicia, 2 Pass the River Lavo, To Castelluccia, 1 To Val S. Martino, 1 To the
Town Castro, 1 To Esaro, 1 To Regina, 1 Pass the River Busento, to the City
Cosenza, 1 To Caprosedo, 1 To Martorano, 1 Pass a small River, To San Biasio, 1
To Aqua della Fica, 1 To Montelione, 1 To S. Pietro a Burghe, 1 To Rosa, 1 To
Sant' Anna, 1 Pass the River Mettauro, 1 To Fonego, 1 To Fumarade Mori, 1 Here
embarque on the River Farto, for eight miles and four afterward by Land, 2 To
Messina a City and fair Port, Posts 36. Posts from Messina to Palermo.
FRom the said City Messina to Palermo, there are not fixed posts from place to
place as above named, but provide and hire Mules from Messina, there to be
found for that service, accustomed to pass over those Mountains both speedily
and securely; this journey is 180 Miles; wherefore (with the greatest diligence)
it cannot be attained in less then two days and a half: which voyage when any
Messenger or other person is obliged to expedite, they pay for the said Mules
as for twenty Posts P. 20 This journey leads over several Mountains,
particularly, Namari, AErei, and Mondon. And obliges the passing of several
Rivers, the chief whereof are, Castriregali, Oliverio, Trajano, Furiano, Salus,
and Termini, P. 20. Posts from Naples to Lezze by Puglia, and the Province of
Ottranto.
The City Naples. Posts TO Marigliano, 2 To Cardenale 1 To Anellino a City and
Principality, 1 To Adente cante 1 To Poracutio 1 To Ascoli, a City and
Principality, 2 To Acquaviva 1 Traverse the Apenine Hills. To the house of the
Count 1 To Cirignola, 2 To Canossa, 2 To Udria, 2 To Ricco, 1 To Bisonto; 2 To
Caporto, 1 To Conversono, 2 To Monopoli, a City on the coasts of the Adriatic
Sea, 2 To Fagliano 1 To Astone 2 To Sant Anna 1 To Busveglia 1. To San Pietro,
1 To Lezze a City of Puglia: Thence to Ottranto are 24 miles, reputed and paid
for posts, 3 Posts 33. Posts from Rome to Na ples, by the Valmone and the
Aglieri.
The City Rome. Posts TO the Torre MezzaVia. 1 To the Cava del' Aglieri, 1 To
Volmontone 2 To Castle Matteo, 1 To Florentino Castello, 2 To Torci, 1 To
Crepano, 2 To Ponte Carvo, where pass the River Garigliano, 1 To the Frate
Villa 1 To Carigliano, 2 To Bagni, 2 To Castle Castello, 1 Pass the River
Volturno To Patria and Pozzuolo, 3 To Naples* 1 Posts 21. Posts from Rome to
the holy house of Loreto.
The City Rome. Posts TO Prima Porta, M. 7 P. 1 To the Castle Nova Castello, To
Rignano, 1 Pass the Tyber, To the City Civita Castellana, 1 Pass the Tyber,
To Ottiricoli, 1 To Narni, a City, 1 Repasse the Tyber To the City Terni, 1 To
Strettura, 1 To the City Spoleto, 1 To Passo di Spoleti, 2 To Varchiano, 2 Pass
the River Trent in the plain of Dignano, 1 To the Mutia Castello, 1 To
Valcimara, 1 To the City Tolentino, 1 To the City Macerata, 1 Here pass the
Riveo Patenza and go to Recanati, whence to Loreto is, post 1 Posts 19. Posts
from Loreto to Ancona.
The City Loreto. posts TO the City Recanati 1 pass the River to the City
Osmi, 1 To Ancona a City and Seaport 1. Posts 3 Posts from Rome to Florence by
the way of Valdarno, and Orvieto.
The City Rome, posts TO the Isola Storta 1 To Ba^ano, 1 To M^nterosa: 1 Where
ends the Ecclesiatical State To Ronciglione a Castle, return into the state of
the Holy Church. 1 To the City Viterbo, 1 To the City Monte Fiascon 1 To
Gapafrica* 1 To Nona under Orvieto, 1 To Ponte Carnaiolo, 1 To Castle della
Pievi, 1 To Castigliori de Laco, 1 To Lorsaia, 1 To Castillon Artino, 1 To
Bastardo, 1 To Ponte all vane, 1 To Fighino, 1 To Treghi, 1 To Florence, 1
posts 18. Posts from Florence to Lucca
The City Florence. PAss the River Bisenzi To Poggio Cajano, 1 pass the Ombrone
to the City Pistoia, 1 pass the River Pescia to Borgo Bogia, 1 To the City
Lucca, 1 Posts 4. Posts from Milan to Venice by the way of Brescia and Bergamo,
. The City Milan, pass the River Lambro to the Cassinadi Pecchi, pass the
Navilio, to the Canonica Where pass the River Adda, 1 At two miles distance
from whence begins the Venetians Dominion To the City Bergamo, 1 pass the
Rivers Serio and Oglio, to Palazznolo, 1 To Ospedaletto, 1 pass the river Mel
to Brescia 1 pass the rivers Naviletto and Chies. To Desensano 1 To Ponte di.
S. Marco, where pass the River Menze. To Castle Nuovo, 1 To the City Verona, 1
Here pass the Adice to Scaldere, 1 pass the River Agno to Montebello, 1 To the
City Vicenza, and pass the River Bacchiglione 1 To the City Padoua, 1 There
pass the River Brenta To Lizafusina, 2 Where imbarking after five miles on the
Sea you arrive at Venice. post 1 Posts 18. Posts from Milan to Udine in Friuli.
The City Milan. TO Cassina di pecchi, 1 To Canonica where pass the River Adda.
1 and there you leave the Milanese Territory and enter the Venetians. To the
City Bergamo, 1 Pass the Rivers Serio and Oglio to Palazuolo 1 To Hospedaletto,
1 Pass the River Mel to the City Brescia, 1 Pass the Naulietto and then Chies,
to Desensano, 1 To Ponte S. Marco pass the Menzo. To Castle Novo, 1 To Verona
where pass the Adice, 1 To Scaldere: 1 Pass the river Agno to Monte bello: 1 To
the City Vicenza, 1 There pass the Bacchiglione and the rivers Tesena and
Brenta to Citta Della, 1 At Castle Franco pass the M^ton, 1 Pass the rivers
Piave and Mondegan to Uderzo 4 To Motta where pass the Livenza to San Vito, 2
To Codroipo, 1 Pass the River Torre. To Udine the chief City of the Friuli, 1
Posts 23. Posts from Milan to Brescia.
The City Milan. To Cassina Bianca, 1 To the Castle Cassano: where pass the
River Adda, 1 To Martinengo, 1 To Coccai, 1 To the City Brescia: 1 Posts 5
Another way from Mlian to Brescia, where heretofore the Posts were laid now not
The City Milan Posts To Cassina Bianca, 1 To the Castle Cassano pass the River
Adda, 1 Pass the River Serio. To Martinengo, there pass the Oglio 1 To Cocci, a
1 To the Cyit Brescia, 1 Posts 5. Posts from Mian to Venice by the way of
Cremona and Mantoua.
The City Milan. To Meregnano, pass the River Lambro, 1 Pass also the River
Muzza to the City Lodi, 1 To Zorlesco, 1 To Pizighitone there pass the Rever
Adda, 1 To the City Cremona, 1 To La Plebe di san Giacomo 1 To Voltino the last
post of the Milanese, 1 Enter the Mantouan Territory, and pass the river Oglio
To Marcaria, 1 To Castelluc^io* 1 To the City Mantoua, 1 Here you pass the Lake
over Bridges pass the River Teyone To Castellaro, 1 pass the River Tartaro To
Langoneo in the Verenian Territory, 1 pass the River Daniella and at Legnano,
the Casteludes to Bevilacqua: 1 At Montagnana, pass the River Lagno to Este, 1
To the City Padoua, whether a conveyance lies also by water, 1 To Lizafuzina,
one may go by water, 2 To the City Venice by water 1 posts 18 Posts from Milan
to Ferrara
KEep the foregoing posts from Milan to Mantoua, which are, 10 To Governolo,
where the Men's issues out of the Lake of Mantoua, 1 To Hostia, 1 To Massa of
the holy Church 1 To Palantone, there pass the Poe, 1 To Ferrara there repass
the Po, 1 posts 15. Posts from Ravenna to Ferrara
the City Ravenne to Fusignano, 1 To the Casa deCoppi, 1 To Argento pass the
Po, 1 To San Nicolo, 1 To the City Ferrara, 1 posts 5. Posts from Ferrara to
Bolognia.
The City Ferrara, To Poggio, ^ To San Piero in Casale 1 To Fun, 1 Xo the City
Bologna, 1 posts ^ Posts from Milan to Ferrara by Parma.
The City Milan. To Meregnano: pass the Lambro, 1 To the City Lo^i, 1 To
Zolesco, 1 Leaving the Milanese territory and entering that of Placentia. To
Fombi, 1 To the City Piacenza pass the Po, 1 Pass the Rivers Nuro and Reilo
Arta, 1 At Fiorenzuola pass a rivolet, 1 To the Borgue San Donino, 1 Pass the
Tarro then the Parma Rivers. To the City Parma, 2 To Sant' Ilario, 1 Pass she
River Lenza where the Territory of Parma ends and that of Modena begins. ^o the
City Reggio, 1 Pass the Rivers Castrola and Secchia. To Marzaia, 1 To the City
Modena, 1 To Bon Porto pass the Secchia, 1 To Vo, 1 To Bonizo, 1 To Finale pass
the River Castrola, 1 To Bondinello, 1 Pass the river Reno, then the Po to the
City Ferrara, 1 posts 20 Posts from Milan to Bolonia, by the shortest way.
posts Keep the above written way from Milan to Modena 14 Then pass the river
Panara, where you quit the Territor^ of Modena, and enter that of Bolonia, pass
the Imola. To Sumoggia, 1 Pass the rivers Canto and Reno to Bolonia a fair
City, 1 posts 16. Posts from Bolonia to Rome by the way of Florence.
The City Bol^gna PAss over the Bridge and afterward to Guazzo pass the River
Savona. ^o Pianoro, 1 Here begin the Apenine Hills* To Loiano, 1 Here you
determine the Territory of Bolonia, and Florentine begins. To ^elagaia, 1 To
Fiorenzuola, 1 To Zovo, 1 Pass the River Sien^. To San Pietro a Sieno, 1 To
Ucellatoio, 1 To Florence pass the River Arno, 1 To San Cassiano* 1 To Le
Tavernelle, 1 To Sagia, 1 To the City Sienna, 1 To Lucignano, 1 To Tornieri, 1
Pass the River Orcia to Scala, 1 Pass a rivolet, and then ascend the Mountains
to Radicofani, a Castle and good Inn, 1 At the foot of the Mountains, pass a
Rivolet. To Pontecentino, there pass a Rivolet troublesome in rainy weather, 1
Thence a little pass the Paglia by bridge. To Acqua Pendente of the holy
Church, 1 To the City Bolsena, 1 To the City Monte fiascone, 1 To the City
Viterbo, 1 To Ronciglione, 1 To Monterossa, 1 To Bacc^na, 1 To Storta, 1 To the
City Rome 1 Posts 26. Posts from Fossombrone to Perugia. At Fossombrone pass
the River,
TO Quaiana, 1 To Cantia pass the hills 1 To the City Giubileo* 1 To the City
and university Perugia, 1 Posts 4 Posts from Rome to Venice.
The City Rome. posts TO Prima Porta, 1 To Castle, a new Castle 1 To Rignano
pass the Tyber, 1 To Civita Castellana: 1 Repass the Tyber, To Otricoli, 1 To
The City Narny, 1 pass the Tyber again to the City Terni, then to Strettura, 2
To Prote and to Sant Horatio 2 To Pontecentemsio and the City Nocera, 2 To
Gualdo and to Sigillo, 2 To Sheggia, 1 To Cantiana and Acqualagna 2 To the City
Urbine, the state of that Duke and a Sea Port, 1 To Foglia, and to Monte Fiore
2. To Coriano and to the City Rimini, 2 To Bellaere and Cesenatico, 2 To Savio,
and to the City Ravenna, 2 To Primaro and to Magnavaca, 3 To Volani, 2 To Gorro
pass there the Po; 2 To Fornase repass the po, 2 pass the River Adice, 1 To the
City Chioza, 2 There embarque for Venice, 3 posts 40. posts from Rome to
Bolonia through the province Romagna
The City Rome,. KEep the same posts as above till arrived at this mark, that
is to the City Rimini, 21 To Savignano, 1 To the City Cesena, 1 To the City
Forli: 1 To the City Faenza, pass the river Lamone, 1 pass the river Senio to
Imola, pass the River Santerno, 1 pass the rivers, Salerin, and Giana, 1 To San
Nicolo, 1 Pass the rivers Adice and Savona, 1 posts 29. Posts from Rome to
Perugia
THe City, Rome, pass the Tyber, to Prima Porta, 1 To Castle, novo Castello, 1
To Rignano, pass the Tyber, 1 To Civita Castellana, 1 Pass the Tyber to
Ottricoli, 1 To Narni pass the Tyber, 1 To the City Terni, 1 To Strettura, and
to Proti, 2 To Sant Horatio, 1 To Santa Maria de gli Angeli, 2 To Perugia a
City and University. posts 12 Posts from Perugia to Florence.
The City Perugia. TO Torte, and Orsaia, 2 To Castello Nartino, and to
Bastardo, 2 To Ponte all Valle, 1 To Fichini, and to Treghi, 2 To Florence,
passing the Arno 1 posts 8. Posts from Milan to Pesaro.
From Milan, you must go to Bolonia the way and posts whereto, you have before,
16 pass the rivers Savona and Adice 1 To San Nicola, 1 pass the river Salerno
to Imola, 1 pass the river Santerno, then the Senio 1 In the City Senio pass
the Amone, 1 To Forli, 1 To Cesena and then to Sevignano, 1. To the City
Rimini, 1 To Cattolica, 11 To the City Pesaro, 26 posts from Milano to Urbino.
From Milan keep the above written posts to the City Rimini, 24 To Coriano, 1
To Monte Fiore, 1 To Foglia an Hostery, 1 To the City Urbine, 1 posts 28 Posts
from Lucca to Genoua
AT the City Lucca pass the River Serchio A Mazaroso in which stage, you leave
theterritory of Lucca, entering the Florentine. 1 To Pietra Santa, 1 To Massa
del Principe, 1 pass the River Versiglia to Sarezana, a City of the state of
Genoua, 1 pass the River Marca to L^rci whence you may pass to Genoua by water
as well as Land, 1 To San Simedio, 1 To Borghetto, and to Manterana: 2 To
Biacco and to Sestri, 2 At Sestri, you may imbarque also for Genoua, being five
posts by water but in an ill season pass on by Land. pass the River Lugna. to
Chiavara pass the River Sturla 1 To Repalo and to Recco 2 To Bolignasco, pass
the River Besa^na, 1 To Genoua a City, and Sea Port, 1 posts 15 Posts from
Venice to Genoua by the way of Parma.
At Venice imbarque for Lizafusina, 8 To Padoua, pass the River Brenta, 1 A
Este, 2 At Mont^gnana, pass the River Lagn^* 1 To Bevilacqna, 1 Pass the River
Daniello to Sangon^to Ver^nese, 1 Pass the River Tanaco To Castellaro, pass the
Teyone, 1 To Mantoua, pass the Mantouan Lake, 1 To Borgo Forte, 1 To Mora, pass
the Po, 1 To Guastallo, a Principality, 2 To Borsello, pass the River Lenza, 2
To Parma, pass the River Parma, 1 To Fornonovo, on the River Parma, 2 To Borga
di val di tarro, 2 Pass the Hills, the Marca, and the River Pogliasco. To
Varasi, and to Sestri, 2 Pass the River Lavagna To Chiavari, pass the Sturla, 1
To Repalo and to Recco, 2 To Bolignasco, pass the Besagna, 1 To Genoua City a
Sea Port, 1 Posts 27 Posts from Milan to Genoua.
To Binasco, 1 To Pavia a City and College pass the Ticino, 1 pass the Rivers,
Gronolone, and the Po, Pancarana, and to Voghera, 2 Pass the Stafora and Curone
to the City Tortona, pass the Scrivia to Bittola, 2 To Seravalle, and to
Ottagio, 2 Ascend the Zovo, andgo down it. To P^nte Decimo, 2 Pass the River
Soseria to Genoua, 1 posts 11 Posts from Genoua to Venetia, by Piacenza and
Mantoua.
The City Genova pass the River Seria To Ponte Decimo, 1 Ascend and descend the
Zovo To Ottagio, 2 Near Gavio pass a small stream To Seravalle, a Castle of the
Milanese, 1 To Betola, 1 To the City Tortona, 1 pass the Stafora to Voghera, 1
pass the River Coppa To Schiatezza, pass the River Versa 1 To Stradella, 1 Here
you quit the Territory of Milan, and enter that of Piacenza to the Castle St.
Gioanni: 1 pass the River Tidone, To Rottofrenoa Castle, 1 pass the River
Trebia to the City Piacenza, 1 pass the Rivers Nuro Relio, Vezeno, and Chier
all in one stream, and near Cremona, pass the River Po, To Cremona a City of
the state of Milan, 3 From Cremona to Venice you will find the posts in the
journey from Milan to Venice by Cremona and Mantoua marked as is here marked, 14
Posts 29 posts from Milan to Guastalla
The City Milan pass the river Lambro to Merignano, 1 To the City Lodi, and to
Zorlesco, 2 To Pizighitone Castello pass the Adda, 1 To the City Cremona, 1 To
plebe di San Giacomo, 1 To Volti. 1. To Casal Maggiore, 1 To Barsello and to
Guastallo, 2 posts 10 Posts from Milan to Corezzo by the aforenamed way
The City Milan. Take the foregoing posts from Milan to Casal Maggiore, marked
as in this place, 8 To Bersello pass the Po, 1 From Bersella to Corezzo are
thirty five miles, which according to the custom of the Modeneses are divided
into 4 posts posts 13 posts from Milano to Trento.
The City Milan posts From Milan to Castelnovo the posts are set down in the
posts from Milan to Venice, by Bergamo and Brescia 10 to Volgarna, 1 To Peri, 1
To Vo, 1 pass the River Adice To Rovere, ^ To Trente a City of Italy and
Germany, 2 Posts 16. FRom Brescia to Trento there is another way to wit, by the
Lake Garda, but the posts are not laid that way nor is the Lake Garda, at all
times passable without danger.

Errata.
Page 2. l. 13. r. the Germans. p. 10. l. 32. r. behold. p. 12. l. 35. r.
Grisons p. 20. li 9. r. cattle p. 33. l. 10. 11. r. when I was in Italy in
honor of whom p. 38. l. 41. r. malignity if, ib. l. 42. r. i^ by. p. 46. l.
39. r. Vicenza, p. 48. l. 41. r. for, p. 50. l. 48. r. faith, p. 54. l. 38. r.
likewise, p. 55. l. 25. r. viscounte. p. 59. l. 10. for sable r. pretend p. 59.
l. 34. r. Rampar^s p. 64. l. 31. r. form. 67. l. 2^. r. many, p. 72. l. 2. r.
me, p. 75* l. 7. r. dele re a, p. 76. l. 38. r Lake p. 81. l. l. r. as p. 83.
l. 26. r. or, p. 84. l. 3^. r. such as have, p. 87. l. 15. r. by for be, p. 89,
l. 4. r. tuines. ^ ^2. l. 30. r. passing, p. 93. l. 36 r. in those, p. 98. l.
45. r. Florence. p. 99. l. 6. r. Ombrosa, p. ^39. l. 16, 17. r.
incomparablenesse page 144. l. 32. r. entire. p. 150. l. 1. r. and by. p. 163.
l. 13. r. God. p. 163. l. 35. ^. ^ratorians reside. p. ^65. l. 22. r. P allas.
p. 167. l. 45* r. Cardinal President, p. 170. l. 4. r. Martyr, i^. l. 43. r.
old ^he Temple, p. 174. l. 18. r. Pliny in the, ib. l. 1 9. dele in, ib. l. 46
r. time. p* ^78. l. ^3. r. depu^ him p. 179. l. 7. r. carcasses, p. 18^. l 38.
r. diseased, p. 183. l. 4. dele and, p. 191. l. 31. r. Tyter. p. p. 208. l. 39.
r. ran into the, p 210. l, 18. r. denominated, ib. l. 32. r. Palm, p. 235. l.
47. r. Salutation, p. 236. l. 25. r. 1465. p. 292 l, 17. r. same, ib. l. 19. r.
Tully, p. 245. l. 18. r. bring, p. 248. l. 10, 11. r. Artemisio.



THE HISTORY OF ITALY, BEING An exact Description of all the Cities, Towns,
Castles, and Villages of ITALY, with the most remarkable particulars in each of
them.
The first PART.
Wherein is contained the Journeys, or Voyages, from Trent to Venice, from
Venice to Milan, from Milan to Rome.

The way from Trent to Venice.
TRento, or Trent, is a City of the Province of Marca Trivigiana, or Marquisate
of Treves, and is seated in a Valley on the confines of the said Province. It
has Walls round it, which are about the compass of a mile, and are washed by
the River Ladice toward the North; Large and Fair Streets, paved with
Flint-stones, and stately Houses. Its Churches are very beautiful, though not
large. There is one most sumptuous, and Royal Palace, which was lately restored
by Bernardo Clessio, Bishop of the said City. Toward the East part thereof
enters a little River, upon which are raised many edifices, to work Silks in,
as also to grind Corn; and from the said little River are brought many
Rivolets, which run along the Streets, and into the Houses of the Citizens.
Without the Gate called Saint Lorenzo, upon the Ladice, there is a magnificent
Bridge, of one hundred forty and six paces in length (but of Wood) which
conjoyns the Ladice with the other little River. The surrounding Mountains by,
being continually covered with Snow, precipitous, and so high that the heads
thereof seem to touch the heavens, are rendered inaccessable. Between these
Mountains, are two ways, the one goes toward the North, the other toward
Verona. It has but little Champaign, or Fields, but those are pleasant and
Rich, planted with Vines, and fruitful Trees, amidst which passes the Ladice.
In this place, may be seen the Castle, and Fort, called Pelen, appertaining to
the most Noble Family of the Troppi. The Citizens speak good Dutch, and not ill
Italian. Trent is now reduced under the power of Germans, and is a refuge for
all Italians, when any disgrace happens to them in their own Country. They
gather but little Corn, but, in lieu thereof, they have good quantity of
delicious Wines, both White, and Red. In the Summer, the Air is good, but the
Sun beats upon it most vehemently on those days it remains in the sign Leo;
And in the Winter, it is so very cold, by reason of the Frosts and Snow, that
there is no living; their Stoves are not sufficient to provide against it,
because the cold is so fierce, that it turns the Rain into Snow, before it
can fall to the Earth; and that which occasions the greatest wonder here, is,
that in that time their Wells, or deepest Pits, are void, and empty of Water.
In stead of Mules, Asses, and Horses of Burden, they serve themselves of their
Oxen, and Cows, with Charrets so easy to carry goods, that they run up by the
Mountains, as if it were in a Plain; though it is very true, that the ways are
so well helped by the Cliffs, or Craggs, that the Beasts may go any where with
little labor.

This City was greatly illustrated, and enriched certain years past, by the
General Council held here: for that there met then five President Cardinals;
Two Legates of the Council, for his Holiness, Pius the fourth, Chief Bishop, or
Pope of Rome, being Cardinals also, that is to say, Cardinal Loreno, and
Cardinal Madruccio; Three Patriarchs, Thirty two Archbishops, Two hundred and
thirty Bishops, Seven Abbots, Seven Generals of Religion, One hundred forty and
six Doctors of Divinity, between Seculars, and Regulars; The Ambassador of
Ferdinand the Emperor, as well in the name of the Empire, as of the Kingdoms
of Hungary, and Bohemia; as also the Ambassadors of the King of France, of the
King of Spain, of the King of Poland, and of Portugal, of the Dukes of Bavaria,
of Savoy, of Venice, of Florence, and of the other Catholic Princes.

The Council was held in the Church of Saint Mary, where there is a very fair
Organ. In the Church of Saint Peter are the Ashes of the blessed Simeon,
Martyred by the wicked Jews. In the Church of the Friars Heremitans lies
buried Cardinal Seripando* who was Legate of the Council, a man famous for
Holiness, and Doctrine. The Cannons are all illustrious persons, and have
authority to choose the Bishop, Lord of the City, and Prince of the Empire,
which dignity, three Cardinals of the most Noble Family of the Madrucci, have
enjoyed successively, of which one named Altiprando lives at present, a
religious Person, and a lover of Learned men.

BASSANO.
FRom Trento the way lies to Bassano, traveling toward the East by the Valley
of Sugana, called by the Ancients Euganea, because a People of that name dwelt
there; This Plain is eighteen miles in length, and two only in breadth, whence
you may go to Venice, but it is too long a journey. Five Miles forth of Trent,
is situated the rich, and populous Country of Perzene.

At the Head of the Valley, near Primolano, are the confines between the
Venetians, and Germans. Upon the high Mountain of Primolano is there built a
most strong Bulwark of the Venetians called Strada, where a few Soldiers can
repel the Dutch, when ever they offer by violence, or force, to advance
forwards. At twelve miles distance from thence toward the East, among the
Alps, is the City of Feltre, by the which way at the right-hand-shore of the
River Brent, three miles distance from Scala, is seated Cavolo, a Fort of the
Germans, inexpugnable, in respect that it is founded upon a great Rock directly
hanging over the highway, with a Fountain of living water in it, whereto
neither Man, nor Goods can be mounted from the Earth, unless fastened to a Rope,
and that wound up upon a wheel, from which (because it is a very narrow way
underneath, between the Mountain and the River) with small labor, may their
enemies be slain with Stones cast on them, as they march along. Thence five
miles distant, is the River Cisimone (which disembogues it self into the Brenta)
where the Dutch and Feltrini, daily load great quantities of Timber and Wood,
as well for the use of Building, as for firing, which they afterward transport
to Bassano, to Padoua, and to Venice. Seven miles distant from Bassano, on the
Right-hand-shore of the Brent, lies the Country of Valstagna, placed at the
foot of the Mountains, and famous for the Sawes there made: thence distant
three miles, lies the Country of Campese, where in the Church of the Friars of
Saint Benedict lies buried he that wrote la Macharonea.

Bassano lies at the foot of this straight Valley, and is washed toward the
West by the Brent, called anciently Brenta, or Brentesia, the which has its
Sourse, or head, beyond the Alps of Trent twelve miles, near Levego. Over the
Brent, a little forth of the Gate of Bassano, is built a great Bridge of Wood,
which conjoyns both the Rivers. Between the Alps, and this Castle, there are
some Hills, which produce most abundantly all things requisite, as well for
necessary living, as delicacy, but most particularly, they abound with Olives,
and precious Wines. The River Brenta runs through the Territory of Vicenza,
passes by the City of Padoua, and in the end discharges it self, by the
Fenny, or Moorish grounds, into the Sea. In this River, they take excellent
Fish, as Trouts, Pollard, or Chieven, Eyles, Pyke, Tench, Lampreys, Barbel, and
Crabfish. In no place are the men more ingenuous in Merchandise than in this:
particularly in weaving of Cloth, in turning most neatly in Ivory, and in
Carving in NutTrees. There is never a year, that they dress less than fifteen
thousand pound weight of Silk, and notwithstanding that, that which is made in
China is esteemed better than is made in any other part of the world,
nevertheless it is known, that this of Bassano is more subtle or thin, and more
light. Hence the Family of the Carrareci drew their Original, and Eccellino the
Tyrant, as also Lazaro, surnamed Bassano, a person not meanly learned, nor less
acquainted in the Greek tongue than in the Latin: he lived a long time in
Bologna, with great satisfaction to the learned, afterward he rendered himself
at Padoua, to the end that he might illuminate those who were studious of good
Letters. At present Giacomo dal Ponte, an excellent Lymner, greatly illustrates
this Country, together with four of his Sons, called vulgarly, the Bassani.
Bassano has under it twelve Towns, which with it self contein to the number of
twelve thousand Souls.

MAROSTICA.
AT three miles distance from Bassano toward the West, is seated a strong
place, named Marostica, a Castle built by the Lords of Scala, near the
Mountain, and fortified with Walls, and two Sconce^. Anciently this Castle
stood in the neighboring Mountain, which looks toward the East, where, at
this time are to be seen the Foundation^. Here the Air is most perfect, and the
Country as pleasant, and produces excellent fruits, in great abundance, but
it most excels in Cherries of all sorts, which are so infinitely pleasant, and
so well ^elished, that therefore in many places they are called Marosticane.
There are many Fountains of clear Water; and thence about two miles, is a Lake
called Piola, whose waters abate, and rise, in the same manner as they in the
Golf of Venice, with great admiration to the beholders. The Inhabitants of this
Castle are extreme contentious, whereupon an Elegant Poet wrote thus, Restat
and in Civibus Marii discordia vetus,
Quae cum Syllanis saevit in urbe viris.


Within this Castle, are many Churches, among which is that of Saint Bastiano,
where the Friars of Saint Francis dwell, wherein lies the Body of the blessed
Lorenzuolo the Child, Martyred by the wicked Jews, who anciently there
inhabited. Francesco of the Family of the ^reschi, has much illustrated this
Castle, who publicly Read the Civil Law in Padoua, and likewise Angelo
Mateaccio, who has composed some Books of the Laws. At this present, adds no
small Fame to this his Country, Prospero Alpino, the most excellent Physician,
public Reader of the first matter of Simples, in the Academy of Padoua, who
has written De plantis AEgypti, De Opobalsamo, and De Praesagienda vit^, and
morte AEgrotantium, lately published, And is now employed (besides his public
Reading) in composing, and ripening some other noble Work for public view.
Through the middle of this Castle, runs the little River called Rozza, whence
about a mile passes the Sillano, so called, because in Ancient Language, it
signified a Stream of running water. It Is believed, that the Ancient Romans
much frequented this Place, for that the Inhabitants to this day retain certain
Latin words, though something corrupted. Before the Church of Saint Floriano,
stand two Marble Stones of great antiquity, upon the one whereof is written
thus, TI Claudio Caes. M. Salonius es Martina Chara Conjux quae Venit de Gallia
per mansiones L. Vi commemoraret memoriam Mariti sui Been quiescas duleissime
mi Marite.

TREVISO.
THe Ancient City of Treviso, is situated on the East of, and at the distance
from Bassano twenty five miles. This City was founded by Osaride, the third
King of the Gre^ans, who being adopted Son of Dionisius (therefore conceded
unto him Egypt) and Reigned in Italy ten years: And because after his death,
there appeared to the Egyptians an Ox, they supposing it to be their King
Osiris, worsnipped it as a God, and called it Ap^, which in their language
signifies an Ox, for which reason in many places of Treviso, is found an Ox
painted with this Motto: Memor: in memorial of their first founders. Others say
that Treviso was built by the Companions of Antenor; Others by the Trojans, who
went from Pastagonia; but whosoever it was built it, imports not much, since
it is most certain, it is a City of great Antiquiry. They oftentimes came to
Warlike disputes with the Padouans, as also with the (...) ^or maintenance of
their consi^es, and although through their vigilance, and victory over the
power of their Enemies, they had much enlarged their T^ritories, almost over
the whole Champain, yet to secure themselves the better, they erected several
Towers, whence they might discover their Enemies, obstruct them from too near
approaches, and as necessitated therein, make their own retreat secure: and for
this reason, was it along time called the City of Towers, ^earing for its Aims
three Black Towers in a white Field. This City either for that it was the most
noble of all the other, or for that it became first under their Dominion, the
Longobardi made the seat of their Marquesate, Marca signifying in their
language, Confines: whence all this Province is called by the name of Marca;
Wherein anciently were six principal Cities, (at present but four) with many
other Cities, and great Castles. Its Territory is in length from East to West
forty miles, and from North to South, fifty miles. It was subjected to the
Hunnes, to the Longobards, Then to the Hungarians, afterward to the People of
Scal^, after them to the Carraresians, and lastly in the year of our Lord, One
thousand three hundred eighty eight, it was reduced under the Dominion of the
Venetians, to whom from that time to this day, they have maintained constant
Faith and Obedience. This City was converted to the Christian Faith, by the
Preaching of Saint Prosdocimo, Disciple of Saint Peter, from whence they took,
a white Cross in a Red Field for their Aims, in liew o^ their Black Towers.
About Treviso runs the River Sile, with many other Rivolets, which incorporate
with it, and toward the East, it has the great River of Piave, wherein they
take the largest Crabfish. The Country abounds in all things, but principally
it breeds the Fatrest Calves. It conteins many sumptuous Palaces, and not a
few Noble Families. At eight miles distance from this City, stands Altino,
which was founded by Antenor, but afterward laid wast by Attila; between
Treviso, and Padoua presents it self the Rich and Civil Castle of Noale. Upon
the Mountains toward the North, ^ood the noble Castle of Asolo, heretofore a
Colony of the Romans as (...) says, where with great delight, dwelt the Queen
of Ciprus, having four miles off Asolo, built a most beautiful (...) as pleas^t
a Plain, with Gardens, Fountains, Fish Ponds, and all other recreations.
Eloigned from thence ten miles stands Castle I ranco, a famous 1199.
Castle, which was built by the Trivisani, in the year of our Lord, One
thousand one hundred ninety nine. After which toward the East, between the
Rivers Piave, and Livenza shows it self Conegliano, part whereof stands
erected upon the Hill, and part upon the Plain, which is replenished with
beautiful structures, and a numerous People; and enjoyes an Air so temperate,
that it acquired the name among the Germans of Cunicla, which is as much as to
say, a Residence for a King. This was the first place, that the Venetians
possessed upon the firm Land. Adjacent hereto stand Colalto, Narvisa, and the
Castle of Saint Salvadore, to the most Noble Family of the Collalti
appertaining. A little further lies Oderto, whereto in the time of the Romans,
the Adriatique Sea rise, which encouraged the Oderzesians to set a Fleet to
Sea. Near thereunto ^es, la Motta, the Country of Girolamo Alexandro created
Cardinal, by his Holiness Paul the third Bishop of Rome, for his most excellent
Doctrine; being no less learned in the Greek, and Hebrew Tongues than in the
Latin. Traveling from Treviso, over a large and (...) Highway, at ten miles
distance, is met the Castle of Mestre, and ^wo miles off that Marghera, where
taking Boat, after rowing the space of five miles, you arrive at Venice.

VENETIA, la Ricca, or VENICE the Rich.
HAving attained Le Lagune, or the (MOORS, or SHOLES) Sholes.
now the Streets of Venice, you behold many proud Palaces, built of Marble,
adorned with Columbes, Statues, and Pictures of great value, erected by those
Noble Senators, with inestimable Expense, and Artifice; among which is Seated
the Palace of the Grimani, imbellished with Statues, Figures, Pourtraicts,
high and great Colossuses, and Vaults; some of Marble, and others of (...),
very artificially Carved, and Engraven, being brought hither from Greece, and
the Ruins of Aquileia. In the open Gallery, whereof are diverse Marble Stones,
with excellent Inscriptions, amongst the which we will hereunder set down some,
which are engraven upon (...) Altars dedicated in honor of Beleno, who was
held in (...) great veneration by the Inhabitants of Aquileia as the (...)
rodian, and Giulio Cap^olino do averr and justify; The Titles (...) which
Inscriptions, I believe will be very welcome and (...) the Lovers of Antiquity.

Upon one four squared Altar, is inscribed. Beleno. Mansuetus. Verus. L^ur:
Lau: Et Vibiana Jantula V. S.

Upon another. Apollini Beleno. Aug. In honorem. C. Petti. C. C. F. Pal.
Fhiltati. Eq. P. Praef. AEd. Pot. Praef. Et. Patron. Collegiorum. Fabr. ^t
Cent. Diocles Lib. Donum. Dedit. L. D. D. D. D.

Upon another. Belino. Aug. Sacrum. Voto suscepto. Pro. Aquillio C. F. Pomp
Vatente IIII. V. I. D. Design. Phoebus Lib. V. S. L. M.

Upon another. Beleno. Aug. Sacr. L. Cornelius L. Fill. Vell. Secundinus Aquil.
Evoc. Aug. N. Quod. In. Urb. Donum. ^ou. Aquil. Perlatum. Libens ^osuit. L. D.
D. D.

Upon another. Beleno. Aug. In. Memor. Julior. Marcell. Et. Marcellae. Et In
Honorem Juliarum, Charites. ^t Marcellae. Filiar. Et. Licin. Macron. Junior
Nepotis. C. Iul. Agathopos VI. Vir. Aquil. L. D. D. D.

Upon another. Beleno Sex Graesernius Faustus VI. Vir. V. S. L. M.

Upon another Eonti. B.

Upon another. VI. Divinae Sacrum C. Verius. C. F. Gavolus.

The next object worth a view, is the Royal and Proud Palace of the Duke of
Venice, which was first begun to be erected by Ange^o Participatio, in the year
of our Lord, Eight hundred and nine, since when though six times burnt either
in part, or in all it rise again* and recovered much more beauty and luster*
Its Form, is not altogether square, the length somewhat exceeding the Breadth.
Toward the North of it, stands the Church of Saint Marco, toward the East,
the Grand Canale, or Channel, toward the South the Sea Coast, and toward the
West, the Piazza, or broad Place of Venice. From the principal Gate of this
Palace, to that Coign which st^nds next the Bridge, called Paglia, or (Straw
Bridge) toward the South: It has an Arcade of 36. Arches, every one whereof
are ten feet large, which space comprehending thirty three Pillars, ass^rds in
length three hundred foot, which Collumns have no B^ses, but excellent HEADS.
The two Frontispieces thereof, appear Pargetted with White and Red Marble, in
the midst whereof are little Ascents or Hills, whereon are set thirty seven
Collumnes, made in the Form of Pyramids, with seventy two Arches; The Facade or
Frontispiece backwards was lately beautified with Istrian Stone, and is
contignous toward the North, with the Church of Saint Marco. The Roofs of this
Palace were heretofore covered with Lead, but the fi^e that happened in the
year, 1574. caused it to be covered instead of lead, with Sl^t of a certain
Mettle. Every Front has one Gate, The principal which is conjoined with the
Church, (of a Piramide Figure) looks toward the Piazza, or broad Place, just
before which stands the winged Lion, and the Duke Foscaro, Carved in White
Marble. Next within on the right hand, is found a spacious Court, wherein are
two Wells of sweet Water, whose mouths are made with Brass, garnished with
Spouts, and other Curiosities. At the end of this Court, is the Gate which
answers to the Sea. Then having ascended the close Stairs called Foscara, on
the left hand, you may go round the Palace upon the Tarrace. The two Fronts
backwards, the one whereof lo^ks toward the Sea, the other toward the Piazza,
parallel them that are forwards, except that they have neither Arches, nor
Collumnes below. The Front toward the East on the even ground, has thirty six
Arches, and as many Pillars of Istrian Stone, over the which, there is an open
Gallery of fifty four Arches, and fifty five Col^umnes. On the Top is drawn a
Wall of Istrian Stone, adorned with beautiful Cornishes. Just against the
Principal Gate, stands the large Stayer-case of the Palace toward the North,
which leads directly to the Lodging of the Prince, at the foot of this
Stayer-case st^nds two Colossuses, the one of Marse, the other of Neptune, Upon
the ^op thereof likewise, just opposite to them, stands two most excellent
Statues, the one of Adam, the other of Fve. The Front below toward the Canale,
or Channel* has two Stayer-cases, by the which, they ascend to that most Royal
Corridor, or open Gallery, wherein stand many Tribunals, or Courts of Justice.
Opposite to the Chief Stayer-case, is a Memorial of Henry the third King of
(...), engraven in Marble with Letters of Gold. From the South East, they
ascend that most splendid Stayer-case, which upon the left hand leads to the
Chamber of the Prince; and on the right hand to the College. Where the Eye is
wholly taken up with beholding the most sumptuous Vaulted, or Arched Roof, or
Seeling, Richly garnished with Gold.

This College stands toward the East, over the Chamber of the Prince, whose
vaulted Roof (as at Venice they call it) is partly guilt, partly Carved with
great Artifice, partly Painted, and wrought with Histories, even to Admiration;
At the upper end of this Hall, is exalted the Imperial Throne of the Duke, and
the Images of Venice, figured by a Queen, who disposes the Crown upon his
Head. Here the Duke with the Senators transact the affairs of State, and give
Audience to Ambassadors, as well such as have recourse to them from their own
Territories, and Cities, as of Foreign Princes. Out of which leads a door into
another great Hall, wherein are figured all the Provinces, which the Venetians
possess upon the firm Land, where also are erected eleven most excellent
Statues of Emperors. Issuing forth of these Places, and walking toward the
Sea, you meet the dreadful Tribunals of the Counsel of Ten, where every Place
gloriously shines with Gold and costliness.

A little more forwards is the spacious Hall, or Senate House of the Great
Counsel, where they dispose the public Offices, and Ballott the Magistrates;
which Counsel orders it self in this manner. First the Duke royally clad, sits
on a Throne, raised a good higth from the Ground. On his Right Hand, he has
three Counselors near him, accompanied by one of the Chief of the Magistrates
of forty, for Criminal Offenses: Just opposite to the Prince at the other End
of the Great Hall, sits one of the Chief of the Illustrious Counsel of the
Ten. A little from whence seats himself one of the Advocates of Comminalty.
In the Angles, or Corners of the Great Hall, stands the Old and New Auditors.
In the middle are the Censors. The rest of the Nobles of Venice sit
promiscuously in other Seats less raised from the plain ground of the great
Hall. Into which Counsel cannot be admitted any that is not Noble, and who is
not above the age of twenty five years. Afterward the Grand Chancellor
(having first recommended to every One their duty, to elect a Person fit for
that Magistracy) names the first Competitor. Then certain little Lads, go up and
down the Hall with double Boxes, the one whereof is white, the other green; The
White forwards, the Green more inward gathering the Balls, which Balls are
small, and made of Cloth, that by the sound of the fall into the Box, may not
be judged into which it is cast, and before he casts in, the suffrage giver,
must show that he has but one Ball, and also tell the name of that Gentleman
who stands for those that perhaps have not well heard who 'twas, do it (many
times) over again; He that would exclude the Stander casts the Balls into the
Green Box, and he that would have him chosen casts them into the White Box,
which are made in such a Form that none can discern into which of the Boxes
they put their Balls, The Procurators of Saint Mark, never enter into this
Great Counsel, Except at the Election of the Duke) but stand under the Lodge
with the Master and Officers of the Arsenal, while that great Counsel is
gathered together for its Guard, dividing among themselves those days, whereon
they ought to have this Charge. But of these things for further satisfaction we
referr the Reader to such, who treat of them at large, herein intending only to
glance briefly at the most remarkable things.

This great Hall, is seventy three foot broad, and one hundred and fifty foot
long, and was begun in the year, One thousand three hundred and nine. On its
walls were drawn by the most excellent Painters of that Age, the victories of
this Commonwealth, Its Princes, with many other famous Men of Italy, which
being spoiled by the smoke of that Fire, which happened in the year, 1577. in
liew thereof, was Painted the History of Alexander the third chief Bishop of
Rome, and Frederick the Emperor, with the subjection of Constantinople, to the
Venetian Republique. The Floors are wonderful neat: Toward the East, is seated
the Throne of the Prince, over which is a Paradise Painted by the hand of
Tintoretto (which was formerly Painted by Guariento) and fills up all that
Front. In the Front over against that, within a square of Marble, is an Image
of the Holy Virgin, holding in her Arms, her little Infant, compassed about by
four Angels. The Windows of this Hall, look some into the Court, and others
into the Sea. Near hereunto is the Magazine of the Palace, which is never
opened, but to Foreign Princes, wherein is provision of Arms, for fifteen
hundred Gentlemen, more or less, and it is divided into four spacious Portals,
with the Doors thereof of Cipres Wood, which give a most sweet savor. On the
other side of the Hall of the Great Counsel is beheld the Hall of the
Inquisitors, with many and diverse Pictures, amongst which is a Judgment, drawn
by the hand of Tintoretto.

Thence descending by the Foscaran Stayers, you enter the Dukes Chapel being
the Cathedral Church of S. Mark, which is built with the fairest and finest
Marble with great skill, and no less expense, whose Pavement is composed all of
little pieces of Porphiry, and Serpentine, and other precious Stones after the
Mosaic manner, with diverse Figures. Among others, there are some Figures
Effigiated by Commission of Gionachino Abbat of Santo Fiore (as is the common
Fame) by which is presaged and demonstrated the great ruin which will fall
upon the People of Italy, with other strange misfortunes: Where you beheld two
Cocks, very boldly to carry away a Fox (which signifies (as some will have it)
that two French Kings should carry away, and force Lodovico Sforza out of the
Seigniory of Milan. And also some Lions Large and Fat appear as put in the
Water, and some others set upon the shore very lean. Upon the Walls of the
finest Marble, on the left hand, are two Tables of white Marble, somewhat
weaved with black, which at their joining, represent a Man, so perfectly
figured, that it is very wonderful to consider it. Whereof Albertus Magnus in a
work called Meteora (as of a great rarity) makes mention. There are in this
sumptuous Temple (reckoned amongst the chief of Europe, (though not so much for
its vastness, as the design and precious materials) thirty six Collumnes of the
finest Marble, which are large two feet Diamiter. The Roof of it is divided
into five Cupoloes covered with Lead. From the plain of this Place, to the very
Top of the Temple, are the Fronts wrought up in Mosaicke work, with Figures in
a Field of Gold, and certain little Heads of Pillars, and Juttings out, or
Eeves of Marble, upon which are set certain Images carved in Marble so
perfectly, that they seem alive. There are also above this place on that part,
which lies over the great Gate (whereof this Part has five made of Brass) four
Horses very Antique of Brass guilt, of an exact Proportion, and extremely
beautiful, which the Romans caused to be cast, to put them in the Triumfal Arch
of Nero, when he Triumphed over the Parthians, and they being afterward
transported by Constantine to Constantinople; from thence (the Venetians being
thereof become Lords) transported them to Venice, setting them upon the Temple
of Saint Mark. In the Porch of the said Church, is seen a red square Marble
Stone, upon which Alexander the third set his Foot upon the neck of Frederick
the Emperor, whereon for that reason, are engraven these words: Super Aspidem,
and Basiliscum ambulabis.

After which mounting to the Top of the Quire, by certain Steps of the finest
Stones, you come to the place where the Singers stand on the Chief Feast days.
There upon the great Alter, is the rich and fair Pixe framed of Gold and
Silver, bedecked with many precious Stones, and Perl of an infinite price,
which all persons admire that behold it. This Altar is covered over by one
Arch, disposed into the form of a Cross, adorned with Marble, which the
Ancients called Tiberiano, supported with four Pillars of excellent Marble;
wherein are carved the History of the Old and New Testaments. Behind this
Altar, arise four Pillars of the purest Alablaster, five foot in length,
transparent as Glass, placed there for Ornament of the Sacred and Holy Body of
Jesus Christ consecrated or the Eucharist. In this Church are preserved with
great devotion, many Relics: and among others the Body of the Evangelist,
this Republiques Protector Saint Mark, with his Gospel written by his own hand.

On the right hand of the Temple, in the midst thereof, is a large and high
Gate, wrought all of Mosaique work, on the one side whereof stands the Effigies
of Saint Dominick, and on the other that of Saint Francisco, which as it is
reported, were made by order of the above named Gionachino many years before
the said Saints came into the world. Within this Gate is kept the most rich
Treasure of Saint Mark so much spoken of; wherein are twelve precious Crowns,
with twelve Breast Plates, all compassed about with fine Gold, and garnished
with many Stones of great value. Among diverse others, with Rubies, Emeralds,
Topasses, Crisolits, and other precious Stones, and Perls of numatchable
bigness; Two Unicorns Horns of a great length, with a third somewhat less. Many
very large Carbuncles, Vessels of Gold, Scollops of Agat, and Jasper Stones of
a good bigness. One Huge Ruby given this State, by Domenico Grimani, a most
worthy Cardinal. An Emerald hower-glass heretofore presented to this most
illustrious Seigniory, by Uscassano King of Persia, with many other precious
things* Vessels, and Censores of Gold, and Silver. There also lies the Mitre or
Bonnet (as we call it) with which every new Duke is Crowned. The which is
traversed all over with the finest Gold, and pollish't, in whose wreathes, are
many most precious stones; and at the very Top, a Carbuncle of inestimable
value; I might also speak of the Candle-sticks, and Challices, with other
things of such imminent value, as may create wonder in the beholders, but would
take up too much time and room to describe them in this Abreviation.

Just opposite to this Temple, and distant from it about Eighty Paces, stands
the high Steeple, which is 40. Foot square on all sides, and Two Hundred and
Thirty high, with an Angel set upon the Top, which like a Weathercock turning
with the Wind to all corners where it blows, ever has the Face toward it.
All the said Top or upper part thereof, is richly guilt, which presents it to
the Eye of such as address to Venice, (by reason of the reflection of the hot
Sun thereon) Lucidely shining at a great distance; In the foundation of this
Steeple was more expended (as Sabellico declares) than in all the other
structure. They ascend to the uppermost part of this Steeple, by certain little
winding steps within, where a most excellent Prospect discovers it self: as
first, the City of Venice, divided into six Precincts, consisting of many
little Islands, whose Banks are conjoined with Bridges, the Streets, the open
Places, the Churches, the Monasteries, and other sumptuous structures;
Moreover, the small Islands seated round about the City to the number of sixty,
with their Monasteries, Churches, Palaces, and most beautiful Gardens; Upon
some of which Islands, are erected many Collumnes, by the Aquleiesi, the
Vicentini, the Opitergini, Concordiesi, Altinati, and several other People, who
to fly the Fury of Attila, King of the Hunnes, recovered this Place; gives no
small Imbellishment to this View. Between the said Moorish Grounds, now the
Streets and the Sea, by Dame Nature is raised a Fence or Bank, to defend the
City and the small Islands, against the furious Waves of the Sea, (with which
it is environed) Which Fence is Thirty five Miles long, and bends in the shape
of a Bow, opening it self in five several Places, for each of which is a Gate,
as well to permit Barks to enter in at them, as to maintain the said Channels
full of Water. The profound Havens of Chioza, and Malamocco, with the Forts
built at the Mouth of the said Havens, to keep any Armado or Fleet at a
distance; And lastly, the beholding the Mountains of Carnia, and of Histria,
and on the Right Hand, the Apenine Hills, with Lumbardy, together with the
Famous Hills called Euganei, with the mouths of the Rivers Adice, and Poe, and
behind them the Alps of Baviera, and of the Gerisons, always covered with
Snow, gives no small satisfaction, nor beauty to his Prospect.

And now we come to the Famous Piazza, or broad place of S. Mark, whose
platform resembles a Carpenters square, at the one end whereof stands the
Admirable Church of St. Mark, and at the other, That of St. Geminian, wrought
with excellent Stones, and round the said Place are built fair and sumptuous
Houses all of Marble Stone, under which are large open Galleries, wherein are
Shops for several Artificors. In this place daily appear an infinite number of
Persons, of all Qualities and Countries, in their several Habits, as well for
News and Discourses, as for Traffic and Merchandise.

At the upper end of the said Place, upon the Channel called La Gi^deca, are
two Pillars admired for their Height and Bigness, which were transported
heretofore from Constantinople, upon the one whereof, stands a Winged Lion, the
Republic Arms, in token of St. Mark their Protector, with this Motto, Pax
tibi Marce Evangelist^mens, and upon the other, is set the Statue of St.
Theodore, between which Justice is done upon Traitorous Persons. These were
brought from Greece to Venice, in the time of Sebastian Ciani the Duke, upon,
certain Vessels of burden, together with another of equal Greatness, the which
overcomming the Power and Industry of the Workmen laboring to lay it on the
Earth, it fell into the Water, where at this time it is to be seen in the Deep:
These vast Columns, were reared by an Engineer of Lombardy named Nicolo
Berreterro, by the strength of great Ropes wet with water, retiring by little
and little; who asked no other reward for this his work, but that it might be
Lawful for Dice-Players to play there when they pleased without any penalty:
This Piazza is not entirely one alone, but four united together. Opposite to
the Church are reared three Standards upon three high pieces of Timber which
are fastened by Lead cast into the boared holes, they are wrought with figures
to denote the liberty of this City, and have Brass Pedestalls. On the right
side of the Church stands the Clock house adorned with the Celestial Signs gilt
thereon, with the Sun and Moons monthly ingress into them, most exactly
wrought and painted. Near the Steeple is a sumptuous Palace built in this Age,
after the Ionick and Dorick fashion, which reaches even to the Church of Sain
Geminian, which for the excellency of the Marble, Statues, Casements,
Cornishes, Frets and other ornaments, together with the most incomparable
Architecture, gives not place to any palace of Italy. Next is the Zecca or
Mint-house built all of flint Stone, and Iron Bars, without any manner of
Timber. Annexed thereunto Stands the Library, which had its Original from
Petrarca, and was afterward aggrandized by the Cardinals Niceno, Alexandro,
and Grimano. Lastly, this Piazza is rendered so Proud and mavelous, by the
Uniformity of Building, and other Imbellishments, that I cannot say all Europe
affords its like.

The Island Muran, must next be visited by taking Gondola, or Boat, Muran.
which for its Furnaces of Glass is much admired through the World. This Island
is distant from Venice about a Mile, and was begun to be inhabited by the
Altinati, and Opitergini, for fear of the Hunnes. At present it is very comely,
and resembling Venice, as well in the structures, as in the Quantity of
Churches, but much more pleasant and delightful, in respect most of the Houses
have open and spacious Gardens, set with all sorts of fruitful Trees. Among
others, is the Church of Saint Peter, with a Monastery belonging to the
preaching Friars, well built, wherein is a famous Library full of good Books.

In this Place they make all sorts of Vessels of Glass (called Crystal Glass)
whose variety and Workmanship surpass all others of the same materials of the
whole world. And the Artizans (except in excellency of the materials) every day
find out new Inventions to make them appear more desirable, with works diverse
from one another. I will not speak of the variety of colors which they give
thereunto, because it is so mavelous that I imagine it worthy all Peoples
sight. They counterfeit excellently several things of Agate, Calcidonian,
Emerald, and Hyacinths, with other pretty Toys so excellently, that I believe
were Pliny to be revived, and should behold them, he would (admiring them) much
more praise these men's workmanship, and these artificial things, than he does
the vessels of Earth made and burned by the People of Aretini, or of any other
Nation.

Opposite to the Piazza of Saint Mark, and about half a mile dista^t, St.
Georgio.
is seen the Church of Saint George, the Greater, a stately structure of
Marble. In which is beheld most curious Marble, both in the Pavements, and in
the Statues, with rich workmanship of Silver, and most sumptuous Sepulchers of
Princes. The Friars of Saint Benedict have here a noble Monastery, wherein are
long open Galleries, spacious Courts, ample eating-Rooms, and
sleeping-Chambers, as also most pleasant Gardens, with a worthy Library.

In Venice are seventeen Rich Hospitals, with a great number of wealthy
Churches, adorned with the exactest marble Stone; consisting of sixty seven
Parish-Churches fifty four Convents of Friars, twenty six Monasteries of
Nunns, eighteen Chapels, six Schools, kept within the Principal Fryeries or
Monasteries. In all which Churches are fifty bodies of Saints, one hundred
forty and three Organs, and many Statues made at the cost of the Republic, in
remembrance of illustrious Persons, which have valiantly fought for her, or
done some other signal piece of service, that is to say, 165 of Marble, and 23
of Brass, among which most worthily presents it self, That proud Statue on
Horseback wrought with Gold, of Bartolomeo Coglione the most famous
Captain General of the Venetian Army, dedicated to him by this Republiek,
before the Church of Saint John and Paul, in testimony of his Fidelity, and
Valor.

Moreover, there are fifty six Tribunals, and ten Gates of Brass. The
Storehouse of the Germans, which is five hundred and 12 foot in circumference,
whose Front outward has many excellent Figures, and inwards two Galleries
which go quite round the one above the other, wherein are two hundred Lodging
Chambers. There stand also up and down this City, besides what are above
mentioned, infinite more Statues, Pictures, and glorious Tombs. At all seasons
it abounds plentifully with fruits and herbs of all sorts, and two hundred
several sorts of Fish: furthermore there are fourhundred and fifty bridges of
Stone, fourscore thousand Gondaloes or Boats, with twice as many Gondaloers or
Watermen, with a vast number of Channels, among the which the Principal is
called the Grand Canale, or Chanel, one hundred and thirty paces in length, and
forty in breadth, over which is built that most artificial Bridge, called the
Rioalto, being one Arch which conjoynes both the Banks, to be accounted for its
height, length, and breadth, amongst the most glorious fabrics of Europe;
whereon are erected twenty four shops covered all alike with lead, that is to
say twelve of a side with magnificent Balustrades behind. They ascend this Brid
Bridge by three degrees of steps, that in the midst consists of sixty six
Steps, and thoseof each side, of one hundred forty five; to these rarities, may
be added the infinite concourse of People.

And to the end we may remove that erroneous opinion that this City was built
by Fishermen; let us observe what Cassiodoro, who was Counselor, and Secretary
of Theodorick King of the Goths speaks thereof. Vos (says he) Qui numerosa
navigia in ejus confinio possidetis, and Venetia plenae nobilibus, etc. which
happening in the four hundred ninty and fifth year of our Salvation, and from
the building thereof between 80. and 90. years, gives a fair presumption, that
the Venetians could not acquire so great reputation, nor less possess so many
Vessels on the Sea, had they not been somewhat rich and noble too sometime
before.

Your next visit must be to the Arsenal, or Magazine of War of this City,
seated on the one side of it toward the two Castles, and Palace of the
Patriark, which are compassed about with high Walls, and with the Sea. This
Arsenal affords but one entrance by one only Gate, and by one only Chanel,
where through are guided in all the shipping, and it is about the quantity of two
miles in circuit. Herein generally they make all their works, and engines of
War, but most particularly their Charge is to prepare here these 4. Materials
for that Service, Timber, Iron, Brass, and Hemp. Of which their charge of
Timber-work, they are so provident, (that besides what at first shows itself
to the view) there is under the water a good quantity of Galleys, great and
small, Gallefoists, Pinnaces, Brigantines, Masts, Main-yards, Oars, and
Rudders, for their Sea vessels. And for the Iron work, Bullets of all sizes,
Nayls, Chains, Anchors, with diverse Plates of Iron, as likewise for Brass, all
sorts of Ordnance, and of all proportions. And lastly, of their Hempen works,
all sorts of Shrouds, Sails and Cables. To which several works, continually
attend a vast number of Workmen, and excellent Handicraftsmen, who being as it
were born in that Place, and from thence obteining their livelihood, Neither
delight in any other Place, nor do no other thing, but what there by their
several Callings they are directed unto.

Therein are erected most ample Arches, wherein their several Vessels are kept
dry, and built, some fully finished, some building, and others repairing. The
next Curiosity, is their spacious Halls, full of Arms for defense in Maritine
service, as great Celades, Cariages, and Breasts; and no less provided of
Offensive Weapons, as Pistols, Daggers, Bramble Sithes, Partisans, Javelins,
Two Handed Swords, Cross-bows, and Long-bows; Others of those Halls are filled
with Artillery, as small and great Muskets, Falcons, whole Cannon, Demicannon,
and Quarter Cannon, Sacres, and Culverins. There are some pieces of A tillery
which have from Three Barrels to Seven, which are called (if I err not) the
Organs, Engines made more for a certain Greatness and Magnificence, than for
use and service in War. To say no more, the whole is kept and governed with
that order and neatness, that it does not only delight the Beholder, but would
satisfy the most insatiable Appetite of gazers, and fill them with a certain
spritely and Martial Ardour.

In fine, the Common wealth has in this place all sorts of Ammunition of War,
as well for Land as Sea-service. All Engines for offense, all charges for
defense, and lastly, all things whatsoever made ready, either to set in order
an Armado for Sea service, or an Army for Land-service, which may be needful.
And although from this place (which may properly be called the Workhouse and
Storehouse of War) they every Day fetch Arms and Ammunition, as well for their
force upon the firm Land, as upon the Sea; Yet nevertheless, by the daily
labors of the Artizans, it is so restored, that it seems to no more diminish,
than the Sea does by the many Rivers that issue out of it. Furthermore here is
kept the stately Galley called the Bocentoro, adorned greatly with Gold and
rich carvings, which never goes forth but upon solemn Feast Days, and
particularly upon the Day of the Ascension of our Savior, on which Day, the
Prince in great state, with a Train of the principal Senators enter herein,
and being thence rowed to the Port of the two Castles near the Adriatic Sea,
there after certain Ceremonies, the Duke solemnly marries the Sea, and casts
therein a Gold Ring, in real assurance of this Republics Dominion thereof.

This Republic allow the Greck Church a full liberty in Venice, who use as
much ceremony in their Religion as the Church of Rome, but less superstition.
Nor have the Jews mean privileges, (for provided they alwais wear a red hat to
denote the Blood they wished and drew upon their own heads when they crucified
our Savior, and without which it is Lawful for any one to kill them) they have
as great immunities in all things as the Naturals, and more power than the
Common sort; here also they have a Synagogue for every Nation, whereof they
have nine in their Guetta or Court, which is assigned them for their
habitation. Their concourse hither is from their immunities grown innumerable,
which I suppose may give as great occasion as any other for this Cities vast
Traffic whereof she is Mistress in these parts, as also for the rise and fall
of the Exchange at the pleasure of her Merchants: in their Bank are managed
vast sumes of money, and infinite exchanges daily made, and yet a very small
sum of money told out or paid through the year, such is the Reputation of
those eminent Senators who are there the Bankers, where most of the Merchants
accounts are kept for a small matter; the Ducket de Banco, whereby they compute
their greatest sums and govern their exchanges, is but an imaginary Coin,
rising and falling at their pleasure. The Citizens rich and poor, wear a black
Cap edged with fur on their heads, and are habited commonly with a long black
Gown with large sleeves with a kind of skirt to throw over one shoulder, and
their Collar always open. Their Ladies did formerly wear their own or a
counterfeit hair below the shoulders trimmed with gemms and flowers, and mounted
in their Chappenes (high as a man's leg) they walk between two handmaids to
distinguish themselves from the Courtezans, (from whom the State for their free
trade extract a great excise yearly) who go covered with a white veil of
tiffany. But of late years they use the French freedom both in habit and
conversation much differing from the Italian restriction through their
Jealousy. We had almost forgot the Island of Zuecca (distant from Venice one
mile) wherein Zuecca.
vast Edifices as well for divine worship, as for the use of the Citizens, with
stately Gardens discover themselves; among the rest the Church ( del Redentore)
or of the Redeemer deserves a place even amongst the fairest of Venice for its
splendour and sumptuousness, being designed by Palladius the famous Architect,
and built by order and at the cost of the State by a unanimous Vow which they
made in the year 1576 when they were infected with an extreme plague: Which to
denote, over one of the Gates of the right side of the said Church, we find it
thus written. Christo Redemptori. Civitate Gravi Pestilentia Liberata, Senatus
ex voto.

Here also is showed some of the Coyns in Silver, which were stamped by Duke
Luigi Mocenigo, in the Seventh Year of this Republic.

The Journey from Venice to Milan, by the Province of Marca Trivigiana, and
Lumbardy.
PADOUA.
TO go from Venice to Padoua, first they take Boat at Venice, and row five
Miles upon Sholes in the Gulf of Venice to Lizafusina, Lizafusina.
so called from a Dutch word corrupted: At which place the direct course of the
River Brent, was heretofore by the Lords of Venice artificially locked up, to
the end, that running through those Pools and salt Moors, it might not through
time and continual running work down the neighboring Grounds: which to
prevent, there was an Engine erected (called La Rota del Carro) whereby with
excellent Industry, the Barks, with all their Lading and Merchandise, were
drawn up and transposed from out of these Pools, or salt Moors, into the River,
and out of the River in like manner into the Pools; which at this time is taken
away, and for supply thereof, the water is locked in with four several
Floodgates, the first at Stra, the second at Dolo, the third at Mira, and the
last at Moranzan. From Lizafusina to Padoua they account four Miles, whereby
they travel either in Boats, which are drawn up against the stream of the
River, or else by Land. On each side of which River throughout, appears a large
and most fertile Campagna, with a rich soil, embellished with stately and most
sumptuous Palaces, and lovely Gardens, and no less beautified with the
continual traveling of all sorts of People to and fro. First they arrive at
the Country of Oriago, called in Latin Or a lacus, because to this place extend
the Moorish Grounds or sholes, thence at Dolo, and then at Stra; Upon the left
Hand, stands the great Town of Gambarare, so infinitely populous, that it is
almost incredible; In the end they attain at Padoua.

PADOUA the Learned.
The ancient City of Padoua, is seated in the Province belonging to Venice,
called Marca Trivigiana, in the midst of a spacious Plain, having the Sea at
Twenty Miles distance on the East and South parts thereof: Toward the West, a
large champion Country; And toward the North, the Mountains Euganei; It is of
a triangular form, environed with double Walls, and very deep Ditches; The
Venetians have fortified it very much, by the immense Walls and Bulwarks, built
by them according to the modern way of Discipline and Judgment in War.

We need not produce Testimony from ancient Writers, to prove the Antiquity of
this City, nor that it was founded by Antenor, Brother of Priam King of Troy,
and that it was denominated heretofore Pado, either from Po, or Patavio of
Paphlagonia, because these things are notorious to all; As also that Padoua was
Head of the Province of Venice, now Marca Trivigiana, or Marquisate of Treves,
and that it was ever Friend, and allied to Rome without any kind of subjection,
being extremely beloved and esteemed, not less for their Alliance or Parentage,
having their joint Original from the Famous Troy, than for the many services
and kindness received from it. Nor find we in any Author, That Padoua was
either subjugated, overcome, or molested by the Romans, but that it always
stood free from the Roman Yoke, and that it aided the Republic on many
occasions; And particularly, at that time when Rome was taken by the Galli
Sireni, in the War against the Umbri, Boi, the Cimbri, and at several other
times; So that it well merited and obtained the Franchise and Liberty of
Citizens and Comunalty of Rome, and to be inscribed in the Fabian Tribe of
Rome, without sending thither new Inhabitants, or making it a Colony, from
whence the Padouans derived equal voice both Active and Passive, and
participated all the highest degrees of that great Sat; And therefore we read
in the Histories of Rome, and in those of Padoua, That many Padouan Houses
transferred themselves to Rome, and as many Roman Houses to avoid the Civil
dissentions translated themselves to Padoua. We may then conclude it to be no
great wonder, that we find in so many ancient Writers, and upon so many Marble
Stones, the Remembrance of so many Citizens of Padoua that were Roman Consuls,
as Quinto Attio Capitone, Sesto Papinio Alenio, L. Arontio Primo, L. Stella
Poeta, L. Arontio Aquila, Giulio Lupo, L. Giulio Paulo the Expounder of the
Law, L. Ascanio Pediano, Trasea Peto, C. Cecinna Peto, Pub. Quartio, and some
others. Another Peto was designed Consul, and Peto Honorato was Corrector of
Italy, so also many were Ediles, Praetors, Tribunes, Censors, Priests, and
chief Bushops. It was then so great and powerful, that they* used to muster
five Hundred Cavaliers or Horsemen, And Strabo writes, that they commonly sent
to the wars, one Hundred and twenty Thousand Foot Soldiers. It maintained it
self ever glorious and invincible, until the Barbarous Nations made themselves
to be felt in Italy, for at the time of the Roman Empires declination, Padoua
also endured the smart, being by the most Potent Attila (the Rod of God) wholly
ruinated, and cast down even to the very Foundations; And though after that it
was restored by Narsete, yet was it another time destroyed by the Longobardi.
But afterward under Charles the Great and his Successors, it began to fill it
self, and to take some small restoration. This City was governed at first by
Consuls, and after with a Podesta, or Provost, at such time as it became under
the Power of Eccellino the Tyrant, who treated it most cruelly, which evidently
appears; For at this day, near the Church of Saint Augustine, they show a great
Tower, wherein the Padouans were imprisoned, tormented and slain, nay the
Cruelty of this wicked Tyrant so far exceeded, that in one day in the City of
Verona, for no other cause than his fantastical humor, he caused twelve
thousand Padouans to be Butchered. Out of the ruins of so many noble Palaces
destroyed by him, he intended and begun near the Bridge a new Citadel for his
habitation and security, but he lived not to finish above a fourth part, which
is built with walls of a vast thickness with flint-stones squared, with a fair
Palace and a proud Tower, which in truth is the most beautiful in all Padoua
(and is possessed at present by Il Signor Conte Giacomo Zabarella.) Many
notable things are extant in this City, but in particular there is a vault
under ground which passes under the River, and goes even to the Piazza, to the
Palace of the Captain, and to the other abovenamed Citadel. After his death
Padoua recovered her Liberty, and became very powerful, so that she got under
her dominion, Vicenza, Verona, Trento, Treviso, Feltre, Belluno, Conegliano,
Ceneda, Saravalle, Chioza, and Bassano, with all their Territories, all the
good ground among the Fennes, and the greatest part of the Friuli, and other
important places; then the Carraresi made themselves Lords thereof, and kept
the power about one hundred years; at last the Venetians got the possession,
having slain Francesco Novello with all his Children, and extinguished the
principality of the Carraresi. Through this City runs the River Brent together
with the Bacchiglione, which dividing it self into many branches gives a great
accommodation to the Citizens. One of which branches or Arms they have brought
to pass through the dike round about the Walls of the City. It affords in great
abundance all necessaries for livelihood, from whence the Proverb arises,
Bolognia (Grassa) or wallowes in good cheer, but Padoua (surpassa) sur-passeth
it. The bread they make here is the whitest of Italy; And the wine is by Pliny
accounted amongst the most noble and excellent. This City has about it seven
gates, many Stone Bridges, five spacious Piazzaes, with many beautiful Edifices
as well public as private: Particularly the Palace used for the civil Law is
the proudest in all Europe, if not in all the World, for so much as that it is
covered with Lead, without sustaining either of Pillars or Beams, though its
breadth is eighty six foot, and length two hundred fifty six. Which Palace after
it had continued a foot 202 years being in part ruinated by fire, the Venetian
Lords in the year 1420 rebuilt with greater splendor. The figure of this Hall
is like a Quarry of glass with equal sides, but not right angled, not for the
nearness of the Fabric as some will have it, but because natural reason
shows, that a man standing bolt upright is with much more ease thrown down
than when he stands a little drawn backwards, its site is turned to the four
Quarters of Heaven, so that at the Equinoctial the Beams of the Sun at his
rising entering through the Eastern Windows, beat upon the Western Windows,
between which is nothing erected to obstruct it: and so upon the contrary. And
at the solstice or* stay of the Sun, when it can neither go higher nor lower,
the Beams enter through the Gates on the South part, and play upon the opposite
part; in sum, there is neither Gate or any other part without excellent Art and
workmanship. The painting of it represents the influence of the superior
bodies upon the inferior, divided with the signs of the Zodiac, in imitation
of that Circle of Gold which stood in the Sepulcher of Simandio King of Egypt:
In this Painting is to be noted the Ancient Habits, and amongst others a
Priest, who holds a Planet upon his back, which anciently they used large and
of rich stuff, from whence it took its name. The Inventer of these Paintings
averreth that this was Pietro d'Abano a Padouan, who was a most famous
Philosopher and Astrologer, whom it may well be, since so many years before
past, that these present Paintings copyed by the hands of certain Florentines,
were drawn out from those which were preserved in the Ancient Palace, by the
hand of Giotto, and really these modern ones are very like to those which in
the plain Astrolobe designed by the invention of Pietro d'Abano are treated on
by Pierio in the thirty second and thirty ninth book of his hieroglificks. And
if the Ancients made such a noise and so much account of the Obelisk which in
the Field of Mars in Rome showed by his shadow the length of the Nights and
Days, what shall we say of this Fabric, wherein are collected so many noble
secrets all worthy to be contemplated and admired?

Whosoever has an appetite in Padoua to behold Paintings let them see the
Church of the Confraternity of Saint Antonio, where they will meet Pictures upon
boards drawn by Titian, and other famous Masters, the Chapel of Saint Luke in
the Sanctuary, where may be seen the true effigies of Eccellino the Tyrant, as
also in the Font of the Domo or chief Church by the hand of an excellent
Lymner. In the remarkable Hall of the Lords of Zabarella Veraria may be seen
pourtrayed the first Subjects of this City, as Antenor its Founder, Volusio the
Poet, T. Livio the Historian, Q. Ascanio Pediano the Grammarian, C. Cassio the
Tribune, L. Orontio Stella the Poet, and Trasea Peto the Stoic, both Roman
consuls, C. Valerio Flaccho the Poet, L. Giulio Paolo the Lawyer, Petro d'Abano
the most famous Philosopher and Astrologer, Albetino Mussato the Poet, Doctor
and Knight, Alberto Verimitano Theclo, Marsilio Santo Soffia an admirable
Physician, Marsilio Mainardino a Philosopher, Astrologer, and a most learned
Divine, Bonaventure Peraghino and Francisco Zabarella Cardinals, Bartolomeo
Zabarella ArchBishop of Florence, and Giacomo Alvarato the famous expounder of
the Law, with a fair history of the most Ancient times of Padoua, and the
Genealogy of the House of the Zabarelli, with this following subscription:
Elogia haec virorum Illustrium Patavinorum
Conditorumque Urbis cum Genealogia Nobilis
Familiae Zabarellae ex Historiis, Gronicisque
Quam brevissime collecta Joannes Cavaseus fecit,
Scripsit in Pariete Presb. Franciscus Maurus
Pucivigianus cerebrosus, pinxit Gualterius cura
Et impensa Comitis Julii Zabarellae aedium
Domini, Omnes contivanei. MD. XLIX. Idibus Martii.


In private houses may also be found most excellent curiosities, as with the
Family of Mantoua, for Marco Mantoua a most eminent Lawyer built a fair Palace
in the Street of the Hermits with a delicious Garden annexed, in the first
Court whereof stands a great Colossus of Marble, being the figure of Hercules,
and above is a stately Library no less replenished with Books, excellent
Pictures, pourtraits of eminent men of the World, and singular sculptures, than
with collections of Brass Figures, Marbles, Medals, and other exquisite things
both natural and artificial, which with the said Palace are now possessed by
Signor Gasparo Mantoua Doctor of Physic and Nephew of the abovenamed Marco.

Luigi Coradino Doctor of Philosophy and of the Laws, heretofore Reader of the
Digests or Volums of the Civil Law in the University, a man of a most quick wit
and polite Learning, an excellent disputant, and particularly conversant in
antiquities, made a noble collection of Books, Pictures, Sculptures, Medals,
antique Brass and Marble Tablets, and other rarities, which for the most part
are enjoyed by the Signor Andrea his Son, Doctor of Philosophy and Physic, and
Reader in the College, a Virtuoso, who conserves them in their Ancient House in
the Street called Torecelle.

Gio Domenico Sala Doctor of Philosophy and Physic, most renowned for having
been so many years Reader in the University, and for having exercised his
Profession of Physic with a known reputation, In his Palace which stands in
the Street called San Lorenzo has set up a Study replenished with Books,
Pictures, Marbles, Brass pieces, Medals. and other precious rarities, and in
particular he has there a large and neat Press with shelves all made with
Walnut Tree, filled with Vessels of Crystal, with all the simple minerals, and
other rare and exquisite things, which were collected by the Signor Conte
Giacomo Zabarella, Doctor, Reader of the College, and Canon of Padoua, after
whose death coming to the hands of Signor Bonifacio Zabarella his Brother, they
were by him given to the abovenamed Signor Gio: Domenico, in testimony of being
his great Friend and Ally, as a gift of most singular estimation.

Benedetto Salvatico Knight, a Philosopher, and Physician, and chief Reader of
the University, a most signal person, no less for his Reading than eminency in
Physic, has restored near the Domo or chief Church, his Palace, making there
a most stately Gallery, gardens with Fountains, Voleries, and a thousand other
excellencies, besides his books and Pictures

The Signor Conte Giacomo Zabaralla Count of Credazza and of the Empire, a most
renowned and vituous Person, has so much labored in the study of History and
Antiquities, that meritoriously by the Lear^edst Pens he is styled the Restorer
of Antiquity and renewer of things devouted by time, being as well read in the
Genealogy of Princes and other Illustrious Families, a work as may be said
without compare; Besides that he has found out the Invention to blason Coa^s
of Gentility to a great perfection, with the right Lineage and the equal
compartments. The works composed by him give a sufficient assurance that a high
value is justly put upon him, whereof are extant the Genealogy of Antenore,
Agamemnon, Trasea Peto, Orontio Stella, Brandeburgica, Polonica, Auraica, and
the Universal Genalogie of those Princes, and of many Illustrious Families, the
relation of so many Originals of Gentility, the Histories of Conterina,
Cornera, Zena, Quirina, Bemba, Michiela, and other, his histories of the City,
and Families of Padoua, the glories of Venice, with many discourses, Orations,
Elogies and other works much esteemed by the Learned; He has in the Street
called Coda the whole length of his Palace erected a most noble Library,
wherein besides that there are great Quantities of Books, of Histories, of
Humanity, and other Learning all most choice, so also are there a good number
of Manuscripts in Paper and Parchment, whereof many are set in gold with
exquisite Limning in Vermillion, many whereof were never printed, whose very
Originals he is Master of: Moreover, he has the Chronicles of Padoua as well
those that are in print as in manuscript; as also many of Venice and other
Cities: And besides these in a Press of Nut-Tree of a notable Largeness and
Workmanship he has collected many Marbles, Brass pieces and other things
natural and Artificial, Ancient and Modern, of great value, as also a quantity
of ancient Medals, and of the later Princes both of Gold and Silver, and other
Metals, which are of a sufficient value, besides many rare Pictures by the hand
of the chief Men of the past Ages, and the authentic pourtraies of Francesco
Cardinal, Bartolomeo and Paulo Archbishops, Orlando and Lorenzo Bishops, all of
the house of Zabarella, and likewise of the Counts Giaccomo the elder, Giulio
and Giacomo the Philosopher, and of other eminent men of his house; He also
preserves the great privileges granted to his house by many Popes, Emperors,
Kings and Princes, with the Key of gold given by Massiminian the first,
Emperor, to the said Count Giacomo his Ancestors, he likewise preserves many
Ancient and notable Seals of his Ancestors, wherewith they used to seal the
privileges of those Counts, Knights, Doctors, and Notaries which were created
by them, together also with many other most incomparable excellencies both
concerning his own Family and many others.

Monsignior Giacomo Filippo Tomassini Bishop of Citta Nova, in the Street
called Ponte de Tadi, has his Palace restored and signalized by the Signor
Paulo his Brother long since Doctor of Laws and the first Advocate of his Age
in his Country lately deceased with a universal sorrow. This Signor is
generally esteemed for a most virtuous person, a Philosopher, a Divine, an
Astrologer, an Historian, and a Humanist, in all which he has justified his
Judgment by those most Elegant Books he has wrote upon all these subjects, so
much approved by the Virtuous: His Study excels no less in Books, Pictures,
Medals and other things of value, Than in the signal Library of the works of
the Laws left him by his said Brother.

The Signor Conte Giovanni de Lazara, Knight of the Order of Saint Stephen, Son
to the Signor Conte Nicolo Knight of the same Order, has no less honored his
Country by his Nobility and Virtue, than for his eminency in the knowledge of
the Antiquities of it, and many other Countries: whereto he has added a
Collection of diverse manuscripts of great esteem, as also a good quantity of
Medals and other things of price, among which the ancient Seal of the Padouan
Republic (whereof Scardevone in the 12 folio takes notice) is greatly valued:
Besides on one side of his Palace (which is one of the fairest of the City) he
has drawn a Border whereon are set the Pourtraies of many Lords and Princes
the Predecessors, and Parents of his Family.

The Signor Sartorio Orsato Doctor in Philosophy and Physic, Son of the Signor
Orsato Knight of Saint Mark, an eminent Subject in his Country, is a young
Student not less read and expert in Philosophy and Physic than in History,
Humanity, and Antiquities, and in his brave house in the Street of Saint
Francesco, has made a Collection of the best Books and squares, with a good
number of Medals, Marbles, brass pieces and other singularities of great Price:
who having composed several works both in Prose and verse, as well in the
Latin as Italian Language, to add to the fame and beauty of this his house,
collects all the Antiquities of Marble Stone that can be sound and obtained in
this Country.

The Signor Francesco Orsato his Parent or Ally having his handsome structure
near the Piazza Forzate, is a Gentleman virtuous and of no less noble Spirit,
skillful in the Mathematics, in Maretine Affairs, History, and Horsmanship,
and has amplified a Study with Books, Tablets, Medals, Marbles, and Brass
pieces, and other valuable and Antique Curiosities: Besides which in his Hall
is drawn round a Frise, whereto are hung large Tablets made by the chief
Lymners of this Age, with the Histories of the several illustrious Women in the
holy Scripture mentioned.

The Signor Giovanni Galvano Doctor of Laws, Reader in the studies, and an
excellent Disputant, is meritoriously at this time created Protector of the
famous Nation of the Germans, being elected to that degree not so much for his
singular Virtue and Intelligence in his profession of the Law, and defense in
Criminal causes, as for his knowledge in Languages, Humanity, History and other
the most worthy Studies, as appears by the most learned compositions made by
him, which demonstrate his great Wisdom; which also clearly appears by his
skill in Antiquities, and in the Collections made by him of Books, Tablets,
Marbles, brass pieces and other rare and exquisite things, wherewith in
abundance he has no less beautified his most signal Study, than with his
Collection of ancient Medals, both of Gold and Silver, and other singular
Metals of great value, in the knowledge whereof most Men of this Age will yield
him a Precedence.

The Signor Alessandro Este a most worthy Patriot, and much honored in his
Country, has in his house likewise near Santa Margarita got together a
notable quantity of Medals and ancient Seals, and other rare and estimable
curiosities. With which we will end our account of the excellencies of private
Houses.

In the next place are presented to our view and admiration seven mavelous
things which are Temporal, and seven that are Ecclesiastic, besides many
others: For the first seven are named il Pallazzo della Ragione or Hall of
Justice, the Public Schools, the Palace of Foscari alla Arena, the Court or
Palace of the Chieftain, the Castle for the Munition, the Ponte or Bridge
Molino and Il Pratto della valle or Meadow; And for the Ecclesiastic these
Churches, Il Domo, il Santo, Santa Justina, Santo Agostino, Li Carmini, Li
Heremitani, and San Francesco.

In the Palazza della Ragione or Hall of Justice abovenamed are standing fair
Antiquities, among others is one of that immortal Treasure of History and
Antiquity, Livie: in whose ever-living memory on that side of this Hall toward
the West, is erected a Sepulcher or Monument with this old inscription or
epitaph added thereunto. V. F. T. LIVIUS LIVIAE. T. F. QUARTAE L. HALTS
CONCORDIALIS PATAVI SIBI ET SUIS OMNIBUS.

Titus Livius 4o. Imperii Tib. Caesaris ano. vita excessit, aetatis vero suae,

LXXVI. and not far distant from thence stands his Image.

On the right hand of which is erected another Monument with an Image made of
the whitest Marble of Sperone, Speroni, a man of an elevated Ingenuity, as may
be known by his works, whichfor the most part he has writ in the Italian
tongue, with this Inscription following. Sperono Speronio sapientissimo,
eloquentissimoque, optimo and viro, and civi, Virtutem, meritaque acta
vitasapientiam, eloquentiam declarant scripta. Publico decreto. Urbis quatuor
viri 1589. and Urbis 2712. Over every Door of this great Hall (whereof it has
four) is a remembrance of those four most famous men who for their Birth
challenge this City, and for their virtue have no less Illustrated this their
Country than Italy it self with the whole Universe. The one is of the
abovenamed and not to be too much honored Titus Livius, the words whereof
follow.

T. Livius Pat. Historiarum Lat. nominis facile princeps, and cujus Lacteam
eloquentiam aetas illa, quae virtute pariter, ac eruditione florebat, adeo
admirata est, ut multi Romam non ut Urbem rerum pulcherrimam, aut Urbis, and
Orbis Dominum Octavianum, sed ut^hunc Unum inviserent, audirentque, a Gadibus
profecti sint. Hic res omnes, quas Pop. Romans pace belloque gessit quatuordecim
Decadibus mirabili felicitate complexus, sibi, ac patriae gloriam peperit
sempiternam.

Over another Door.

Paulus Pat. I. C. clarissimus, hujus Urbis Decus aeternum, Alex. Mammeae temp.
floruit, Ad Praeturam, Praefecturam, Consulatumque evectus. Cujusque sapientiam
tanti fecit Justinianus Imperator, ut nulla civilis Juris particula hujus
legibus non decoretur. Qui splendore famae immortalis oculis posteritatis
admirand. Insigni imagine hic merito decoratur.

Over the third Door.

Petrus apponus Pat. Philosophiae, Medicinaeque scientissimus. Ob idque
Conciliatoris cognomen adeptus. Astrologiae vero adeo peritus, ut in Magiae
suspicionem inciderit, falsoque de Haerisi postulatus, absolutus fuit.

Over the last Door.

Albertus Pat. Heremitanae Religionis Splendour, continentissimae vitae, sumpta
Parisiis Insula Magistrali, in Theologia tantum profecit, ut Paulum, Mosen,
Evangelia, ac libros Sanctorum laudatissime exposuerit. Facundissimus ea aetate
concionator. Immortali memoriae optimo jure datur.

There is also in this Palace a Marble engraven after this manner.

Inclyto Alphonso Aragonum Regi, Studiorum Authori, Reipub. Venetae foederato,
Antonio Panormita Legato suo orante, et Matthaeo Victurio hujus Urbis Praetore
constantissimo intercedente, ex historiarum Parente, and T. Live. ossibus, quae
hoc tumulo conduntur, Brachium Patavin. cives in munus concessere 1451.

To conclude with this Palace or Hall of Justice, if considered as an upper
Room, it is the fairest and most spacious of Christendom, of which there is no
part but has some Astronomical secret; it is convered with Lead, and round about
goes a stately corridor of Marble.

Near the abovenamed Palace stand the Schools for all Learning; which is the
second Marvel, not only of Padoua but of Europe, within is a square Court, the
building two stories high one over another, sustained with most fair Pillars;
and round about in every corner are the Arms of all such as have been Consuls
or Protectors in that University; some in colors only, some in colors and
stone, with their Country, name, and year set up, at the Venetians charge, to
make famous this Nursery of Learning. The Anatomick Theater erected in those
Schools stands above, and is most neatly contrived, and most commodious both
for the Professor and the Spectators. This University of Padoua is as it were
the Market place of Learning (and much approaches the Academy of Athens) To
this place from all parts of the World throng the most eminent in all the
liberal sciences, and no small number of the Nobles as Scholars, not only from
all parts of Italy and its neighboring Provinces, but from the farthest parts
of the World. In this City are ten Colleges, where are allowed honorable
Pensions to many Scholars.

The first College stands in the Street Santo called Prattense, deriveing its
name from its Founder Pileo Conte di Prata, Cardinal, and Bishop of Padoua, in
which are appointed 20 Scholars, Padouans, Venetians, Trivisans, and Furlans,
with a Prior or Governor, who heretofore kept a Coach: The Scholars pensions
were 20 Crowns per Month and more, but the Merchants Bank of Venice (who
usually paid them) being of late lessened, at present, besides their Lodging
and Service, they have but ten Crowns by the year. The Cardinal committed the
Government thereof to Francesco Zabarella his Nephew, and after his death to
the most ancient of his house, and of that of the Family di Leone, recommending
it also to the care and overseeing of the successive Bishops of Padoua, and to
the Prior of the College of the Professors of the Laws.

The second called Spinello a Ponte Corvo instituted by Belforte Spinello of
Naples, is governedby the Priors of the Masters of Art, and by the most Ancient
of the house of Doctors, where are maintained four Scholars Masters of Arts for
five years, two Padouans, one Trevisan, and another Stranger, each of whose
allowance is twenty five Ducats by the year.

The third named da Rio built in the street so called, and instituted by that
Family, consists of 4 Scholars Masters of Arts, approved by the most ancient of
that family, their stay is permitted for 7 years, their allowance is, Lodging
Rooms, Bread and Wine, with twelve Ducats, and they ought to be of Padoua or
its Territories.

The Fourth called del Campione situated in the borgo di Vignal is for nine
Scholars in the Arts: two Padouans, two Trivisans, two Farraresians, two French
men, and one other Foreiner, and for seven years, they are allowed Wheat,
Wine, Wood, Service, Lodging, and some moneys. The Patron or Master is the
Abbot of Saint Ciprian of Muran.

The fifth named Santa Cantarina is submitted to certain Noble Venetians, and
has for Scholars in the Arts. 16 who have Corn, Wine, Money, Salt, Lodgings,
and Service allowed in a handsome proportion for seven years.

The sixth dedicated to Santa Lucia by the Brescians conteyns 6 Scholars in the
sciences chosen by the Communalty of Brescia, their allowance is 25 Ducats a
piece with their Lodging and service defrayed.

The seventh called Feltrino founded in the Street Santo, is governed by the
nobles of the family of Altini in feltre, the continuance of the Scholars (who
must be students in the Laws) is seven years, their number is but two Scholars
and one-Artist, they have for allowance a quantity of Wheat being 16 measures
for each, and 10 Mastellaes of Wine with their Lodgings.

The eighth built in the Street San Leonardo named del Ravenna, is put under
the tuition of Piavano di S. Giulano di Venetia, and the Scholars have Lodging
Rooms, Services, and one Duckat allowed by the year for each.

The ninth in the Viginali called Cocho is for Six Noble Venetians, each ones
allowance, being Lodging, Service, and 40 Ducats yearly.

The tenth called Amulio, near the Pratto della vallae, is for 12 Scholars
Noble Venetians, founded by Marco Antonio Amulio Cardinal, and every Scholar is
allowed, Lodging Rooms, his services are paid, and six Ducats by the year.

The third notable and mavelous Temporal Rarity of Padoua is the Piazza or
place caled the Arena, which is a noble Court, round about which stands the old
Arches, and Vestigia of a proud Theater, which by the ancients was called
Naumachia, but of later years they use it to run a Tilt, and for all manner of
horsemanship, with many other games; the Ladies standing to behold them in the
open Casements of that proud Palace, which stands at the head of the Court in a
Lunary form, the Arena or Court being Oval.

Backwards toward the Wall are gardens filled with Vines and precious Fruits,
as, also on that side which is toward the Church of the Hermits with a small
Chapel dedicated to the holy Virgin, which is also a Priorate of the house of
Foscarie and belonging to that serene Family of Venice.

The fourth mavelous object is the Court of the Captain or Governor of the
City, where the Proud Palace of the said Prefect, the Chamberlains and many
other Citizens habitations, besides the dwelling of a world of other People are
so contrived that it may not improperly be called a little Citadel: This was
the Kingly house of the Carraresi, Its Chambers may truly be said to be built
for Princes, with two halls which for their Largeness and Nobleness could not
be built for other; the one is Called the Hall of Giants, wherein stands the
public Library: here are pourtrayed the most eminent Subjects of the Roman
Republic, and of the World, with a representation of their most famous Acts,
by the hand of Gualterio a most eminent Lymner, with their Elegies under each
figure, heretofore composed by the most virtuous Giovanni di Cavazzi a
gentleman of Padoua, and inscribed in a signal Character by Pietro Francesco
Pucivigiano called the Moor: The Books contained in the said Library are most
excellent and in great abundance; The signor Gio Battista Salvatico, Doctor,
Knight, and a Gentleman of Padoua bequeathed to it, by his Testament, his
Collection of the Books of the Laws of a great value. The signor Giacomo Caino
a Gentleman of Furlan Doctor and Reader in the College has likewise given to
it the Library of Pompeo Cacino a Physician his Uncle, of no less esteem; The
signor Conte Giacomo Zabarella has added to it a brave quantity of
Manuscripts, some writ in parchment, others in paper bound in Leather Lymned
with Vermillion and Gold rarely and exquisitely: some whereof were never
Printed, amongst which are the works of Cardinal Zabarella, of the Count
Giacomo Zabarella his Grandfather of Philosophy; of the Count Francesco his
Father, which are in rhyme and prose in the Tuscan Tongue very learned, and
treating of many subjects concerning his own Family: Therein also are the Works
of Cesare Cremonio the Philosopher, and many other bought at the Public cost,
and others added there by the Signor Ottavio Ferrari a Gentleman of Milan
Reader of Humanity in the Schools, and the public Library Keeper, which
Library is every day so increased by the Nobility and others, that it is well
hoped within a little time twill arrive to the Reputation of the richest and
most famous in the World.

The fifth wonder is the Castle for the Munition above named near the Church of
Saint Agostino, which was built by the Tyrant Eccellilino for his safeguard,
wherein he slew so many Noble Padouans, that he had almost destroyed the whole
City: herein are the public Granaries to maintain plenty in the City, and all
sorts of Ammunition for its defense in time of need.

The sixth admirable thing is the Ponte Molino; so called from the thirty
wheels of Mills there erected (a most signal Object) and the five Arches of
flint Stone; near which stands a Palace in manner of a Fortress built with
those very Large squared and wrought Stones which were brought from the other
ruinated Palaces and Forts by Eccellino the Tyrant, with a Fort and most fair
Tower, in the year 1250 And is now possessed by the Count Giacomo Zabarella, as
is above said.

The seventh wonderful Object of Padoua is il Prato della, valle a Meadow so
ample that twould alone contain a great City: It was anciently called Campo
Marzo, the field of Mars, from the Martial exercises there used, and in this
place were many Saints beheaded by the Pagans, to such a number that they are
wont to say that part which is compassed by Water was emplastered with the
blood of those Martyrs: Here every first Saturday of the Month is held a free
Fair or Market of all sorts of Cattle and other Creatures, and at the Feast of
Saint Antonio is a famous Fair there, which although it happens in the hottest
Weather, being there kept for fifteen days in the midest of June, and that
there are then many thousands of Creatures, yet there is never seen a Fly to
molest them.

If to these might be added an eighth Wonder, we would name the Vineyard or
Garden of the Knight Bonifacio Papa fava, situate in the Street called Vanzo,
where besides a most fair and adorned Palace, you beholds many statues of
excellent workmanship, and infinite numbers of Cittron and Orange Trees, which
form lovely walks to the Passengers, for beautifying whereof, of those Trees
are framed Arches and Prospects to delight the eye; to whose confines is
conjoined a full stream of water brought from the main River by a curious
Aqueduct, which being confined to one Gate under the Wall, gives at its
utterance a sweet murmur, and with its clear gurgling on every side washes the
Foot of the Palace: And the flowery banks within which the said Rivolet is
contained renders the Palace as it were in an Island of so specious delights
and pleasant Savours, that what is added by Art to that of Nature may well
cause it to be termed the eighth wonder. Hither flock for their Pastime the
Ladies and Gallants of Padoua, inviteing with them also the Foreiners with
their Music and other Pastimes, where (in the hottest Weather) the shade of
the Trees, the Ampleness of the Walks, the pleasantness of the Waters, and the
beauty of the site add (to their other joys and delights) a fresh Air. And
although these beauties show themselves in perfection, yet that magnanimous
Cavalier never ceases to illustrate it (to his no small costs) with greater
delights; and by this and his other Gallantries shows himself to be born of
that Family which for its Greatness and Dominion was no less formidable in
Italy, than renowned in Europe. At this present resides here, this Noble Person
with his Brother Scipio Papafava, Knight of the great Cross of the Order of
Jerusalem, Prior of Messina, and the most worthy Primate of the whole Kingdom
of Sicilia, together with the virtuous Roberto Son of the above named Cavalier
Bonifacio, young in years, but his conditions and practices may challenge the
ripest Age, who is the Comendatory Abbot of Sebinico, being Doctor of
Philosophy, of Divinity and of the Laws, a true Splendour to his Country and
Family, being conversant in the Greek, Latin, and Hebrew Tongues, and well
known in the Mathematics, as was testified by the singular experiments of his
Ingenuity some Months since. There flourishes likewise of this Noble Family at
this time a numerous company of Cavaliers and great Subjects, who degrade not
from their most famous and Ancient Progenitors, of whom to speak but little
will diminish from their Fame, and much is not opportune in this place: for
their Ordinary dwelling, these Signors have a Palace in the Street San
Francesco Maggiore, where they have Coppies of exquisite Books in all the
Professions, left them by Monsignor Ubertino Papafava Bishop of Adria, Brother
of Bonifacio, besides many ancient Manuscripts and Authors not yet printed,
which relate the Histories of this Family also the old coining Press of the
Carraresian Princes, with other precious monuments of this House, preserved in
the Chamber of Rowles of the said Palace, which may be termed the most large
and worth seeing of this City.

And now we come to the Spiritual wonders and Churches of Padoua, whereof the
first is the Domo or Cathedral Church, situate (near) in the midst of the City.
The Padouans were converted to the Christian Faith, by the predication of Saint
Prosdocimo their first Bishopp authorized by Saint Peter, who (among others)
baptized Vitaliono the Chief Man in this City, who therefore built the Church
of Saint Soffia. Henry the fourth Emperor enriched this Cathedral, giving to it
twenty seven rich Canonicats, of so good a revenew that they may be styled so
many Bishops; among which are four dignities, that is to say, Arch- priest,
Arch. Deacon, The Person that has charge of the wax, etc. And the Deacon;
there are twelve under Canons, six Custodi or Rectors, and six Mansonary or
Houskeepers, and more than 60 other Persons and Clerks belonging to the Chapel,
besides the Masters of Grammar and Music* with many excellent Singers, so that
this Clergy exceeds a hundred Persons, and their Revenew above a hundred
thousand Ducats by the year, which makes it the most noble and Rich of Italy:
and therefore it is that the Bishop of Padoua is styled a little Pope, and his
Canons with some reason the Cardinals of Lombardy, for that their Chapter is
always filled with the Nobility of Venice, Padoua, and other Cities, whereof
so many have ascended to the Miter, and Hatt, that it is worthily called to this
day the Seminary of Cardinals and great Prelates.

In this Church (not elsewhere as is pretended) lies enterred the Wife of Henry
the fourth, whose name was Berta, as is proved by this antique Inscription.
Praesulis, and Cleri praesenti praedia phano
Donavit Regina jacens hoc marmore Berta
Henrici ^egis Patavi, celeberrima quarti
Conjunx tam grandi dono memoranda per aevum.


Under the Chorus within a rich Monument of Marble, lies the Body of Saint
Daniel, one of the four Tutelars.

Two great Cardinals repose in this Church, who were both Arch priests of the
same, that is to say, Pileo de Pratta, and Francesco Zabarella, with other
eminent Persons.

Pileo Conti di Pratta a Citizen of Padona and of Furlan was for his virtue
created Bishop of Padoua, and afterward Cardinal of Saint Prassede by Pope
Gregory the 11th. and Apostolic Legate. But in the year 1378. the Schism being
risen between Urban the sixth his successor, and Clement the Antipope, he was
deposed by Urban, after whose death Bonifacio the ninth suceeding, he was again
created Cardinal with the Title of the Tusculan Bishop, and Apostolic Legate,
and finally he dyed at Padoua, and was buried in this Church in a sublime and
most noble Arch with this memorial. Pileus Pratta Card.
Stirpe Comes Pratae, praeclarus origin, multis
Dotibus insignis, seclo celeberrimus Orb:
Defunctus statuit sic suprema voluntas,
Hac Cardinalis Pileus tumulatur in urna.


And this Arch was heretofore in the Chapel of the Holiest, on the right side
of the Chorus, but being necessitated to make the door of the greater Vestry in
that place, it was removed out of that Chapel, and adjoined to the nearest Wall
in a worthy and eminent Place.

Francesco Zabarella, a Philosopher, Divine, and a sublime Lawyer, was esteemed
the Prince of the wise men of the World in his Age, and his works left behind
him prove his desert of that Title: He was a most Learned man in all the
sciences, and of a most holy Life, for which reason the Florentines and
Padouans offered him the Episcopal Dignity, and other Princes not a few eminent
Degrees. At last Pope John the 22d. created him Archbishop of Florence; then
Caidinal of SS. Cosmo, and Damiano, in the year 1411: and after that Legate of
the Apostolic Sea and, Praesident of the Council of Constanza; where being
earnestly desired and designed for Pope, he dyed in the 78rh. year of his Age,
in Anno 1477. For whose Body (transported into his Country) was erected a most
fair Mauseole a rich Monument, where it reposeth to this day in the Chapel of
the Blessed Virgin, on the left side of the Chorus, in an Arch of pure white
Marble with this Memorial. Franc. Zabarellae Flor. Archepis. viro optimo,
Urbi and Orbi gratissimo, Divini Humanique juris
Interpreti praestantissimo, in Cardinalium Collegium
Ob summam sapientiam cooptato, ac eorundem animis
Pontifice prope maximo Io. 22. ejus suasu abdicato
Ante Martinum V. ob singularem probitatem in Constant.
Concilio. Joannes Jacobi viri Clarissimi silius id
Monumentum ponendum eur avit. Vixit Annos LXXVIII.
Obiit Costantiae 1417.


This Chapel was called of SS. Pietro, and Paulo, and was acquired and endowed
by Bartol. Zabarella Archbishop of Spalatro for the use and name of his
Family; who thence are Patrons of it and maintain therein two Chaplains;
afterward it took the name of the Blessed Virgin, when the Noble Matron
Antonia Zabarella Sister to the Cardinal bequeathed to it by her Will that most
holy Image, which was found in her house, then placed over the Altar of this
Chapel, which Tradition says was painted by Saint Luke: which Robert King of
Naples gave to Francesco Petrarcha, by whom it was transported to Padoua, and
left to Giacomo the 2. of Carrara its Lord. After whose decease it came to
Marsilio his second Son, who gave it in portion with Fiordilige his Daughter,
Wife of Pietro Zabarella, then it came to the hands of the said Antonia, by
whom with other gifts it was left to the Domo, and is that most holy Image which
in their Processions they carry when they would obteyn in their greatest
necessity the Divine Assistance by her Intercession. In this Chapel are other
Epitaphs and Monuments, of the Noble Family of Zabarella, whose Original is
known to proceed from the most Ancient Sabatini, of Eolonia; whose Ancestors
came from the Cornelii, Scipioni of Rome; of whom were the most glorious
Scipio, ^inna, and Sylla Princes of Rome; with many other Heroes, besides the
holy Popes Pio, Cornelio, and Silvestro, and the Emperors Balbino, Valeriano,
Gallieno, Tacito, and Florian, Celso, two Satarnini and Avito, and many other
Saints and eminent Persons, in Bolonia, of that Family were also the Saints,
Hermete, Aggeo, and Caio Martyrs, il B. Sabatino Apostolo di S. Francesco,
Sabatino Bishop of Genoua, Elector of Carlo Calvo Emperor, with many other
grand Persons who have illustrated and governed that City: Also their house
being settled in Padoua by Cal^rio Sabbatino Count and Knight of Bolognia, his
posterity were called Sabarini and Sabarelli, from whence arose the surname
Zabarella, of which Family besides the Cardinals abovenamed, there have been
Bartol. Archbishop of Spal. and Florence, who dyed a designed Cardinal; Paolo
Bishop Argolicence; and Archbishop Parience, Orlando and Lorenzo, who dyed
with the name of Blessed Bishops, the first of Adria, the second of Ascoli;
five Arch-Priests and seven Canons of Padoua, many Doctors, most famous
Readers of the University in all Ages, famous Counts and Knights, many valorous
Captains, as, Andrea General of the Polentani, and Andrea the second, General
of the Church, Giacoma the first made Count and Knight of the Dragon by
Sigismond the Emperor, was by the Popes John the 22d. Martin the 5th. and
Eugenius the 4th. constituted Governor of diverse Cities, Senator of Rome, and
called by a Bull, Apostolic Baron.

Bartol the second, Doctor, Knight, and Praetor of diverse Cities, Prefect of
Florence and Roman Senator, who as also Giacopo the second Counselor and
Knight of the Golden Key were by Massin. the second Emperor created Counts,
and Knights, to them and to the eldest Sons of their posterity for ever; which
was afterward confirmed to Giulio his Son by Ferdinand the second, Father of
Giacopo the third Zabarella the Philosopher; of such grand Fame were these
persons; and these great men were known to be of this Family besides many
others eminent both ln Letters and Arms.

But having mentioned two Padouan Cardinals, it seems convenient to me to give
some account of the rest, since they have adorned this their Country with such
a dignity.

Simone Paltanico was the first Padouan Cardinal, who being a person of great
Knowledge, and the highest virtue, merited from Pope Urban the 4th. to be
created Cardinal of S. Steffano and Martino in the year 1261 and afterward
Apostolic Legate. He dyed in the year 1276. His Family is extinct in Padoua,
but in honor at Vicenza under the Noble surname of Counts of Poiana.

Pileo de Pratta was the second Padouan Cardinal, as is aboves^id of this House
are the Counts of Portid in Friuli.

Bonaventura Bado^ro of the Counts of Peraga, was a man of great Wisdom and
goodness, and being a Hermitan Monk, he read Philosophy and Divinlty in his
Schools; who after the other degrees ascended to the Generalship, and thence by
Pope Urban the 6th. in the year 1384. was created Cardinal of S. Cicilia, and
deceased five years after. Of this House are the Badoeri, Noble men of Venice,
and the Padoeri of Padoua.

Bartolomeo Oliar io the Minikin, a famous Philosopher and Divine, was by the
Florentines elected for their Pastor. after which by Pope Boniface the ninth he
was called to the Cardinalship of S. Prudentiana in the year 1389. and deceased
7 years after.

Francesco Zabarella, was the 5th. Padouan Cardinal and Archbishop of
Florence, as before is related.

Lodavico Mezarota being a Philosopher and a Physician, deserted that his
profession, and put himself under the command of Giovanni Vitelli General for
the holy Church; and behaving himself well therein ascended from one degree
unto another, till in the end (after Vitelli his death) he was constituted his
successor, and Patriark of Aquileia: wherein he made such progress as is not to
be imagined; let it suffice that he restored the Church to its Liberty, and
delivered the Florentines and Italy, for which his Noble deeds he was by Pope
Eugenius the 4th made Cardinal of S. Lorenzo, then Bishop of Albany, and
Chancellor of the holy Church, he dyed in the year 1465: at this day is his
Family extinct.

And besides these there were others of this City intended for Cardinals, who
being overtaken by death could not possess that dignity, as Gabriel
Capodelista, Aquensian Archbishop was defigned Cardinal by Pope Clement the
5th, in 1304. Bartol. Zabarella Archbishop of Florence, having been Apostolic
Legate in Germany, France, and Spain, for weighty affairs, with the happy
success of his Labors, and the great satisfaction of Pope Eugenius the 4th.
was by him designed Cardinal, but upon his return, an indisposition seized him
and deprived him of Life in Sutry, being but forty seven years old, in Anno
nostrae salutis 1445. Francesco Lignamineo Bishop of Ferrara and Apostolic
Legate was by Pope Engenius the 9th. designed Cardinal, but he was prevented by
his death in the year 1412. Antonio Giannotti a famous Lawyer, Bishop of Forli,
and Archbishop of Urbin, was Vice Legate in France and Bologna, where he dyed
at his 65th. year, being then by Pope Clement the 8th. designed Cardinal Anno
1591.

In the Palace of the Bishop these things are worth a sight, The most ample
diocese of Padoua, drawn in a large square by Marco Cornaro Bishop of Padoua a
Prelate worthy of eternal memory, and a great Hall where to the life (as is
believed) are drawn the Pictures of 112 Bishops of this most ancient and Noble
City. The Church of Saint Antonio of Lisbone merits the second Place amongst
Padoua's fair Churches, as well for the design and artifice, as for the
pretiousness of the Marbles and other Ornaments. The Roof of this Temple is
distinguished into six mavelous Chapels covered with Lead. First must be seen
the Royal Chapel of this Saint, adorned with the finest Marbles, and 12 Noble
Collumns, in the nine spaces of which Columns between the one and the other, are
engraven his Miracles by the most rare Sculptors of that Age, so well that it
renders the spectators stupefied. In the midst of which Chapel ari^es the Altar
of this Saint, and within it lies entered his body. Upon this altar stand
seven Figures of Brass of a just proportion, wrought by Tytian Aspetti, the
excellent sculptor of Padoua, Its Roof is adorned with the fairest Frets and
figures made of pargetting stuff guilt richly, and its Pavement exactly
composed with Marble and Porphyry ^heckerwise. This Saint having lived 36 years
dyed the 13th of June 1231, and was canonized by Gregory the 9th. in the City
of Spoleto, in the year 1237. On which day in Padoua they go in procession
carrying his Tongue in a little woodenBoul with great solemnity and
superstition; which is accompanied with all the Friars of Saint Francis, that
is to say, by the Conventuals Capucines, and those that go upon wooden
Pattens called Zoccolani, and with all the Doctors of the Colleges, as well of
the Laws, and Physic, as those of Divinity and Philosophy; wherewith they also
carry all the Vessels of Silver and other precious things bestowed upon this
their Saint, as also an infinite number of their holy Relics preserved in
curious Vessels: Among which are the Figures of ten Saints of pure Silver, 16
rich Chalices, 50 Vessels, 3 whereof are to contayn their Eucharist, many
Silver Candlesticks, Lampades, Censores, and 50 Sylver Votaries or pieces
dedicated by the vows of several persons, which are as big as a small Child.
Likewise a Shipp furnished with Masts, Sayls and Shrouds, together with a model
of the City of Padoua both being neatly cast in Silver. In a fair Reliquiary
they preserve the Tongue of the glorious Saint Anthonio and in another his
under Chap. In others all of Silver guilt framed with most exact workemanshipp,
they keep a cloth dipped in the precious blood (as they say) of our Savior
Jesus* Christ; three thorns of his Crown; some of the wood of his Cross; of
the hairs and milk of the blessed Virgin; some of the Blood issuing out of the
five wounds given Saint Francesoo; and many of the Bones and other rare
relics of infinite of their Saints, as may be seen in the Treatise published
by Count Giacomo Zabarella Praesident and Treasurer of the Venerable Tomb of
the glorious Saint Antonio: Who (befides the revenue of the Convent wherewith
the Fathers are maintein ed) possesses a great Revenue, together with much
Silver and other precious househouldstuff, all bestowed upon that Saint by
Princes, and private Persons, which Wealth is governed by seven Presidents,
vulgarly called the Signori all' Archa di San Antonio; three Ecclesiastics and
4 Seculars, with a Casheer, who receives the Revenues, and pays the Musicians
and other disbursements, which Officers are elected every year, and every Six
Months two of them change. In the Convent is a fair public Library, much
amplified by the reverend Father Francesco Zanotti, an eminent Person of
Padoua, who always governed his Convent with great prudence as Guardian, and
his Religious Order whereof he was Provincial: whereto the most reverend Father
Michael Angelo Maniere Guardian and Provincial also has added his Industry
with great success and evidence of his Prudence, Virtue and Goodness; both
whose good Actions have given ^ great Splendor to the Fame of this most Noble
Convent. Near to this said Library is another Room wherein are kept the rare
collections of Count Giacomo Zabarella, given to the said Saint; which consists
of many excellent Books and Manuscripts, and all the Histories (in being) of
Padoua, Venice and other Cities which no where else are to be found, also of
Medals, Marbles, brass Pieces and other notable Antiquities, with the Golden
Key, and all his works, all which being before fully related, are here
abbreviated to avoid Prolixity.

Opposite to the Altar of Saint Antonio is the Chapel of Saint Felix the Pope
of like grandezza: where also repose his Bones; ^ound about which are hung
Pictures excellently wrought by Giotto, whereof Daute, Boccacio and other
writers take particular notice: In it are the Tombs of the Signori Rossi and
Lupi Marqueses of Soragna; and next the Chapel of Saint Antonio, with which it*
maintains like Grandeur and Fame, it is the most eminent of all; the greater
Altar whereof is richly carved in Marble, and has on the right side a
Candlestick of a very great height, and wrought with many Figures, and over
against it an artificial Chorus adorned with lovely Figures carved in wood: In
this Church likewise are the Sepulchers of Fulgosio of Marin, and Ascanio
Zabarella, the first famous in Letters, the second in Arms; which are erected
in the Chapel of Saint Catherine appertaining to their Family; in another Tomb
lies buried Andrea Zabarella with Montisia Polenta his Wife, Daughter of
Bernardino Signor of Ravenna, with many other eminent persons, which would take
up too much room and time to specify. Before the said Church stands a noble
Statue of Brass cast by Donato Fiorentino, and presented to the State of
Venice, in memory of the Valor of Gattamelata da Narni, who was Captain
General of their Armies: whose effigies is there erected on Horseback, and
whose body with that of his Sons ly buried in the Chapel of Saint Francis with
two fair Epitaphs inscribed over them.

The third ecclesiastic excellency of Padoua, is the sumptuous and ample
Church of Saint Justina, where are kept with great devotion the bodies of Saint
Luke the Evangelist; Saint Matthias the Apostle, of the Innocents, of Saint
Prosdocimo first Bishop of this City and Province, of Santa Giustina the Virgin
Martyr, of Giulian of Massimo second Bishop of Padoua, of Urio the Consessor,
of Felicita the Virgin, Arnaldo the Abbot; together with an infininte number of
Relics, which they preserved ina most Ancient Cemetery called in those days
the Pit of Martyrs: there also stands a speckled stone, upon which certain
Martyrs were beheaded, another stone whereon San Prosdocimo celebrated divine
service: Herein likewise they conserve the Tablet of the blessed Virgin painted
by Saint Luke, and with great devotion brought from Constantinople by the
blessed Urio. Its Chorus which compasses the high Altar round, is made all of
Walnut Tree, and upon it engraven by Richardo Francesco the History of the Old
and New Testament. It has much Silver Utensils and precious vests; to say no
more, this Chapel for its structure and beauty, is an incomparable piece; And
not a little illustrated by that proud aod wealthy Monastery of Saint Justine
now contiguous with it, which for its sumptuousness, Grandeur, and Riches, may
be reckoned one of the Fairest of Italy. On the Walls of the Cloisters amongst
the Legend stories designed, they have inserted hundreds of old inscriptions,
with the draughts of old stones and pieces of Urns dug up when the foundation
of the Convent was first Laid. It has for revenue 100000. Crowns yearly. It
keeps an Abbot with many Friars of Saint Benedict; And here began the
Reformation of that Order, about two hundred years since.

The fourth signal, is the Church of Saint Augufiino, of the Fathers
Dominicans: which was first a Temple of Juno, wherein the Ancient Padouans
dedicated the spoils of Cleonimus the Spartan, as says T. Livie. Thence it
became the Particular Chapel of the Carraresi, who there fixed the Sepulchers
for their Family. Where also are the Monuments of Marieta, Mother of James King
of Ciprus, and F. Carlota his Daughter, with many Memorials of other Grand
Persons, as well of this City as Strangers; and in particular of Pietro da
Abano, near the great Door. It has a Stately Convent with a fair Library,
where are the Pictures of the chief Fathers of that Order.

The fifth Marvel is the Church of the Carmelites, famous for its vast height,
and grandeur, with one only Arch, and a most high Cupulo; Its Chapels are all
of one resemblance, and in great perfection: Herein they keep an Image of the
blessed Virgin, who, as they say, showrs down her continued favors upon those
that devoutly by her intercession pray for them to God Almighty. In this Church
are certain Monuments of the Naldi, Famous Captains, and many other Noble
Families of Padoua.

The Sixth Ecclesiastic wonder, is the Church of Eremitani, wherein lies
buried Marco Mantoua, the famous Doctor of Laws. Here are the Chapels of the
Cortellieri, painted by Giusto an ancient Lymner, and of the Zabarella, by the
hand of Montegna.

The seventh is the Church of Saint Francesco, wherein are the Tombs of
Bartolomeo Cavalcante, Jeronimo Cagnolo an excellent Doctor, and of Longolio
whereon Bembo composed the ensuing Verses. Te Juvenem rapuere Deae fatalia
nentes
Stamina, cum scirent moriturum tempore nullo
Longolio, tibi si canos, seniumque dedissent.


In the Church de'Servi, is enterred Paolo de Castro; and near the Church of
San Lorenzo stands a pure Marble Chest, erected upon four Columns which is
concluded to be the Noble Hero Antenors Tomb, from this Epitaph engraven upon
it in old Characters. Inclitus Antenor patriam vox nisa quietem
Transtulit huc Henetum, Dardanidumqne fugas,
Expulit Euganeos, Patavinam condidit Urbem.
Qu em tenet hic humili mar more caesa domus.


In the Church of the Capucines, lies buried Cardinal Commendone.

The Chief Families of Padoua, and Cavaliers are Alvorati, Marquess of Falcino,
a City of the County of Bolzonella; Lazara Count of Paludo; Leoni Count of
Sanguineto; Obizzi Marquess of Orgiano; Zabarella Count of Credazza;
Buzzacarini Capidilista, Conti, Datti, Papafava, S. Bonifacii, and besides
those aforenamed, these following, viz. Ascanio Pediano the Orator; Aruntio
Stella; Uallerto Flacco; Uolusio Poeta; Jacomo Zabarella a most worthy
Philosopher; with many others both valiant and Learned who have much added to
the renown of this City.

Between the Church del Santo and that of San Giustina, lies the Physic Garden
filled with simples, and planted iu the year 1546. at the cost of the Students
in Physic and Philosophy, to the end they might the more commodiously search
into the nature and virtue of every Medicinal Herb: The chief care and custody
of this Garden, is always committed to some excellent Doctor in Physic, who
Reads to the Students, the names and nature of every Simple; in the latter
times Melchior Guillandino, Giacomo Antonio Cortuso, and Prospero Alpino, three
excelling Persons underwent this charge, but at present it is in the hands of the
learned Giovanni Vestlinghi^, or Westlingius, a Knight and Anatomy* Reader in
the University. A man allowed so great an esteem for his excellent knowledge,
Edmond Wal^er Espuire.
that he was become the Admiration of this Age, when I was in honor of Italy,
In whom a worthy and Noble Person of our Nation, being casually at Padoua, at
the proceeding of certain English, to the Degrees of Doctors, and having been
an Auditor at some of his Lectures, composed these ensuing Verses upon the
Anatomy. Learned Westlingius, had we but the Art,
To tell the Treasures of the nobler part;
And could the Soul's high powers describe as well,
As you, the Palace where that Queen does dwell;
In her Anatomy my Muse might find,
Praises proportioned to your knowing mind;
To whose great art and industry we owe
That all the wonders of our Frame we know:
For not the inventory, we alone
Of every Nerve, Vein, Artery, and Bone,
Receive from thence, ^t are instructed too
What the wise Maker has designed them to:
The great importance of the s^ndrest string,
And use of every (seeming useless) thing:
As if our first Creator you had seen,
Or had of Counsel with Prometheus been,
That all the Plagues which his rash Brother threw
On wretched Man, might have their Cure from you.


Ten miles out of Padoua, toward the Port of Malomocco, stands the Castle
Pieve de Sacco, from which the Bishop of Padoua Polverara.
takes his Title of Count, a little beyond that, stands Polverara where are
bred the largest foul, as Cocks and Hens, of all Italy. Near which begins the
Sholes or Gulf of Venice, between which appears the most ancient now deserted
Cit^y of Adria which formerly gave the Adria.
name of Mare Adriaticum, to the Sea now called the Golph of Venice.

Toward the North stands the Castle di Campo San Piero, whence that Noble
Family took its name and Original. Between Padoua and Bassano is built a
Cit^adel.

Toward the West is the City Vicenza* with the famous Mountains Euganei.
Euganei, so called in the Greek tongue, for their excessive deliciousness;
whence the Padouans extract great quantities of Medicinal herbs. Which Hills are
neither part of the Alps, nor part of the Apenines, a thing scarce credible:
than which Constantiue Paleologo said (as Rodigino reports) that besides the
Terrestial Paradise it was not possible the World could afford a place more full
of delights. At five miles distance from Padoua, are extant the Baths of
Albano, where is to be admired the different kinds of Waters: how out of a vast
high cavernous Rock arises two sources of Water not above 2 foot one from the
other, of a perfect different nature; the one whereof encrusts and converts
into a hard white stone, not only the Banks by which it runs, but what ever else
is cast into it, in creasing the saidc rustment of what is thrown in, according
to the time it is left in it, and that which is more, it begets Stone of the same
nature upon the wheel of a Mill which is turned by its stream, which every
Month enforces the workmen to beat it off with Pickaxes that their Mill may
not be hindered; the Water hereof is never drunk by any creature, being held
very hurtful; but the other Water runs upon a light Sand, is much more light
in weight than the first, and is diverse times drank for sundty healthful
operatio^s: the people have dug the Earth in parts round the said Hill, and
have found Sulphur, about the middle part, and at the root of them having dug
toward the East and South parts they have found Salt. Abano at this day is
nothing so much inhabited as we ought to believe it was heretofore; by reason
that upon any digging they often find underground, many Relics of Antiquity;
some also will have it that here they spun the finest Linen Cloth. On the
other side of Abano stands the sumptuous and rich Monastery of Praia, with the
black Monks of Saint Renedict: and near it the Church of Santa Maria di Monte
Ortone. Approaching whereunto is the Convent of the Friars Ermitans of Saint
Augustine, called Scalci, or without Shoos in which are sources of boiling
water, and mud, excellent for pains and shrunk sinews: though the difficulty
with which they are come at, renders them of less common use than they would
be, for they are a vast way in the Earth, and in small quantities too: but they
are of a white color, and stiff as well wrought clay; not black and dirty as
those which are commonly gotten out of the adjacent Montagnone. They pass from
Padoua to Este upon the River, and upon the way espy the noble Castle of
Monselice, (environed Monselice
with most pleasant Hills) also the foundations of a ruinated fortress, where
they gather infinite numbers of Vipers, for the composing of that so much famed
Venice Treacle: On the left side whereof is the Hill Arquato Contrada, much
spoken of in memory of Franc* Petrarca, whose habitation being long there, at
length he gave up the Ghost, and was there honorably interred in a sepulcher
of Marble, with this Epitaph enscribed, which himself made, as follows.
Frigida Francisci, lapis hic, tegt ossa Petrarcae,
Suscipe virgo Parens animam, sat Virgne parce,
Fessaque jam terris, caeli requiescat in Arce.


At this day also may be seen there his House, his Chair, and little Garden.

Two miles distant from Arquato upon a little Hill, is Cataio, a large Town of
the Signors Obici: thence they come to Battaglia a Parish near the River,
seven miles after which one arrives at Este a noble Castle and ancient: whence
that Illustrious Family of Este Este
drew their Original. Whose Palace is transformed into a Monastery by the
Dominican Friars. From this Country they extract (besides abundance of all
other things for sustenance) excellent Wines. It contains 100000 Souls, and the
public have 18000 Crowns of yearly income. There they ascend the Mountain of
Vende, where is a Monastery of the Friars of Mount Oliveto, three miles whence
stands another Mountain, where is the rich Abbacy and Monastery of the Friars
of Camaldol. Tenn miles beyond Este is seated the noble Castle of Montagnana
nothing inferior to that of Este neither in Riches Lendinr^.
nor Civility, where they much trade in Hemp. Eight miles farther is Lendinara,
a very strong Castle and Town washed with the River Adice: but the Air is a
little gross in the Winter time, it contayns 4000 Souls. Near which is the
Castle Sanguienedo, in the Confines between the Venetians, and the Duke of
Mantoua: where there is a fair even way for eighteen miles length. Isuing out
of the gate of Padoua called S. Croce, which leads to Ferrara, first you meet
Conselve heretofore a Castle of the Signori Lazara, where stands the most
delitious palace of the Count Nicholas of Lazara, a magnanimous and generous
Knight, wherein Henry the third, King of France and Poland quartered: near it
lies the Count Paludo, whence the said Signor derives his Lordship: it is a
Country Noble and Fertile, is a Convent of the Fathers Hermitans founded by
Giovanni de Lazara, Knight of S. Giacomo, and Lieutenant General of the
Venetian Cavalrie in the year 1574. After which is met Anguillara, whereby
Rovigo.
the Adice passes. Farther on they go to Rovigo, made a City by the Prince or
Duke of Venice seated, 25 miles from Padoua and 18 from Ferara; It was built
out of the Ruins of Adria, whence it is not allocated above a mile; it is hathed
by an Arm of the Adice, where are erected noble dwellings, environed with a
deep Ditch or Fosse, which in circuit are about a mile; its Country is most
Fertile, being compassed about with the 4 Rivers, The Poe, the Adice, the
Tartaro, the Castagnaro. And so it borrowes the name of Polesine (which
signifies Peninsula, almost an Island) from its length, and the circum volution
of those Rivers. Many Illustrious Persons have added to the Glory of this their
Country, as the Cardinal Roverella, Brusoneo the Poet, Celio, the Riccobuoni,
and Gio Tomaso Minadoi a most learned Physician, who wrote the Persian History,
with other famous men. It has a Church dedicated to Saint Bellino, heretofore
Bishop of Padoua, the Priests whereof with miraculous success restore to health
such as are bit by mad Dogs, whom they as suddenly cure as indubitably, with a
certain exorcism, which if malignity proceeded in a natural course of Physic,
would not only require the best skill but length of time. Whosoever reads the
36th Chapter of the 6th. Book of Diosc. and those other Tractates writ on that
infirmity, may comprehend how great this miracle is. Mathioli in the cited fol.
of Diosc. owned the success, and willing to deduce it from some natural cause,
says, that possibly these Priests might intermix some medicinal herb or secret
with that bread which they are wont to bless for Dog-bitten Mad Persons: but
this may easily be answered, For this Church is governed by two poor Priests
who many times desert it; nor are they of a selected condition; and twere
strange if since the time of Saint Bellino to this day none should arrive
therebut he must bring that medicinal secret with him* Secondly they give but
one little morcel of that blessed bread to a person, and it can scarce be
imagined enough of the medicine should be contained in so small a parcel of
Bread, for so wonderfully a dangerous disease. Thirdly the Nuns of Saint Fetro
in Padoua, have an ancient Key which was San Bellinoes, which Key heated* and
its sign made on the head of the mad Dog* he never after that is troubled with
the least sign of madness* Which being, it is necessarily conluded, and the
Physicians must p^r force confess, that it is a pure Miracle wrought by God at
the intercession of San Bellino, who by the instigation of certain evil People,
was torn in pieces by Dogs, and his glorious Corpse laid up in the said Church
of Polesene.

Desiring to go to Ferrara, First they take the way Rosati, till they arrive at
the Poe, which passing by Bark, they reach Francolino, a County some five miles
from Ferrara.

VICENZA.
VIcenza is now seated in the Marca Trivigiana, or the Marquisate of Ireves, It
was built (according to Livie, Justine, and Paulo Diacono) by the Galli Senoni,
who fell down into Italy in the Reign of Tarquinius Priscus, in Rome, giving
the name of Gallia Cisalpi^a, to that part possessed by them: But Strabo,
Pliny, and Polyb^s will have it to be founded by the Ancient Tuscans, and that
it was one of the twelve Cities under their dominion, on this side of the
Apenines, and that it was much increased and amplified by the Galli Senones.
When afterward the Cities thereabouts performed good service for Omnipotent
Rome, at the descent of other French men, in the year 366. into Italy, and at
their Assayling of Rome, Vicenza being one of them, in recompense of their
assistance so oportunely contributed, was created Municipal, a Free City:
whence exercising their own Laws and Statutes they participated of the honors
and dignities of Rome; and thence it is we find so many of its Citizens in the
Magistracy of that grand Republic, among others, Aulus Cecinna, the Consul,
was General of the Army of Vitellius the Emperor, In whose honor (because he
so much surpassed the fame of an ordinary Citizen) It will not be impertinent
to place here this following ancient inscription. A Caecinnae Felicis,
Viteliani exercit. Imp. Ob Virtutem, and munus Gladi atorum apud se exhibitum
Cremona.

To it was allotted also the Title of Republic and City, as is to be seen in
many ancient Marble Stones up and down the Country, and it was assigned to the
Tribe Menenia. It was under the protection of Brutus and Cicero, as appears in
his familiar Epistles, and in this ancient inscribed memorial: D. Bruto, and M.
Tullio Viris in Senatu contra Vernas optime de se meritis Viceut.

All the time the Roman Empire continued in its Grandezza, it ever followed the
victorious Eagle, which decaying, this also suf* fered much Calamity, and
underwent those mutations, which it and all the Cities of Italy gro^ned under
with miserable example: Not at all, nevertheless, declining from its ancient
Vigor and Reputation: Whence it was that the Longobardi held it very
considerable, and assigned to it, Its own particular Dukes and Counts, Those
Governors calling themselves by that Title, for that they continued for life,
and to their Heirs masculines after them: Of one of whom Paolo Diacono makes a
noble record in the life of Leon the Peredeo
Emperor, which was Peredeo Duke of Vicenza, who marched to Ravenna in
assistance to the Pope, and there dyed fighting valiantly for his Holiness.

This City was by Desiderio the last King of the Longobardi selected amongst
all his, to place securely his Son Aldigerio, when himself was besiged in
Pavia, by Charles the great; but it avoided not its total destruction.

The Relics of its ancient Theater, which at this day demonstrate themselves
in the Gardens of the Signori Pigafetta, and Gualdi (wherein both the Kings of
the Longobardi and those of France often sat to behold the public shows and
Games) And the fragments of the hot Bathes, with the Pilasters for the
Aqueducts, give sufficient testimony that it had no defect of whatsoever,
either for Ornament or magnificence, other famous Cities use to enjoy. And at
that time when Lo^arius the Emperor endeavored in Rome, in the year 825, to
reform the occasion of the Feudes, and to that end convocated the principal
Lawyers of the primary Cities of Italy, He also invited the Vicentine
Counselors with an honorable testimony of what esteem he had for the City
Vicentia.

Furthermore when Ottone King of Germany (the Berengarii being overcome and
discomfited) was by the Pope crowned Emperor, he remised the Italian Cities in
Liberty, granting unto them Power to elect their Podesta or chief Governor,
and to enjoy their own Laws, among the rest Vicenza participated of that so
great a gift: Whence forming a Carrocio or Chariot which was the Badge of a
free City, and acknowleging the Empire with the ordinary Tribute, it lived in
the form of a Republic, (although much perplexed with the most cruel factions
of its own Citizens) until the year 1143. When Federico Barbarrossa having
gathered the utmost of his Power, forced all the Cities of Italy into
servitude, and destroying Milan, in the rest constituted a German Podesta

Vicenza endured not long this Tyranny, but united with Padoua and Verona, they
shoke off the yoke, and sent the first Ambassadors to the Milanesi to offer
them assistance, and to persuade them to do the like; and so they concluded the
famous League of the Cities of Lombardy, by which Colleagues Barbarossa (being
overcome between Como and Milan) was driven to the other side of the Alps.
Which victory the peace of Costanza followed, to the conclusion whereof came
also the Orators of Vicenza, where they megliorated enough their Cities
Condition, and the state of their Liberty, chiefly for that Henry the Son and
successor of Federick confirmed the abovenamed Peace with all the conditions
conceded by his Father: All the Ambassadors of the Colleagued Cities
randezvousing at Piacense, to that purpose, where also was the Emperor; and
Michael Capra a Vicentine was comissionated thither for the City of Bolognia.

In those days the Republics Library flourished in this City with infinite
co^course of Foreign Nations, abounding with the most worthy Professors in all
the sciences and Arts, which it appears continued to the year 1228. In which
year Federick the second being exalted to the Empire, an extreme Enemy to the
Pope and Cities of Italy, after many ruins whch he brought on others, in the
year 1236 burnt and destroyed Vicenza; exercising his greatest cruelty against
the most potent Citizens, which reduced it with great ease under the wicked
Tyrant Eccellino, continuing so until his death, when waving and debilitated,
it by degrees crawled up the steps of its Ancient Liberty; yet not so strongly,
but that after 46 years it underwent by the Citizens neglect, the Signory of
the Scaligeri, who there governed under the shadow and name of an Empire: and
that title not improperly taken, for that Can Grande at that time their head,
was a most valiant and potent Lord.

Vicenza was well treated under their government, and many public Edifices
restored, but the wheel of Fortune running round, and the Line of those
Lawful Signors extinct, Antonio the last of them and illegitimate, was first
deprived of Verona, then of Vicenza, by Gio Galleazze first Viscount of Milan,
by whom it was held very dear, and so much honored for its fidelity, that he
made it the Chamber of his Empire.

He dead Catarina his Wife distrusting her own ability to maintain so great
Dominions, by her Letters full of Courtesy, absolving their Oath of fidelity,
gave the Vicentines ample Liberty to elect their own Government, who after
diverse consultations and many solicitations to colleague themselves with the
Switzers, and to become one of their Cantons, having at large supervised the
great calamities of the passed times, and fearing future miseries, At length
the Advice of He^rico Capra (a wise and esteemed Citizen of great Interest both
for his many adherents and riches) prevailed to surrender themselves of their
own free accords to the Republic of Venice, whose pleasing Government was then
become famous through the whole world. Who accepting with all Gratitude this
their free offer, confirmed unto them all such Jurisdictions, Statutes, and
Prerogatives, as they knew how to demand; and in particular the Consularship
the most Ancient Magistracy of this City, and received it into protection,
styling it the first Born and most faithful City, under whose Signory it has
ever since continued, daily increasing both their Wealth, and conveniences.

Yet notwithstanding, at the Inroad of Gi^radada, the State of Venice, (though
unwillingly) gave way to the Signory of the whole firm Land; by which means
Vicenza fell into the hands of Massiminian the Emperor, who sent thither
Leonardo Trissino, to receive possession thereof, as Vicar of the Empire, which
he performed there, as also in Padoua: Who with Vicentia, through the great
affection they bore the Republic of Venice, and the singular Prudence of the
Venetian Senate within some few years after easily returned to their former
Obedience under it.

This City is four miles in circuit, in form like the figure of a Scorpion, and
although informer times it had the Reputation of strong, from the double Walls
which environed it; yet it is neither fortified nor capable of Fortification: it
being situated at the bottom of a Hill that comands the Town; however
(voluntarily living like the Ancient Spartans) the Citizens pro^ess that the
Walls of their Breasts suffice to maintain even to the death their Fidelity to
their natural Prince, which preserves it with safety. It is washed by two
Rivers Bacchileone (by some Latins called also Meduaco Minore) and Rerone
Ereteno before mentioned, together with two other small Brooks, Astichello and
Seriola, which serve them with many conveniences. All which united at a small
distance from the City, form a Navigable River as well upwards as downwards,
capable of Vessels of a huge burden, who passing by Padoua reach Venice, and
give the best occasion and reason for the riches of that Country.

They account that it with the Buroughs conteyn 40000. Souls, being replenisht
with Proud and Stately Palaces, Noble Temples and public Structures built
after the modern Architecture: the Hall of Justice (wherein the Judges assemble
to do Justice) for its Ancient and modern Structure may be compared with any in
Italy: Upon the highest Tower raised to a Wonder (which joins to it) is placed
the Horologe which serves all the City within, and a mile out of it, most
comodiously.

The Piazza most capacious for all their Justings and Tournaments, (where morn
and even render themselves the Nobility) is no less adorned with Open Galleries
and the Fo^rt of the said Palace, than with a fair habitation, for the Seignor
Capitano and the Fabric of that mount Piety, which is so rich that they lend
such sums as the poor Citizens require without any Usurie. Besides this (which
is called Piazza Maggiore) there are five other Piazzaes for the public
markets, of Poultry, Grain, Wine, Wood, Hay, Fish, Fruits, and Herbs. And as
the Splendidness of the Vicentians Spirits is apparent in profane things, so
does their Piety and magnificense, no less shine in and toward the Divine
worship: For which they number in the City 50. Churches accounted Stately, and
beautified with ancient and modern Pictures, whereof 14. are Parochials, 17. of
Friars, and 12. of Nuns, all well furnished with receptacles and other
necessaries for subsistence: Among which the Mendicants or begging Friars, by
the Charity of the Citizens, have no mean Reliefs. In the Country are also 3.
other Monasteries of Nunns, and above 20. of Friars, besides Parochials, which
are very ample in the Villages.

They are well stored with Hospitals for the poor of all conditions, having
nine, besides the Confraternities and other retreats of Godly persons who wait
on works of Charity. In the Cathedral (signal for the good Bishopric of 12000
Ducats yearly Revenue) besides other Reliq^es they keep the bodies of the
Martyrs Carpoforo and Leoncio Vicentines. And in the Church of Santa Corona of
the Dominican Friars one of the thorns of the Crown of the Savior of the
World, given in the year 1260. by Lodovico or Lewis the Saint King of Franee,
to Bartolomeo Breganze, Citizen and Bishop of Vicenza It received the Light of
the Faith of Christ by the teaching of Saint Prosdocimo first Bishop of Padcua,
Saint Paul yet living.

Near the Domo stands l'Oratoria de Madonna, or the Oratory of our Lady, raised
by those of that confraternity, in imitation of that of Rome, which possibly in
magnificence and beauty it surpasses.

Its State under the Venetian Dominion is such, as certainly no City under
their power has greater privileges. The Consul the most ancient Jurisdiction
of this City judging all Criminal Offenses, and its own Citizens all other
civil Causes: For which end the Council chooses a round of four Doctors and 8
Laics, which change by fours every month. These form the process for
Manslaughter, in their City and Territory, and being summoned to meet Morning
and Evening, in the Congregation, the Antientest of the Doctors assuming and
stating briefly the Case, first gives his Judgment, after whom all the rest,
from one to the other, and last of all the Podesta who has but one voice,
pronounce theirs, and the sentence passes by the Major part of Opinions,
whence there is no appeal: And their Justice has been so duly administered,
that hitherto the supreme Prince never violated nor revoked their Judgment.
The said 4. Doctors have also their seat of Justice for Civil Causes, whence
there is an appeal to one Judge (who is therefore styled the Judge for Appeals)
who must be of the same College, or to the Podefia or his Assessors, so that
it is in the will of every person to determine his Cause before the proper Judges
of Vicentia.

The Deputies who represent the City consult and order those things which
appertain to its honor and the public good, and have absolute power in all
their Cities Provisions: who choose four of the chief Nobility, called the
Cavalieri di Commun; who with their Officers oversee the Weights and Measures,
and that all the orders made for the benefit of the People be duly executed,
and in case of any defect report it to the Deputies; These Magistrates are
every year created by the council of the 150 Citizens, and also are chosen
every year, whereby to give occasion to every one to demean himself well and to
live virtuously.

It has three Colleges, One of the Doctors of Laws, where none is admitted,
that cannot prove himself of a house of Nobility, of one hundred years
standing, and Legitimate Issue for three Ages, besides that, he is examined of
his knowledge at his entrance, and obliged to proceed Doctor in the University
of Pado^a. The second is of Physicians more modern, and the third of Notaries,
most ancient and restrained.

It has Six thousand ducats of Income by the year, which is expended in
repairing the Bridges, Highways, and Palace, maintaining an Ordinary Resident
at Venice, and other extraordinary charges. The Vicentines delight to go abroad
in the World, (an humor seldom met with in the Italians) as well to learn
good breeding, as to provide for their Families: So that returned home they
live in all splendour and politeness, both within and without doors, go richly
apparelled, as well Men as Women, and keep many followers; which they may well
do, by their abundance of Riches

For which cause this City is reputed full of Gentry, and their common Title
is, il Signor Conte. Nor are they less noble in their buildings, both public
and private, than in their garb: for by the industry of Palladi^s a Vicentine
and reviver of the Roman Architecture, it shows it self most pompous, and
equal to any other great City: The Vicentines are great Lovers of Strangers,
liberally entertain with all sorts of Regalios, the acquaintance and friends
they take knowledge of in other places, and willingly take the oportuninity to
treat any great Prince.

They erected a Theater by the invention of Andreo Palladio the Renovator of
the good and ancient Architecture (capable of 5000 persons in their Seats) as
by this inscription appears. Virtuti ac Genio Olympior: Academia Theatrum hoc a
fundamentis erexit Paladio Archit. Anno. 1584.

The Stage, or Scene, is a stupendous thing to behold, for the many Statues
and Corinthian Pillars; the Prospective represents a Royal City, where was
first performed, with great Applause, and incredible satisfaction to the whole
Province, in the year 1585: the representation of Epidus Tyrant of Soffocles,
acted with lordly pomp, as well in the habits, as music, Chorus, and
illumination of the Theater: The Olympic Academy (to whom we owe this work)
ought therefore to be thanked as the receptable of the Muses, and all other
noble and elevated ingenuities. The Vicentines chiefly have the obligation for
this work, to the memory of the Cavalier Chieregato Governor of all the
Militia of the Kindome of Candy, and restorer of all the ancient and good
discipline for the Infantery.

Besides that Olympic it has another Academy more modern for Horse, founded,
by the Count Oderico Capra Leader for his Highness of one hundred Men in Arms,
not less useful for the Exercise of the Youth, than for the manage it gives
the Horses, with much profit to the Prince in warlike Occurrences, where good
Masters Riders are well entertained.

Which makes the City be filled with well managed Gennets and other the best
Horses of Lumbardy. For instance, view the Stable of the said Count Oderico,
furnished with 15. Coursers, of the best Races of Italy.

Going out of the Gate, Del Castello, is the Campo Martio (made in imitation
of, that anciently in Rome, which was for the hunting Campo Martio.
of wild Beasts) for the exercises of the youth, and Soldiery, watered round;
whither the Ladies and Gallants resort in the summer Evenings to participate
the fresh Air, which the surrounding Hills afford. The Arch or entrance into
this field will remain as a lasting monument of Palladius who built it.
Opposite hereto is the Garden of the Count Leonardo Valmarana, which is very
praiseworthy for the long and beautiful closs walk of Citron and Orange
Trees, and plenty of all Fruits, together with the Labyrinth. At the head of
the Borough stands the Temple of San Felice and Fortunato the Martyrs, which
some believe that Narsitze built, therein is preserved the Body of San
For^nnato and he^d of San Felice, which were lately found in the Cloister of
the Bishop, miraculously in ^ Ch^st of Lead, with Letters signifying so much:
viz. The head of San Fortunato, and the Body of San Felice, of whose Martyrdom
Cardinal Beronio makes mention.

A mile further is the Oli^, made famous by the overthrow which Alviano the
Venetian General received from Cardona and Prospero Collonna, Captains of the
Spanish Army. Somewhat beyond stands the Castle of Montecchi^, with the Palace
of the Co^ti G^aldi where Charles the 5th. Lodged. Whence by Mo^tebella they
pass to Verona, leaving on the right hand the pleasant Valley Dressina, with
Valdagno and Arcignano, most populous and trading Villages, where they make
Linen Cloth, not ordinary, neither in quantity, or quality. And on the left
hand Lo^igo Podestaria, which for its white bread and good wine carries the
Bell: famed also for the birth of Nicolo Leoniceno, a most renowned Physician,
and very much endeared by Hercoles first Duke of Ferrara, near whom he lived
and dyed, having long read in that University.

Issuing forth of the Gate de Monte, one sees another Arch of Palladius, with a
most high Stayr case, to the top of Madonna del Monte held in high vene^ation
for the continual Miracles wrought at her intercession, and much frequented by
the Neighboring People. A quarter of a mile farther by the River side which is
navigable; upon a little Hill (as it were artificially separated from the
other, and of a Facil ascent) stands the Rotonda, of the Signors Counts,
Oderico and Mario Capra Brothers, so called from the round ^upola at the top
(or likeness it has with the Pantheon at Rome) which covers the Hall of the
same Figure: They mount to it by four ample Marble pair of Stayrs, where are
four spacious Chambers worth seeing for the fair Columns which seem of an
excellent Marble called Paris. From each of which one may behold various
prosp^cts, from one an immense campagna, another the large Theater and Town,
the third mountains over Mountains, the Fourth Land intermixed with Waters, so
that the eye rests marvelously contented. The round of the said Hall garnished
with Figures of Plaster of Paris, and Pictures and bordered with gold,
receives its Light from the Top like the Pantheon of Rome. The Chambers are all
guilt and mingled with Histories of excellent Invention and Pictures drawn by
the hand of Alessandro Maga^a a Vicentine, Palladius made this his Masterpiece,
for it is so contrived that it conteyn^ Geometrically a Round, a Cross, and a
Square: And if in any place the Heavens seem to display their eternal Beauty,
more than in other, it is there. They use to say that Apollo and the Sisters with
their Chorus so journ there, And that Bacchu^ resides in his deep Seliars;
which are so vast, and filled with the best wines, and they with so much
liber^lity and bounty free to all persons, That they must not be passed without
a visit: nor the Gardens filled with Citrons and all sorts of outlandish
Flowers: all which are splendidly governed and freely showed to all Strangers
with all kind acceptance from the Patrons.

The passage over the Park of Longara planted with incomparable fruits by the
said Counts, will not appear tedious at your arrival at Custoza, beautified
with the Acqu^ducts for wind, which driving the Fresoo upon the Palaces
exceedingly temperate the heat of the Sun in Leo, together with the most cool
Wines, kept in those great Cavernes in Snow: whose dry and wholesome Air (though
as twere congeled) makes them be infinitely frequented in the Summer, as a most
singular delight and without a Parallel.

On the right hand of Custoza having traversed the Bridge Bacchiglione and
drawing some miles toward Padoua, is seen the Castle of Montegalda, formerly
an important Frontier against the enemies, but now by the benefit of this Peace
become more like to the Castle of Alcina, the storehouse for the Munition,
being now applied to conteyn waters for the use of artificial fountains, and
the Ditches converted into walks planted with Citron and Orange Trees, whose
blossoms afford a most pleasant odor into the Palaces; but not to come to near
Padoua already so fully visited, let us return by Custoza* again to Vicenza,
and in the way thereto leading by the River side, between it and the Mountains
behold the Vicariate Barbatona, whose Hills called Alcini a little hanging and
receiving the heat of the Sun at high Noon, afford those delitious wines
esteemed only fit for the Palate of an Emperor called Monte Alcino.

From Vicenza desiring to go to Ferrara, they travail by Poiana which
terminates the confines on that side, where the most Noble Palace of the Count
of Poiana most worthy of its Builder Palladius, and furnished with excellent
Pictures, deserves a serious view.

A mile forth of the Gate of Saint Bartolemeo, stands the Palace of Circolo,
appertaining to the Count Pompeoi Triffino built after the modern Architecture
by his Grandsir Giovan Ciorgio, a famous Poet, and no less skilled in this Art,
than in all others, as well as the liberal Sciences, which deserves a visit for
its compact structure and excellent Invention: whence advancing over a fair
plain, one reaches at some miles distance the pleasant Country of Breganza,
famous for its sweet and flavorous wines.

Turning on the left hand a rough Country conducts one to Maarostica, a Seat
for a Podesta, and a large Castle, the Country and Birth place of Angelo
Mateaccio, a most learned Man, and Reader of the Civil Laws for a long time in
Padoua, at the same time, Alessandrio Massaria, was Chief Reader in Physic,
and of the Conte de Monte, both Vicentines, and the Escu^pii of this our Age,
and from Marostica, at three miles distance, is seated Bassano, now out of its
Territories, heretofore comprehended in them, and to this day in Spirituals
governed by the Bishop of Vicenza.

On that part of Breganze, which is washed with the Aflico is Situated Lonedo,
and the Palace of the Signory Co^to Alessandro, and Girolamo Godi, built at
excessive expense on those Craggy places, whereto ascended (though with much
pains and some sweat) it is compared to the Mount of Virtue; for that having
gained the Top, there is found what may restore one with such plenty and
gentleness, that it may be said the Goddess Abondantia, there had emptied her
Basket. The Architecture is most exact, the Pictures of excellent hands, the
Prospects wonderful, the Fountains Beautiful and the Cittrons and sweet
Flowers for all seasons not despicable, but above all the affableness and
Civilities with which the Padro^i treat all Srangers, is most to be admited.

Through the Gate Santo Croce, they travel to Trento, the Country whereto is
bounded with a continued List of little Hills which afford most delitious
Wines, till arrived at Schio, where they mount on very cragged ways.

Schio is a principal Town, Seated at the feet of those Mountains, at 15.
miles distance from the City, filled with Merchandise and modities; it conteins
five thousand Souls, a People neat and civil as well as Warlike. It gave birth
to Giovan Paolo Mamfrone, who from a private Soldier arose to the chiefest
honors in Wars, and both he and his Son Giulio are not a little famed for their
excellent Conduct and valor, in Histories.

Through the same Gate taking the Strada militare, at ten miles Journey,
presents it self Tiene, a noble Town, in a most pleasing site, and not a
little beautified by the Palace, of the Count Francesco Porta, which though
built after the ancient Architecture is nevertheless full of Majesty:
beautified with springs of running water, Labyrinths, spacious Gardens, Citron
and Orange Trees, and an Air pure and sweet, even to ravishing admiration.

Two mile further, upon the raised Hillock of Care, is lately erected the
Romitorio, by the Charity and free gifts of the Peaseants of Romiti
Camladolensi, whose situation with their quotidian industry and labor, must
soon render the place such, and so beautiful, that it may dispute the Palm
with the chief houses of Religion.

From Piovene a large Town coasting the Monte summanno and the Torrent of
Astice, by the confines of Furni, one arrives at Trento, by a very ill way,
only capable of Horses: at 28 miles end. Along the Astico, (where they take red
Trouts,) may be seen those Edifices, wherein is mrde writing paper, the
Furnaces and Forges for Iron, and the sawes which being drove by the Waters,
saw that Timber and reduce it to forms, which in great abundance grows on these
Mountains, which also serve for the feeding their Flocks and Herds.

The Summano is famed for its rare simples, and for the Temple of Mary the
Virgin, which (according to common belief) was heretofore dedicated to the God
Summano, which Idol being destroyed by Saint Prosdocimo, the Temple was
consecrated to the Mother of God. Some years since was found there a most
antique Stone engraven with Roman Letters, which by the Learned is intepreted
thus. Palemon Vicentinus Latinae Linguae Lumen. And gives confidence that
Palemon was buried there, which Rhemio Palemon the Vicentine, flourished in the
time of Augustus, in Grammar and Rhetoric, when those professions, were in
much more esteem than at this day, the very Emperors in those days not
disdaining to assist therein.

From Piovene you ascend to the Set Communi, which are seven Villages filled
with a great number of most fierce People dwelling on those Mountains, whom one
would think created by Nature for a Parapet to the Vicentines, against the
incursions of the Germans, Their Language is so strange, that though it
approach the German as much as it can, yet the sharpness of their
pronunciation, renders it unintelligible even to the Germans; some think they
were the Relics of the Goths: They enjoy many exemptions for their fidelity
to their Prince and the City.

Maximilian, the Emperor, in February 1508. attempted by this part to surprise
Vice^ with a flying Army descending from Trento, but the noise thereof spread,
and the Peaseants raised, by Girolamo, and Christofero Capra, with others of
their Family in Piedment, who having possessed themselves of the narrow passes
of Asiago, and the F^rni with five hundred Soldiers of their party opposed his
Army, compelling them with much slaughter to a dishonorable retreat: Their
Readiness and Valor in which action was greatly acknowleged by the Venetian
Senate,

In Sum, All its Territories are most beautiful, the Hills contending with the
Valleys, for fertility and goodness: The wines (there growing in great Plenty)
are esteemed without compare the best of all these Countries, which occasioned
the Proverb, Vin Vicentin, etc. with that variety of Color and Taste (a rare
thing) that both Winter and Summer, the most delicate Palate may meet its full
satisfaction: There being Wine sweet and sharp, which please and cut,
Aromatic, and Fragrant, Stomachal and brisk, with a hundred other real
differences, all most digestible healthful and grateful to the Palate. It
produces Corn of all sorts, Pears, Apples, and all other Fruits for every
Month in great abundance.

The Peasants have such infinite numbers of Calves and Kids that they supply
half Venice, whither the convenience of Water and carriage invites them to vent
the superfluities thereof, as also their admirable Venison, Partridges,
Pheasants, God wits, Quails, and Quoists; and although their Fining is not
equal to their Fouling, yet they want not, either red or white Trouts, Lampreys
or other Stonefish, besides what certain Lakes afford of excellent sorts.

They much enrich themselves by the Craft there much used, as well within, as
without the City, of making Cotton Clothes, which are esteemed no loss for
their goodness than whiteness.

They have likewise great quantities of Silkworms, and therefore it is that
their Country is so well planted with Mulbery-Trees whereof the Wo^s feed, and
thereof they extract at least 500000. Crowns a year, distributing them to all
Merchants that resort thither for them, which much adds to their Riches; here
also they fetch Fullers Earth for many uses into several Countries, as also the
Sand, wherewith at Venice they pollish their Looking Glasses.

Trento affords them some mines of Silver, and Iron, but much Stone for all
sorts of Structures, some whereof for their hardnese are compared to the
Istrian Stone, and others for their fineness to the Marble of Carrara.

The conveniences of Timber, Stone, Sand, and unslacked Lime, considered with
their active and ingenuous Natures, together with the laboriousness of the
Peasants, and the beauty and variety of Sites, is that which nourishes so much
the Art and discipline in their Workmen of the Architecture of (...).

Whence Botero deservedly accounts this Province for one of the four most
delitious and rich Provinces of Italy. Its Air being so pure and healthful,
that they reach great Ages, besides that this Cli^t in all Ages has produced
Men eminent, no less or Learning than Ar^s, as appears in the Histories, and
enclines the ordinary sort to a certain Spriteness and aptness to all
occupations and exercises.

In its Territory, they number one hundred and three score thousand Souls:
which added to them of the City, amounts to two hundred thousand, dispersed
into 250. Towns and Villages, which are governed by two Podesta'es, and eleven
Vicariats, Noble Venetians, and Noble Vicentines, whose Jurisdictions, are
limited to civil matters, only: Criminal Causes being wholly reserved to the
Consulary.

The Prince draws from Vicenza, eighty thousand Ducats annually without the
least charge; and makes the Province to maintain three thousand select, and
well disciplined Foot, under four Captains, who always reside at their several
Quarters, and the City one thousand Muske^teers: Also for the urgent necessity
of War, they have made a new calculation of such persons as are fit to bear
Arms from 18 years old to 20. and they have thereupon enrolled in a Book the
names of 16000. flourishing brave Youths: Its Territory, is one hundred and
fifty miles in circumference.

Vicenza is distant from Padoua 18. miles, from Venice 43. from Verona, 30.
from Mantoua, 50. from Trent, 44. from Treviso, 33.

Thus for a conclusion, we may with truth affirm, that reflecting on their
Political State, the strength of the City, which consists not so much in the
circuit of the Walls, as the Liberty and amplitude of its Territory, Their
riches and the number, Valor, and gallantry, of their People: Vicenza will
find few Cities equal, and consequently will find no small esteem from a wise
Prince.

VERONA The Ancient.
It Is the Vulgar Criticism on this name, that syllabilzed, It comprehends the
three first syllables of the three head Cities of Italy Ve Venetia, To Roma, Na
Napoli, others more stricty interpret that whatecer may be found in those three
Cities abounds there. Verona is reckoned amongst the most Noble Cities of
Italy: Built long since by the Toscanes, and was one of the twelve, by them
cmo^anded on this side the Apenines, The Galli Cenomani peopled it having beat
out the Toscanes. Its name (as some other say) was taken from an ancient Noble
Family of the Toscanes called Vera. It is seated near the Mountains toward the
South, as twere in a plain, and is in form little less than a Square: In the
time of Augustus Caesar, it was much larger, as many inducements make us
believe, among others, That it is written they used to set forth 50000 Soldiers,
which appears no great wonder since Cornelius Tacitus called Ostilia, a
Borough thereof, though now distant from it 30. miles, we may thence conclude,
they numbered 200000. Souls, Martial calls her great, and Strabo most great. Its
situation is very strong by Nature, yet the Venetians have made it now
accounted impregnable, through the many wonderful Fortifications of Bastions,
Bulwarks, Castles, Towers, Counterscarpes, added by them, and the deep and
large Dykes, kept full by the River Adice.

It has one Fort in the Plain Country near the River, and two in the
Mountains, the one named San Felice the other a more modern, called San Angelo:
the which guards the Plain, and aptly repels the furious assaults of any
Enemies. It has five Gates no less strong then adorned with Sculptures,
Collumns, Statues, and other fair Marbles. Besides, in the City are many things
from whence may be gathered. That it has been a most ancient and Noble City:
Under the Castle of San Pietro, they yet show the great foundations of a
Theater with the entire doors of the Scene, as also the Signal of that place
which was anciently deputed for the Naval Fights, in that place, where now is
the Orchards of the Fathers Dominicans. In the Piazza de (...), stands the most
antique and great Fabric, the Amphitheatre built of square Marble Stones,
called by the Veronei the Arena. The outward wall, whereof had four fair Rows
of Pillars Arches and Windows, composed of four forts of Architecture, that is
to say, one Dorick, one Ionick, one Corinthian, and one mixed with good order,
being a Structure not less fair than high, as may be credited from that little
part which yet is a foot. The Barbarous who sacked Italy, disrobed it of all
the Marble Stones and Ornaments of the exterior circuit, even to the
foundations wherewith to adorn their other Structures leaving that so Noble
work, deprived of all its Majesty; howbeit from those small relics remaining,
one may take a judgment of the grandeur and quality of the rest, as easily, as
from the nails may be guessed what creature a Lion is, because the Reason and
art of Architecture, and circular proportions make it easily comprehended; that
every one of the said Orders or degrees of the exterior Wall, had seventy two
parts or as one would say, Arches and as many Pillars; and from the void places
in the third order, which was the Corinthian, one may know that there were 144.
Statues between the Arches, and Pillars; Being entered at the Porches, which
within encompass the whole Fabric in three orders, one would wonder at the
great number of Stayrs Steps and ways, which on every side were used by the
Spectators to go in and out without disturbance. Who might altogether (although
a great multitude) mount and descend with great facility and no trouble by
those numberless ways In the midst is the Arena, and it is a noble sight to
behold that spacious plain of an Oveal form, 34 perches long, and 22 broad,
environed with 42. Seats, which ly gradati^, one above the other, still
extending to the Top, and were capable of 23000. Persons, which might sit there
commodiously; under which Seats are the said Steps and ways. The inward part
also was despoiled by the barbarous of all its Marble Seats, though at present
the Citizens of Verona, at their proper expense have restored that, and adorned
it as formerly, and at certain times use to show to the people Games, and
huntings, after the Ancient custom. We find not in authentic Histories who
founded this Noble Fabric, but Torello Saraino, a Venetian, and a most learned
man, endeavors to prove by many arguments, that the Theater, and the Arena,
were built under Caesar Augustus, one whereof is that we evidently find in
Suetonius Augustus, constituted many new Colonies through Italy, and fought to
enrich and adorn many of the old, to which opinion adds, says a certain
Chronicle (as says Torello) wherein it is written that the Arena was built in
the twenty second year of the Empire of that Augustus; with whom Ciriaco (...)
disagrees but little, who in his Itinerary of Selavonia collects many
antiquities of Italy, and says that the Arena of Verona, called by him the
Laberinth, was built in the 3^th. year of the Empire of Augustus. But Magino
the most excellent and celebrious Mathematician writes much otherwise, for in
his description of the Marquisate of Treeves, under Tolemeo, fpeaking of
Verona, he says, that that Amfitheatre which was built by L. V. Flaminius in
Anno. 53. After the building of Rome, etc. But let every one believe hereof as
he pleases, it is sufficient that the Grandezza, the magnificencie, and
nobleness of the work gives to understand, that it was erected in the most
flourishing days of the Roman Empire, the Majesty, and greatness, whereof it
much represents.

It Is known that a little distant thence was the place where the Sword players
exercised, and to this day are to be seen, the footsteps of the Arch Triumphal
erected in honor of C. Marius. for his victory over the Cimbrians, in the
Territories of Verona, some part of the prospect or Front of the ancient
Piazza, yet remaining, shows it to have been of excellent Architecture, It Is
said that there was the Via Emilia, the Emilian Way, which lead to Rimeni,
Piacenza, Verona, and to Aquilegia, where appears an Arch of Marble, Dedicated
to Jupiter, who also had a Temple on the Hill, the foundations whereof are now
extant ruinated by time, but adorned with carved Hierogloficks.

In the Via Emilia, were many four squared Arches of Marble, three whereof, we
now behold, one of which was built by Vetruvius and shows 'twas framed with
true rules of Architecture. In Verona are many other Signs, of Venerable
Antiquity, as great Ruins of her Houses, with many Chambers adorned with
figures, composed of several pieces of Stones, of Temples, of Arches,
Triumphals, Palaces, Aquiducts, Collumns, Statues, Epitaphs, Medals, of Gold
and Silver, Urns and the like, which by the firing that Attila King of the
Hunns, put to it, were lost and destroyed: the aPvements, in some places being
thereby become twenty foot under ground. This City, has many sumptuous
Palaces, and among them the Council house, or Chamber of Justice is the chief,
of a square form, with 4. Halls, and one square low Court, wherein there is so
much room, that they therein do Justice, and hold Council at the same time,
comodiously: upon the roof whereof stand exposed to the air the Statues of
Cornelius, Nepos, Emilius, Marcus, old Poets, of Pliny the natural Historian,
and Vetruvius the Architecture, and in a very high Arch, the Statue of
Hieronimo Facastrao, all which men graced their Mother Verona by their singular
virtues.

Besides which, there are two Palaces for the Governors and many others
eminent enough of particular Veronians. They praise also the great Bell, which
is in the high Turret, The Piazza frequented by the Merchants; the Borough
where they teazlle wash and pr^ss Clothes, and the Field called Campo Martio,
where they exercise the Soldiery. There are also other Piazzaes for the
Markets, and to walk in, one for the Nobility, and another for the Merchants:
In the bigger whereof stands a Stately Fountain with a Statue representing
Verona, with a Kingly Diadem at her Feet.

The most beautiful River Adice runs by Verona, which comes just from the
Alps of Trint* and sends two arms through the Streets of the City for its
greater convenience, by which River they convey to Verona diverse Merchandices
from Germany and Venice. There are many Mills within and without the City, and
other Edifices for the Mecanicks. They have four Bridges over the Adice, all
erected with excellent artifice and beauty, one whereof has two spacious
Arches, which give a Noble prospect, Europe scarce affording any more polite
and truer built.

This City abounds with all things necessary. Their fruits are all delicious,
but the Figs Bardolini exceed all others. It has Fish very sweet from the Lake
Garda, Good Meat from the excellent Pasture, exquisite Wines from the Hills,
good Corn from the Vales, and good health from the Air, though somewhat
piercing. The Merchandise of Cloth and Silk, mantains above 20000.
Handicraftsmen.

Verona was under the Etrurians, the Euganei, the Heneti, the French and the
Romans, with whom it was confederated and had voices in the ballottinges of
Rome. The Romans never sent a Colony into Verona, but it was ascribed to the
Tribu Poblilia, and the Veronians have had many Magistrates in Rome. Heretofore
4. Deputies had the clear and mixed government of this City, as the Roman
Consuls, which 4. were created by the Citizens, together with the other
Magistrates: whereof they yet retein some shadow by having Consuls, the wise
men, the Counsel of twelve, the hundred and twenty, and the Prefect of the
Merchants. Afterward the Roman Empire declining, Verona became under the
Command of certain barbarous Tyrants, but they being driven out by the
Ostragoths and they by the Longobards who were Lords of it 200. years, it was
finally freed from their Signory and fell into the power of the successors of
Charles the great, that is of Pipin and Berengarius, and others who there made
the Seat of their Empire, as Albano King of the Longobardi, had done formerly.

In the Reign of Ottone the First, it again recovered its Liberty; but discords
arising among the Citizens, it was oppressed by the Tyranny of Ezzelino, and the
Scaligiri, its own Citizens, who Lorded it for 200. years, Last of all being
also oppressed by others, it voluntarily rendered it self to the power of the
Venetians who in those days, were esteemed the Justest of Lords. It was
converted to the Christian Faith by Euperius, commissionated to preach there
from Saint Peetre. It had thirty six Bishops Saints, with S. Zenone its
Protector, to whom Pipin Son of Charles the great, dedicated a Church with
twelve pounds of gold for yearly revenue. The greater Church, is a most noble
one, and rich with a Chapter of Canons of much authority. In the Church of S.
Anastassia is a fair Chapel of Giano Fresco a Genouai Captain, filled with
Marble Statues and his own effigies.

The people of Verona are pious, and have always had good Bishops, in
particular lately Augustine Falerio a most upright Prelate and illustrious
Cardinal as he was ever accounted by the most holy Fathers and Docters of the
Chvrch. Nor will we forget Nicolo Hormanetto Bishop of Padoua, nor Giberto, who
was the reformer of many Churches, the first of whom, brought into that
Province Carlo Borromeo Doctor, and Head of all the holy men, and the most
shining Star of the College of Cardinals. Nor that the Churches of Verona
(before the Conncel of Trent) were reformed into that order they still observe
They give divine honors to Lucius the third Pope, who going to Verona, there to
call a Council, passed into a better Life, and was there interred in the great
Church; whence in Verona was created Urban the third his Successor.

Verona is well peopled, and has many noble Families: and has produced signal
Men in all exercises. It had some Consuls in Rome: It has had many holy men
and many blessed, among which is famous San Pietro the Martyr, of the Preaching
order, buried in Milan, born in the Street of S. Stefano in Verona, where at
present may be seen the house of his Nativity. The Veronians have sharp wits,
and are much inclined to Learning, which has occasioned that it in every Age
has brought forth Men of excellent esteem in all sciences. They were Veronians
that have their five Statues set upon the public Palace: So also was the
learned Scaliger, for whose sake and his Family ( i Signori della Scala) is
erected in the heart of the City a Stately Marble Tomb, encompassed with Iron
work, resembling a Ladder, which that name implies. It has afforded some Women
too, so well read in the Greek and Latin tongue, and the Sciences, that they
have held disputes with many learned Men, among others Isotta Nogarola was
glorious, it has one Porphyre Tomb of a King of the Goths. In sum, Verona
possesses all those things that may render a City perfect, and its Citizens
happy: So that it is no wonder that many Emperors (induced by the beauty of the
place) spent some Months of the year there, as we read in the codicils of
Justinian, and Theodosius, and that Alboino, first King of the Longobards, and
Pepin Son of Charles the Great, and Berengarius, with other Kings; of Italy,
selected it for their own Residences; and to the end no ornament might be
wanting, instituted an Academy for good Letters, and Study of humanity in the
house of the Signori Bevilacque, whereof Cota a good Poet of our times says
well thus. Verona, qui te viderit, and non amarit protinus amore perditissimo,
is credo se ipsum non amat, caretque amandi sensibus; and tollit omnes gratias.

The Territory of VERONA.
THe Territory of Verona, in our times is about 80. Miles large, from the
Confines of Torbolo, a Castle of Trent, toward the South to the Polesene of
Rovigo, and from the Eastern part from the confines of Vicentia to them of
Brescia, which are toward the North 46. Miles, and 15. miles toward
South-East, where it confines with the Padouan, it is 30. miles long, a fertile
plain. toward the Northwest, it has 25. miles of mountainous Country:
Toward South and by East, thirty Mils to the Ferrarian or Mantouan confines,
of most fertile Countries, being no less pleasant than fruitful of whatever
can be desired. It has Mountains, Hills, Woods, diverse navigable Rivers,
clear fountains, oil, good Corn, good Wine, Hemp, and great plenty of Fruit,
and Trees bearing Apples, more sweet, fresh, and of longer keeping than any
other Country: It has Fowl, and Flesh of all sorts, diverse sorts of Stone, and
Chalk, Villages with fair Fabrics, and foundations of ancient Towers: In sum
it may well be called as fair and happy a Territory as any other, and more than
some are.

Going out of the Gate Vescovato, turning on the left hand, after having met
with many fruitful Hills, and the ruins of an ancient Castle, you come to the
Borough S. Michael, which has a fair St. Michael.
Church dedicated to the blessed Virgin, wherein they have seen many miricles,
and many Paper Mills, being 5. miles from Verona, then following the way a
little on the right hand, one finds the Baths, helpful for the Sterility of
Women, and to refresh the Reyns, where the Learned Calderino was born, who
after lived in Rome.

It Is reported, that there stood an ancient Castle, and that the Church of Saint
Matthew the Apostle, was a Temple of Juno. Opposite whereto upon a Hill is
seen, il Castllo Soave, built in a lovely site by the Scaligeri; a little
forwarder is Monte Forte, a Town belonging to the Veronian Bishopric, upon the
very confines, as on the other Monte forte.
side on the confines is the Borough Saint Boniface. On that part which looks
toward the North-East, are some plains well inhabited. That part looking
toward the South, begins from the Porta Nova, and goes to Lonigo a Cologna,
wherein is nothing remarkable, more than its fertility, and the head of the
River Tartaro; and on that side toward Mantoua, 17. miles distant from Verona,
is the Island Scala, so well replenished with people and goods, that it has in
some Scala.
sort the face of a City.

Toward the West, before Verona, lies a Stony untild Champion or Downs, but
famous for diverse deeds of Arms there, performed by great Captains; It Is said,
that Sabino Giuliano, who would have gotten the Empire, was there by Carino
Cesare overthrown and flain, that Odouacro King of the Herlui, and Turcillingi,
having by violence obtained the Kingdom of Italy, forcing out Augustolo, and
therein tyranized some years, was in this place discomfited in a Battle of
three days, by Theodorick King of the Ostrogoths; That Lamberto Son of Guidon
King of Spoleto, was there overcome with 14000. Hungarian Soldiers by
Berengarius. That some years after, by Gugone Arelatense, Arnoldo Captain of
Baviera, with a potent Army of Germans, was there cut in pieces, whom the
Veronians first called into Italy for King against Hugone, and had received
into their City as victorious and triumphant. That there likeness was overcome
and deprived of his Kingdom the second Berengarius by Rodolfus Borgondus; and
that in ancient times in that place were fought many Battles (of no less
consequence than obaining or losing of the Kingdom of Italy) with various
success. But as to what Biondo says, that in that Down C. Marius, vanquished
the Germans and the Cimbrians, who made a furious incursion into Italy, it is
very uncertain, because Historians much differ in describing the place where
that memorable Act was performed.

Thence one may go to Villa Franca and Sanzeno, rich Villages confines to the
Mantoua Territories, but if from those Downs one take Sanzen.
toward the South, having passed many Villages, you arrive at Peschiero a
strong Castle, but of ill Air, 14. miles from Verona, seated Peschiero.
on the Banks of the Lake Garda, where the River Menzo has its source, and on
the left side of the Lake five miles further off (most ill way) stands
Rivoltella, and two miles onward Desensano, the confines Desensano
of Verona.

On that part of Verona, toward the North-west, are many Hills placed in the
form of a Theater, where they are stocked with fertile Vineyards; and so much
adorned with beautiful Palaces and Gardens, that the prospect at a distance
much pleases; within these Hills is the Vale Paltena, inhabited and Fertile, and
following the plain, appear Paltena.
many and stately Palaces, on the banks of the Adice, which runs through that
Campagna.

At 10. miles distance from Verona upon the ascent of certain little Hills, may
be beheld the Valley Pulicella, replenish't with many Pulicella.
Castles and great Towns, behind which begin the Mountains of Trento, they say
that in the said Valley, there are two teats of Stone cut with a Chizel, which
constantly distill a water, wherewith if a Woman having lost her Milk bath her
Nipples, it will return in great abundance. Returning to Verona, by the Adice,
on one fide is the foot of the Mountain Baldo, and many Castles and Buroughs:
On the other fide a plain to Peschiera, and there begin the Mountains which are
on the right hand-shore of the Lake: there stands Bardolino, where those
Bardolino.
incomparable Figs grow, whereof Soliman Emperor of the Turks delighted Gardo.
to discourse of, with the Christian slaves, as also, Gardo, which gives name
to the Lake, and many other Castles: In this place is to be admired, the
vastness of the Venetians Minds, who conveyed over those rough and mountainous
places, both Galleys and Ships armed in all particulars, to fight in the Lake
with Filippo Visconse Captain of the Milanesians, Mount Baldo, whereof somewhat
is spoken Caldo.
formerly, ought here to be set before all the Mounts of Italy, being 30. miles
in circumference, affording excellent and rare plants, and some veins of Copper.

The Lake GARDA.
Anciently the Castle Benaco, gave name to this Lake, where now is Tusculano,
but at present it takes name from Gardo aforenamed. This Lake from Peschiera,
which lies on the South of it, is 35. miles long toward the North, and from
Salo, on the West shore to Garda or Lacice on the East, is 14. miles broad: It
is very tempestuous, and many times raises waves as high as Mountains, which at
certain seasons of the year, makes it dangerous to navigate, and this they
believe proceeds from the enclosure of the winds by the Mountains, hindering by
their surrounding its issuing out, Wherefore Virgil says, Fluctibus, and
fremitu assurgens Benace marino.


This Lake affords well-relisht fish, in great plenty, but chiefly Trouts,
Carps, and Eels, whereof Pliny speaks at large. Eight miles from Peschiera,
runs a neck of Land in to the Lake, two miles long, which seems to divide the
Lake. Here anciently was Sirmione which gave birth to Catullus the Poet, but
now remains nothing but a small Castle, though abounding with all
delitiousness. On the same side Sirmione.
is Rivoltella, and Disensano, a principal Market Town of those parts, not
defective in any thing. But on the other shore there are many fair Castles,
among others Salo and Prato di Fame, where the Bishops of Trent, Verona, and
Brescia, may each (standing in his own Diocese) shake hands. The Country there
is pleasant, bearing Olivs, Figs, Pomegranates, Lemons, Citrons, and other
fruitful Trees, which there flourish much, by having the River and Lake on one
side, and the Mountains on the other, defending it from blasting winds, and
affording the reflex of the Sun all day, from its rise to the setting, which
renders it one of the beautifullest places of Italy. The number of the People
inhabiting this Valley and Lake of Garda, shall be given in the Description of
the Valleys.

BRESCIA.
BRescia by the Romans Brixia, is seated 20 miles from Disensano, which a
direct Road leads unto, but something Stoney. Some will have it called Brescia
from Britein, which in the Language of the Galli Senones (the restorers of this
City) signify rejoicing Trees, as if the quantity of Fruits wherewith they are
yearly hung, made them rejoice. Livie and other grave Authors write, that
Brescia was built by the Galli Senones, in that age when the Kings commanded in
Rome, and that the Romans made themselves Masters thereof, after they had
conquered all Lombardy. They further say, that it always kept inviolable Faith
with the Roman People, and particularly in that calamitous time, when Hannibal
destroyed their Armies. Besides they say, that it was reduced into a Colony of
the Romans, after the associated War, together with Verona, and the other
Cities, on that fide the Po, by Cn. Pompeius Strabo, Father of Pompey the
Great, and a little time after Caesar reckoned the Brescians in the number of
the Roman Citizens; under whose Empire it continued till its Majesty was at the
height, when it was no less rich than potent, as may easily be conjectured from
the many ancient Marble Stones, and Statues, with the inscriptions and Epitaphs
of illustrious Persons, and of diverse famous deeds thereon which ly dispersed
in the City and up and down its Territory.

It Is seated in a plain (at the foot of certain Hills) more long than broad;
although but three miles in circuit, yet well replenished with dwellings and
inhabitants. Its vicinity to the Hills beautifies it with many Fountains, a
commodity which many Cities of Lombardi want. In it are many Piazzaes, the
greatest whereof is that where the public Palace is erected; which for its
fairness, may be accounted one of the Noblest Edifices of Italy. Under which
Palace are fair Porches, with shops affording well tempered Belly pieces of
Armor, Swords, Muskets, and other military Arms, which has nominated it
Brescia the Armed: other shops are no less furnished with the finest Linen
cloth, a Commodity by which these Citizens acquire great Riches. A small River
called Garcia passes through the City, which at its issuing forth is
artificially drawn on this and that side to irrigate their Fields. It has five
Porrs or Gates, and one impregnable Castle, built with Stone upon a Hill. The
Torre de Pallada is of rare Tuscan work, and therein is the Great Bell of the
City. It heretofore suffered much calamity through the Factions and enmity of
its Citizens, whose fury was such that proscription and Death to their Enemies,
without fyring and destroying their Houses and Goods, but trivally appeased:
Which caused it to change in 28. years its Sovereign seven times, in the time
of Lewis the third, and Otto Emperors, Its Citizens being much addicted to
Arms. It Is a most horrible thing to read the History of Capriole, o^ those
calamitous times, representing the great slaughters of the Citizens, with their
Proscriptions and Banishments, the sacking, burning, and ruining, of their
Habitations, and the desolation of the City; much resembling the times and
Actions of Marius, and Scilla and the Triumviraie. At this day it is governed by
the Venetians with great peace, and such increase of Riches, that its former
smart is scarce perceptible. It received the light of the Christian Faith by
Domo
the preaching of Sant Apollinare, Bishop of Ravenna, in the year of our Lord,
119. It has some fair Churches, among them the Domo, (whose Bishop with a good
Revenue has the Tide of Duke, Marquess, and Count) where a Skie-coloured Cross
called Oro Fiamma, is much reverenced by the People, who indubitably believe it
to be the same which appeared to Constantine the Emperor fighting against
Maxentius, The Motto, in hoc signo Vinces.

Next is the Church of Santa Giulia the Martyr, built by Desiderius, Santa
Juliia
King of the Longobards, in the year 735. adorned with rich Vests and precious
vessels, and honored with the bodies of many Saints, together with those of
Ansilperga, the Sister, and Hermingarda the Daughter, of that King: which ly in
its noble Monastery: wherein two daughters of Lotario the first Emperor, one
sister of Charles the the third, one Daughter of Berengarus the Userper of the
Empire, with many other Virgins of Royal blood, have spent their days in the
^ervice of God, under the Orders of Saint Benedict.

Brescia is well replenished with People, and among them with many noble and
illustrious Families, as the Gambari, the Martinengi, the Magi, the Avogradi,
Averoldi, Luzaghi, Emilii and others. It has given Birth to many Saints, of
whom they name only San Giovita and Faustino, who suffered Martyrdom for the
Faith of Christ, on the Walls toward Verona, whereof at this day appear some
Marks of it. It has had thirty Bishops canonized for Saints: Its Territory is
so large, spacious, and long, that it is believed, the Bishop thereof has the
Cure of near Eight Hundred Thousand Souls: It abounds with all things necessary
for human Sustenance, and the People are reputed of a quick-witted and elegant
Ingennity: whereof an elegant Poet writes. Caelum hilarem, frons laeta Urbi,
gens nescia fraudis,
Atque modum ignorant divitis uber agri.


The Territory of BRESCIA.
THe Bresciau Territory, is one hundred miles broad, beginning from Mosa 15.
miles distant from Mantoua, and ending at Dialengo at the top of Alcamonica,
and 50. miles long, extending from Limona on the Lake Garda to the Orzi Novi,
the Country containing 450. Towns, Villages, and Castles well peopled, and
affording all sorts of Corn, Grain, Wine, Oil, and Fruit: Toward the East, on
the Road leading to Verona, on the right hand, stand G^di, Manerbio, Calvesano;
Calcina to, on the left, the Mounta^ns, Bridigolo, Lonato.
Padengo* and the Lake, with the fair Town of Lonato* ^5. miles off ^rescia.
Toward the South by the way of Cremona, a^ seen Virola, Asola
and Asola, a strong Castle, Issuing sorth the Gate San Nazario, toward the
West, on the right lies Priviato, on the left, Quintiano, a noble Castle. This
is the way of the Orzi Novi, where stands a strong Castle 20. miles from
Brescia, built in Anno 1134. Here they vant much of the excellency of their
Linen Cloth, near which passes the River Oglio, which terminates the
Venetians dominions. And Oglio.
going out of the Gates. Giovanni, you meet the Torrent M^la, Coraio a rich
Country, and Reato the most populous Town of the Brescian Reato
Territories; a little farther a most fertile plain, beautified with many
Castles, from the dwelling of the French there in it is called (...), but before
you can reach Palazzolo, must be passed the Riv^ (...), over a stately Bridge,
from whence they enter the Territories of (...).

The BRESCIAN Valleys
THis City has three principal Valleys, the first called Valcamonica,
Valcamonica
lies toward the West, and is bigger than both the other; extending it self
50. miles toward the North, is continued with surrounding Hills, among which,
is a running current yielding good Trouts, which River enters at the head of
the ^ake Isseo, running Isseo
through it, and out of it with the same name, and passing through the Play^,
many A^ms and Branches are drawn from it, to overflow the fields, whereby they
become most productive of Grass, Hay, Corn, etc. It has some minerals of Iron
and Copper, Its chief Brenna.
Town is Brenna; toward the end, this vale divides it self into two parts, one
whereof exte^s to the County of Tirol^, the other reaches the valley Tellina.

The second is the Vale Troppia, which takes its commencement 6. Troppia.
miles off the City, and extends it self 20. miles long, to the North,
circumscribed with Mountains, and washed with the River M^la. In some places
it is narrow, and ^is most (...) nearest the City: wherein 10. miles off the
City, is the rich and Noble Castle and Town Cardone
Cardone, much talked off, for the good Harquebuses there made: It affords Iron
Mine, and that gives cause of the Iron works there built.

The last is the Vale del Sole 22. miles long, conjoined with the Del Sole
other, through which passes the River Chiese, which issues from the Lake
Iseo, washing it for 10. miles space, affording good Fish, especially Trouts;
here also are some Iron works. This Vale divides it self into many Branches, by
many (...) t^; and in many places, is well and neatly planted with Vines and
fruitful Trees: These two last Vales are in the power of the Venetians, and
produce So^ldiers of great gallantry. The whole Brescian Territory affords near
800000. Souls, besides what the City it self contains.

The first and shortest way from BRESCIA to MILAN.
Going out of Brescia by the gate San Giov^nni for Milan, are seen ^caglio
Pontoi, so called from the similitude of Ponto Oglio, the River which washes
that Castle Walls: Then Martinengo, Triviglio, and Cassano, much famed for the
mortal stroke there received by Ezzelino the Tyrant of Padoua, from the Romans;
on the right hand the Campagna Giare di Adda, then the Castle Caravaggio, head
of all the Giara Caravaggio
di Adda, strong by site and Art, rich and abounding. Here in the year 1422.
they fable an appearance of the blessed Virgin, where she reposed, they dugg a
Well, whose Waters are good for all infirmities, Cassina
there also, they erected a most stately Church. At Cassano, you repass the
River Adda, then travaling 10. miles, arrive at Cassina, the white Hostery,
then 10. more to Milan, this way from Brecia to Milan, is accounted 50. miles
long.

The second Voyage, but longer, from BRESCIA to MILAN.
THis way is more straight and long, than the other, which they take out of the
Gate San Nazario, and at 20. miles end arrive at the Orzi Novi, whence passing
the River Oglio, they come to the most noble Castle Soncino, where in Winter
time they make a certain pleasant Soncino
Bread with Almonds, they also make Latten Candlesticks, the Inhabitants are
both Civil and courteous. This Castle is endowed with the Title of a
Marquisate, and belongs to the State of Milan, over the Gate whereof are set
the Arms of Spain. In Soncino, the Tyrant of Padeua, Ezzelino, would needs dye,
born of Saxon blood, and 70. years old, who having received a mortal wound in
one Knee, from the Army in Cassano, would not permit them to dress the wound,
nor apply any remedy, where he unhappily and Meritoriously abandoned this Life;
five miles farther lies Romanengo, and so much more far Crema, which on the
East is washed by the River Serio. This Crema was anciently one of the four
principal Castles of Italy, Crema
but is at present a City, and an Episcopal Seat, it is placed in an ample plain,
fortified with Rampants and Ovals, well enriched, full of civil People,
replenisht with Houses, abounding with human necessaries, and under the
Government of the Venetians. The Domo, the Tower, the Piazza, and the Palace of
the Podesta, are worth a visit. The Podesta which the Venetians commissionate
thither, governs 46. other places; here the women get well by whitening sowing
thread, and weaving of Linen Cloth. Thence (passing the River Torno) 10. miles
farther is Lodi (Laus Pomponia by the ^omans) Lodi
a great City on the side of the River Ada, famous for the Cheese made there
not much inferior to the Parmisen; then Malignano, a Castle honored with the
Title of Marquisate of the Noble Family of the Medici at Milan, and so to
Milan, this way is 62. miles long. All which way is like a Garden, the
highways straight, and Level on both sides whereof, run channels of Water, on
each side of which are planted Trees, up which run their Vines, and the Fields
are some Meadows, and the rest yield plenty of Corn.

The third Journey from BRESCIA to MILAN by the way of BERGAMO.
PArting from Brescia by the Gate San Giovanni, passing the Torrent Mela, are
seen the Castles Cacaglio, and Palazzuolo before named, and on the other side of
the River Oglio, the Village Malpaga, built in a fair plain by Bartolemeo
Coleone of Bergamo, who Malpaga
there ended his days, at 76. years of Age, and was buried in Bergamo. In
honor of whom for having been the most valiant and faithful Captain of the
Venetian Army, is erected his Statue on Horseback gilt all over, with a Marble
Basis, before the Church San Giovanni, and Paolo in Venice. On the left hand
lies Orgiano and S. Maria of Basella a Church with a fair monastery for
preaching Friars; whence passing a Noble Bridge over the River Serio, you
arrive at Bergamo 30. miles from Brescia.

BERGAMO.
THe City of Bergamo, is so ancient that its founders are not known, yet some
avert they were the Orobii which in greek signifies Inhabitants of the
Mountains. Giovanni Annio of Viterba with Giovanno Chrisostomo Zancho, much
labor to demonstrate and prove the Antiquity of Bergamo, and wherefore so
named, by many etimologies of the word, as well in Greek, as in Hebrew, and in
the end conclude it to be thus called in Hebrew, which in Latin sounds,
Inonditorum clypeata civitas, vel Gallorum Regia Urbs, quae a Graecis
Archipolis, a recentioribus autem Latinis tum princeps, tum Ducalis Civitas
appellari solet. And a little further say. Igitur Bergomum Regalem ve terum
Gallorum urbem extitisse, nomen ipsum manifestissime docet.

Others are of opinion, that ^was first built by the Tuscans, and afterward
restored and enlarged by the Galli Cenomani: Its Country toward the East is
plain, sertile, and productive of Fruit. On the North and West, rugged,
Mountainous, and barren. It Is rendered a very strong City, by those thick walls
which inviron it, and those bulwarks, and other engines of War, which for its
detence against Enemies the Venetians have erected. It Is small and seated on the
side of the Mountains. It has two Buroughs conjoined with it, where they have
raised stately edifices as well for Divine worship as private Citizens
habitations. In one of which is yearly kept a Fair which begins on the day of
Saint Bartolemo, and continues for many days, whither the vast quantity of
Merchandise invites as much People, as Italians, Germans, Grizons, and
Switzers: The Air is most serene there, and its Territory produces sweet
wines, Oil, and many pleasant fruits. In some places (for want of Land either
fit for tillage or Vines) the people employ themselves in working Woollen and
Linen Clothes, which they afterward carry into all parts of Italy. Their
Language is very rustic, but that renders not the People so, who are civil and
ingenuous, and no less disposed to Learning than Trade, whence it took the
surname of Bergamo the witty.

It has produced many noble Wits, who by their excellent virtues have added to
its Luster: Whereof were Alberico di Rosato, Doctor of Laws, and Ambrogio
Calepino, whose works no ingenuous person neglects to have. Friar Damiano, a
convertite of the order of Preachers, was a man of so great Ingenuity (in
cementing pieces of several woods together, with such artifice, that they have
been often mistaken for Pictures drawn with a pencel) that his fellow has not
been known herein. Friar Pagano of the same Order, gave excellent example of
constancy at his death given him by the Heretics. Hence also, have issued men
of great Judgment and Counsel, to govern the Republic, particularly of the
Family of Foresti, with many Cardinals, Prelates, and excellent Captains.

The first Advancer of the Christian Religion in this City, was Saint Barnabas,
a Disciple of Christ, in the 25th. year of our Salvation; together with
Anatolone the Greek, and Caio the Roman, giving it for Bishop Narino one of its
Citizens; who having governed it with great sanctity of Life and Religion for
thirty years, deceased, and was there interred: whom many holy Bishops from one
to another have succeeded.

In the Domo of Bergamo, are 25. Bodies of Saints, kept with great devotion.
Where near the high Altar stands the Sepulcher of Bartolomeo Coleone, a famous
Captain, and Citizen of it, with his Effigies in Marble, which he caused to be
cut for him by the Life, the Epitaph whereof follows. Bartholomeus Colleonus de
Andegania virtute immortalitatem adeptus, usque adeo in re militari fuit
illustris, and non modo tunc viventium gloriam long excesserit, sed etiam
posteris spem enim citandi ademerit, saepius enim a diversis Principibus, ac
deinceps ab Illustrissimo Veneto Senatu accepto Imperio, Tandem totius
Christianorum exercitus sub Paulo Secundo Pont. Max. delectus fuit Imperator:
Cujus acies quatuordecim annos, ab ejus obitu solo jam defuncti Imperatoris,
tanquam vivi nomine militantis jussa, cujus alias contempserunt. Obiit Anno
Domini 1475. quarto nonas Novembris.

In the Church of Saint Agostino is the Tomb of Friar Ambrogio Calepino, who
with great diligence and industry, collected all the Latin words in a form
approved by the gravest writers: whose works are known to all the World, being
divulged where ever the Latin Tongue is spoken.

Bergamo, together with its Buroughs, contains a great number of Souls: Above
it stands the Capella, or Chapel, a place strong by its site upon a high
Mountain, and by the most impregnable Walls wherewith it was encompassed by
Luchino Visconte Lord of Milano and Bergamo: but at this time it is wholly
abandoned and half ruinated, being found by experience of little aid to the
City when need required: here at first was laid a foundation for a Monastery
for the Order of S. Dominick, and a Chapel built, whence called Capello.

Bergamo was long time subject to the Roman Empire; after whose fall it was burnt
by Attila; then it was yoaked to the Longobardi, who styled themselves Dukes
thereof; then reduced under the power of Kings of Italy: and so continued till
the days of Filippo Turciano, who became Lord thereof Anno 1264. After it was
Subjugated by Luchino the Viscount. Then Mastino della Scalla made himself Lord
thereof. By whom some time after it was sold to Pandolfo Malatesta for thirty
thousand Ducats of Gold. And after it had been some times occupied by the
French, of its own accord it gave it self to the Venetians, under whom it
peaceably reposeth to this day. If farther and more at large any one defires to
be satisfied in the history of Bergamo, let him read the book entitled, La
Vigna di Bergamo.

Serio runs close by Bergamo, deriving its source from those Mountains, Vale
Serina.
between which toward the North are 6 vales. The first is called La vale
Seriana, from the River Serio's running through it, which is well peopled, who
by Tolomeo are called Beccunni. The second is Vale Brombana, so named from its
vicinity with the Banks of the River Brombana
Brembo* each of which are extended for thirty miles long. The San Martino
third is Vale di San Martino, 15. miles long. The fourrh, Vale di Calepio,
Calepio Chiusontio Manca
the fifth, Vale di Ohiusontio, the sixth, Val di Manca; in which between
Towns, Villages, and Hamlets, are numbered 200. Inhabited places, of which the
chief are Calepio, Lever de Chiusonto, and Vertua, where they make excellent
Woollen Clothes. On this side the Territory of Bergamo extends it self 28.
miles. Upon Calepio is the strong Castle Leuco, where a Bridge conjoyns both
the Banks of Adda. On the West Bergamo has the City of Como, Monza, and the
Como
Hills of Brianza, toward the East Brescia, and toward the South Crema with
the above-described Places. Bergamo is accounted 32. miles from Milan, having
on the right hand the Rivers Brembo which discharges it self into the Adda,
further on, near the Adda is the well-fortified Castle of Trezzo, reared by
Bernardo Viscount of Milan, Anno 1370. together with that artificial Bridge,
which on the left hand over the Adda discovers it self with the abovenamed
Places. At twelve miles distance from Bergamo stands Colonica a small Village,
where imbarking you psss 20: miles in the Water and so arrive at Milan.

CREMA.
THe Relation of this City should have been placed between the narrations of
Brescia and Bergamo, where in the second voyage from Brescia to Milan it is only
briesly touched, but the Author having found himself tardy, in omitting an
account of this esteemed one of the prime Cities of Lombardy, apollogizeth for
his placing it here in the end of this Book, and promises a reformation in the
next impress.

Being then in the City of Brescia, and going forth the Gate San Nazario, after
twenty miles travel you arrive at Orzi Nuovi: and having past the River Oglio
find the Castle Soncino: and sive miles more forwards meets Romanengo, and so
many more the City Crema, which is situated in the East shore of the River
Serio, by which it is deliciously washed; it lies in the Center of fruitful
Lombardy, between five illustrious Cities, at thirty miles distance from each,
which encompasse it like a Crown, whereof she may be termed the Cross, that is
to say, Milan, Bergamo, Brescia, Cremona, and Piacenza, who affording it what
it stands in need of, and expending its superfluities, concur in the rendering
it a rich City, it is full of regard, and filled with Merchandise and a haughty
self-conceited sort of men, but better illustrated by their gracious and loving
Women, who flourish, are free, and most pompous in their array. It is adorned
with sumptuous and magnificent Fabrics, among which the most conspicuous are
the public Palace, the Piazza and the Domo with its Tower (wherein is a large
Bell) of fair and open Architecture, with two regardfull Chapels, one dedicated
to the blessed Virgin, all over garnished with excellent pictures, the other to
Saint Mark no less beautified with gilt Images. Two other not able things this
Church owns, to wit, that Wooden crucifix, which in Anno 144^* was cast into
the Fire by a certain man called Giovanni Alchini, of the faction of Gibellina
Bergamesca, which would not burn* but is still preserved with the one side a
little singed in a particular Chapel, with great Veneration, the other is a Key
of San Bellino, which has the foretold miraculous curing virtue of such as are
bit by madd Dogs.

In the same Church are conserved certain trophies of Banners, and a Lanthern
of a Gally, taken together with the Gally in a Naval fight against the Turks,
by a Preacher of the most noble Family of Zurly, during the fight, being set at
the head of the Gally. Besides the above named Fabrics and things worth seeing
in this City, two Hospitals are valuable. One for the infirm, the other for the
decrepit and outcasts: the sacred Mount of Piety is well endowed, and governed
with great providence by the public, to supply the necessities of the City and
Country.

There is also a noble Academy for Students, who under the name of Sospinti,
employ themselves in good exercises with an impulse of generous emulation.
Distant a quarter of a mile from the City stands (toward the Castle) a
magnificent Temple of great devotion, named Santa Maria della Croce, of an
admirable Structure, and adorned with many rare Pictures: To this noble and
fair City, though Little (as little best corresponds with little) belongs a
small but most fertile Territory, washed all over with current and Christalline
waters, which affords the City good Fish, as Lobsters, Trouts, Gudgeons, and
Eels, and the Country an enriching of their soil by overflowings, whereby it
yields great plenty of Corn and Grass, the first whereof they have for their
own use and other Cities, and with the second they make incomparable cheese.

But that wherewith it most abounds is Flax, which after made into the finest
Drapery is spent all over Italy.

In its territories though small, are contained fifty four Villages, and Towns,
the chief whereof are, Monte dine, Stanengo, Camisano, Tetrore, Vaiano,
Bagnelo, Madegnano, being all most populous.

The Original of this City, was taken from its situation, for being environed
then with the three Rivers, Ada, Oglio and Serio, it was very strong, and that
strength as is believed invited many noble men of the neighboring Cities (in
the time of the Wars of Albonio King of the Longobards) to retire themselves
thither, and from Cremete one of the chief of those Nobles it took its name.
For Forty years it maintained it self in liberty, but then she with the other
Cities of Italy suffered shipwreck, being by the Longobards, Frederick
Barbarossa and others, many times, taken, burnt, sacked, and destroyed, and
subjugated sometimes to the Emperors, sometimes to the French, and sometimes to
the Germans. But now it is governed by the most Serene Republic of Venice under
whom it has the privilege to keep every year a Fair beginning at the end of
September being frequented with innumerable concourse of People, diverse
Merchandises and Commodities, and great store of Cattle of all sorts.

It ever was the Mother of illustrious persons, as well learned in all the
sciences, as famous Captains, eminent Engineers, Generals of Armies, writers of
Histories, as well Moral as Divine, Prelates of the greatest Negotiations, and
Cardinals, some whereof have possessed the Pontificial Chayr.

MILAN the great.
MIlan was an ancient and illustrious City, and for a long time (through its
beauty remained an imperial Seat.) Behind its shoulders rise those Mountains
which separate Italy. Before it is a long and spacious Plain which extending it
self above 200. miles, reaches the Church lands between Rimio and Pesaro on
the one side, and Istria and Osia, on the other side. Whereof Polibius writes
thus. There is a plain, between the Alps and the Apennines of a triangular
Forn, wherein are pleasant Fields above all the Fields not only of Italy but
all Europe. Of which Triangle, the Apennines form one side, the Alps another,
and the Adriatic Sea or Gulf of Venice (as it were the basis to the other two)
makes up the third side.

And although Milan was heretofore a small Town, it was nevertheless much
aggrandized and amplified by Belovese King of the Galls, having environed it
with a Wall 24. foot broad, and 64. feet high, which compassed in all the
Streets and round of the City: in which Wall were raised 130. Bulwarks, and
Towers of immense bigness and height, which had six principal Gates. This was
effected 270 years before Brenta King of the Senoni, fell down into Italy, who
threw down and levelled it with the Foundations. But the Roman Senate having
restored it to its first form and beauty, and being increased in Riches and
People, Attila King of the Hunns descending into Italy, ruined it once more.

Afterward, it was again rebuilt by the Archbishop Eusebius, rearing the Wall
again, and re-edifying the ruinated Building. And one hundred years after, that
is in Anno Salutis 577. the Goths exercised so great cruelty toward the
Milanesi, that after they had cast down the Walls, and Edifices, they in one
day slew thirty thousand Citizens.

This City was likewise ill treated by Erimberto Brother of the King of France,
and by Federick Barbarossa the Emperor: who with intendment of its perpetual
desolation ploughed and sowed it with. salt, but being afterward reconciled to
the Citizens, he restored it to its former beauty, encompassing it round with a
wall, wherein were set out six principal Gates: At which time, viz. in the
1177. year, the circnit of it was six miles without the suburbs, but now there
is a Wall drawn round, which comprehends therein the Suburbs also, which was
done by Gonzaga Lieutenant of the Emperor Charles the 5th. and is in
circumference ten miles, having very deep Fosses or Ditches, and ten Gates.

This City, before the coming of Belloveso, as is aforesaid, was but a Town
called Subria built by the Tuscans, then Belloveso coming from Gallia, beat out
the Tuscans, aggrandized and much beautified the Town: As to the name
Mediolano, as formerly called, diverse are the opinions, some say it was so
called for that it was seated between two Rivers, the Adda and the Tesino.
Others say, that name was imposed on it by Belloveso by the command of the
Gods, giving him to understand, that he should build a City where he should
find a Farrowing Sow, half black and half white, with Wool between her
shoulders: Whence finding such a Sow in that place, and esteeming it a good
augure and praesage, he built it, naming it Mediolana, as much as to say, Meza
Lana, or half Wool, in remembrance of which thing we find in a Marble over the
Gate of the Palace of Merchants the shape and figure of the said Scrofa or
Farrowing Sow.

The Galls kept the Dominion of this City, a long time, under Belloveso and his
Successors, till they were beaten out by the Romans, who subjected it for a
great while to them, under whom it augmented in riches and People, chiefly
under the Emperors as well Greek as Latin; some whereof much delighted to
reside there, invited thereto by the beauty of the place, and the comodiousness
of managing the Wars against the French and Germans, as necessity required. It
so much humoured Trajan, the Emperor, that he there built that proud Palace
which to this day retains his memory.

Adrian, Massiminian, Hercules, Filippo a Christian Emperor, Constantine,
Constanzo, Theodosio, with many other Emperors, dwelt there, left most stately
Edifices, and caused four Wi-draughts or Common shores to be dugg, which
continue to this day. Afterward it became subject to the Goths, and to the
Longobards, who being driven out by Charles the great, it came under the power
of the Emperors. In which time Contado Suevio being Emperor, it began to take
boldness and aspire to Liberty, when Justice was administered by the Captains
and other Officers elected by the People uniting with them the Primate or
Archbishop of the City, by the Peoples election: In which time great discord
arising between the Nobility and Plebeians, and thereby governing themselves
very ill, they to prevent those disorders put themselves under the power of
those of Torre, afterward to the Visconti, who a great space kept the
Dominion, whom the Sforzeschi succeeded, them the French, and last of all the
house of Austria obtained it, and keep it to this day in good peace and
tranquillity.

Milan lies under the sixth Climate or Degree, which affords it a great
benignity of the skies, yet the Air is somewhat thick. Channels of water environ
both the City and Suburbs, upon which by Barks they conveigh great abundance of
goods and provisions of all sorts. In truth it is a wonderful thing to behold
the great plenty of all things, for the life or necessity of Man, which are
there, and it is held for certain, that in no other part of Europe* there is so
great provision for the Belly, nor at less price, than is here: whence the
Proverb is taken Solo in Milano si mangia. For whereas in other Cities one
finds not above three Piazzaes at most, where are kept sueh public Markets, in
Milan there are a hundred, whereof 21. are principal, which every fourth day of
the week are vastly laden with all sorts of Provisions: For wines they chiefly
have Vernaccie of Montf^rrat, and the Wines of Brianza so much spoken of:
Moreover for that it is the Center of Lombardi, hither they transport infinite
quantities of Merchandise, from Germany, France, Spain, and Geneva.

It Is seated in a wide Plain, having about it green hills, delightful Meadows,
navigable Rivers and Lakes, which furnish them with delicate Fish. In sum,
this Country affords in most plentiful measure whatsoever can be desired. It Is
so thronged with Artizans of all sorts, that the vulgar proverb goes. Chi
volesse rassettare Italia rovinarebbe Milano

But the chief of them are Goldsmiths, Armourers, Gun-makers, and Weavers, who
here exceed in these particulars, and in works of Crystal, either Venice or
any other part of Italy; the Nunns work here likewise most exact and neat
curiosities in straw works. It abounds likewise with most magnificent and
Stately Palaces, among which the stupendous Palace of Tomaso Marini (built
with so vast expense and Artifice, that whoever beholds it stands amazed)
shines like the Moon among the Stars.

The Castle of Porta Zobbia, named among the chief of Europe, both for its
site, greatness, beauty, and its plenty of Artiglery, Arms, and Ammunition, is
so impregnable, that hitherto it was never taken by force, but through failer of
provisions and Famine it has been yielded up. This Fort may be compared to an
indifferent City, for within it are streets, Piazzaes, Palaces, Shops for
Goldsmiths, and all other Trades whatsoever, together with all sorts of
Victuals and other provision in time of War, as well as Peace. Immense
Bastions, with three large profound Dykes, environ it, through which run great
Channels of Water, with a most vast Wall, and spacious Ramparts, under which
they walk by a close way made to that purpose. Upon the Battlements and through
the Porteholes up and down, are drawn out great Mouths of Cannon, and other
pieces of Artiglery set upon Iron Carriages, some whereof shoot Bullets of 800.
pound weight, with such force that no obstacle can withstand them; It has one
place to lay up, and dispose the Arms in a Capacious Arcenal, replenisht with
infinite Arms of all sorts both for Offense and Defense. The Tower in the midst
of it, is of a square form, and is in circuit (not reckoning the Towers which
one may call little Forts) 200. paces. The whole Castle or Fort is 1600. paces
in circum ference, besides the Trenches. In fine it is accounted by all Ingineers
the fairest and strongest fortification of Europe. They unwillingly admit any
Stranger to see the outworks, much less the interior parts.

It abounds with rare and excellent Pictures, among others there is one upon
the Front of a Palace near the Fort, wherein are painted the Acts of the
Romaus, by the hand of Trofo da Monza, so divinely, that it is impossible to add
to it. The Images are done so exact to the life and so natural, that all the
beholders rest astonished, and expect speech from those inanimate (but seeming
breathing, and moving) Pictures.

To say no more, Art here has overcome Nature. Toward the Gate Beatrice, is
the Front of another Palace (of the Lituadi) painted so rarely well by the hand
of (...), that it almost fascinates the eyes of the Aspicients. And at the Gate
^osa, stands an admirable Statue made to the middle, at the Public cost, in
remembrance of a Strumpet, who principally caused Milan to gain its Liberty.

Milan from the death of Belloveso continued ever head of the adjacent
Country, which made the ancient Emperors to send thither a Lieutenant with
title of Count of Italy, who also was Captain General of the Empire, and
remained there with Consular authority, and Captain of their Armies, that he
might bridle the Fury, and shut up the passage from the Inroads into Italy of
the Ultramontaneous People.

Such is the wholsomness of the Air, the Beauty of the Country, and Copiousness
of sustenance, that it has tempted many Princes (desirous to rest quiet) to
make this their Retreat, and Asylum, as also many other great Men that they
might the more commodiously apply themselves to the Study of Learning: Of which
were Virgil, Alipius, Saint Augustine, Hermolao Barbaro, Merula, Francesco
Filelfo, Celio Rodigino, Alexander the sixth, and Pious the fourth Popes. And
although too often this City was thrown down to the very foundations, and at
last furrowed with the plough of the Enemies, yet it ever revived again, and
that with more beauty and Splendour than at first, increasing still so much in
Riches and People, that it ever kept a place among the chief Cities of Italy.

Near the Church San Salavdore, there stood a proud Palace of the Emperors,
with a Temple dedicated to Jupiter, made in emulation of the Campidoglio at
Rome, and where now the Counsel is kept, was the Palace for Justice; where also
the Proclamations of the Dukes were accustomed to be publicly read, and the
due punishments executed on Malefactors. There was also a Theater to present
Comedies, a place for Horse* races, and a large Circle where now is Santa Maria
Maggiore. The Garden near San Steffano, was an Amphitheatre, where they
accustomed to fight Duels. The Church of San Nazario was an old Prison, where
they condemned Malefactors to fight with the wild Beasts there preserved to
that end in great number,

The Common Field was then a Theater, where the young men exercised themselves
in taming and manning of Horses, and fighting. Where the Cathedral Church is,
was a place with Stalls many ways where they made their Feasts to their Heroes
and Household Gods. The Stalls now for the Cattle, then was a pleasant Garden,
beautified and planted with many Fruit trees and plants brought from far
Countries; great store of odoriferous flowers; Rivolets of Christalline waters,
Statues and Sculptures of Marble. Where the Church of San Lorenzo stands now,
were the hot Baths of Maximinian, Nero, and Nerva, the Emperors, nothing
inferior to them at Rome.

Besides which antiquities, there yet is preserved a stately Armory in the
Palace, replenished with most noble Arms, worthy any Prince for the value and
fairness, being not only inlayed with Gold and Silver, but engraven with
greatest Cost and Workmanship; where now is the Church San Lorenzo, was a
Temple dedicated to Hercules, made in the form of the Rotunda at Rome, near
which were erected 16. Marble Pillars, and upon them a Palace for the
Emperors, part whereof was ruined by fire, the rest by time, nothing but the
Pillars remaining All this Fabric was raised by Maximinian Hercules, who
ordained the Town should be no more called Milano, but Herculeo. At one end of
those Pillars is this inscription put in. Imp. Caesari L. Aurelio vero Aug.
Arminiaco Medico Parthico Max. Trib. Pot. VII. Imp. IIII. Cos. III. PP. Divi
Antonini Pii. Divi Hadriani Nepoti. Divi Trajani Parthici, Pronepoti Divi
Nervae. Apnepoti Dec. Dec.

This Milan was always a potent City, whence we read that it many times made
opposition to the Romans, and often fought the Goths and other Barbarous
People, and also against both the Federicks the first and second Emperors,
obtaining a most glorious victory: It subjected to it Navara, Bergamo, Pavia,
Como, Lodi, and Tortona, and freed Genoua from the hands of the Moors, The
Romans were wont to say. Qui miseram citius cupiunt effundere vitam,
Modiolanum adeant, gens ea dura nimis.


It was so much prized by the adjacent Countries (that it being ruined by
Federick Barbarossa the Emperor) Cremona, Verona, Piacenza, advised how to
restore it at their own cost and charges, and in all times it was very populous.

It received the light of the Faith from S: Barnabas, sent thither from Saint
Peetre, who then resided in Antiochia, which was in the 46. year after the
coming of our Savior, where he substituted for Bishop Anatalone the Greek his
Disciple, whom in process of time succeeded many holy Bishops, among others
that glorious pillar of the Church Saint Ambrose the most renowned Doctor; who
finding the Bodies of San Gervaso and Protaso the Martyrs, caused that Church
to be built which is now called San Ambrogio. This was the Cathedral Church,
where is seen the true effigies of the brazen Serpent made by Moses, brought
hither by Theodosius the Emperor, as also the effigies of San Bernardo upon a
Pillar, who in this Church said Mass, preached and wrought miracles. Likewise a
sumptuous Sepulcher wherein lies Lewis the second Emperor, and Pepin King of
Italy both Sons of Charles the great, there under the Altar within a deep Pit
locked with four Gates of Iron, is kept with great reverence the body of Saint
Ambrose, and a book writ with his own hand: Angelberto of the illustrious
Family of Pusterly in the time of Charles the Great, being Archbishop. The
Emperor gave to this Altar a noble Pall, embroidered with Saints and Angels, in
20. several Squares, in the midst whereof is the Savior of the World, as he
rose from the dead, upon whose head is a Diamond set round with gemmes of
inestimable value. On both sides of which Altar are four other Images of
Saints, in the middle is a Cross. The Vests are all over beset with many pearls
and precious stones; behind the Altar is another Cross of silver two Cubits
high, and one and an half broad, where are 23. figures of Saints of embossed
work; This so stupendous work cost in those days 28000. Scudaes, and is now
worth 100000. Volvinio the excellent Sculptor of those times was the Artificer
of it. Saint Ambrose stood at the Gate of this Church, when he excomunicated
Theodosius the Emperor, commanding him not to enter therein. Contiguous with it
is a noble and stately Monastery of the Friars Celestines. At the issuing out
of Saint Ambrogio, is a poor Chapel in a blind corner with a Well, where Saint
Ambross baptized Saint Augustine: and it is known, that this was the way, which
Saint Augustine, and Saint Ambrose took hand in hand to give thanks to God in
San Gervaso, for the holy Baptism received, singing Te Devm Laudamus, as the
Inscription testifies. Hic beatus Ambrosius babtizat Augustinum, Deodatum, and
Alippum, hic beatus Ambrosius incipit te Deum laudamus. Augustinus sequitur, Te
deum confitemur.

The meanness of the place makes it most credible to be true, the name of
Carolus Boromaeus a Council of Trent Saint, highly cried up at Milan, having
too much extinguished the memory and esteem of that learned Father.

The Church of Santa Tecla, is replete with holy Relics; here rests Saint
Ambrose, and among other Relics a Nayl which was fixed and drove through a
member of the Body of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ into the Wooden Cross
whereon he was crucified, by the wicked Jews, which. was bestowed on it by
Theodosius the Emperor: This is the antientest Temple of Milan, and was first
consecrated to the Savior, after to the Virgin Mary, and lastly to Tecla, but
anciently many years before the coming of the Messiias, they say there stood a
most famous Temple of Minerva, where (as Polybius averrs) this goddess was
adored and reverenced with the greatest and most particular devotion, whence
many suppose this Ciry took its name, for that in the ancient Celtique and
German tongues Magdalant signifies the Land or Country of a Virgin, which
opinion is likewise confimed by Andrea Alciato I. C. A veritable Author in all
the sciences, who in his Emblems writ this Epigram. Quam Mediolanum sacram
dixere puellae
Terram, nam vetus hoc Gallica lingua sonat,
Cultac Minerva fuit, nunc est, ubi nomine Tecla
Mutato, Matris Virginis ante Domum.


Santa Maria della Scala, was founded by Regina, Wife of the Visconte: and
enjoined to be so called, because she descended from the Family of the Scalaes
of Verona. It stands where was anciently the Palace of the Turriani: And where
the Church of Saint Dionigeis stood in old time a Dragon, which then greatly
afflicted the Country and destroyed many, at last he was slain by Umberto
Angiere, who was thereupon created Viscont.

There are two Chapels in the Church of Saint Mark, in one whereof is the most
excellent Pictures of Lomazzo, containing in one the Apostles, Prophets,
Sibils, and many other pourtraies: In the other the fall of Simon Magus from
Heaven, which it represent, as most horrible spectacle.

The Church of San Nazario, contains certain proud Tombs of the illustrious
Lords, the Trivultii chiesly that of Giacomo, of whom may be truly said: He
that never was quiet lies still here: Near this Church they show a red stone,
which they term the holy Stone, wherein are cut the victories, and trophies
which Saint Ambrose gloriously obtained upon the Arrians, in memory whereof, to
him was erected a Statue at the Gate Vico. The Church of S. Fedele, is
admirable, no less for its beauty, than for the Architecture of Pellegrino.

The Church of San Paola and San Barnabas, for the Nuns is most noble, where
was first founded the Order of the reformed Priests of the beheaded Saint John:
They have one rare cross cut by Bramantino.

The Church of Santa Rosa, is for the preaching Friars, who have the keeping of
the holy Rosarie.

In the magnificent Temple of San Gottardo, are excellently drawn the effigies
of the Visconte, where ly buried Azzone Visconte, and Gio Maria the second
Duke. Its beautified with a stupendous Belfry, and a fair Garden.

The Church of Saint Eustorgio the Bishop, shows a stately and sumptuous
Sepulcher, wherein ly the bones of San Pietro the Martyr. A rich Tabernacle
where is kept the head of Saint Eustorgio, and the Tomb of the three Magi, with
this inscription. Sepulchrum Trium Magorum, where lay the Bodies of those Magi,
which were brought hither by Saint Eustorgio, in Anno 330. when he came last
out of the East; but many years after, this City being destroyed by Fedrick
Barbarossa, in Anno 1163. These Bodies were conveyed to Colonia Agrippina by
Rodolphus the Archbishop, now they keep in that Sepulcher, the Body of
Eustorgio with many relics of other Saints, Martyrd there for the Faith of
Christ. Here also are kept the Ashes of many noble Milanesians, inter alia of
Matteo Visconte first Duke of Milan, and of Gio Merula a most Learned Man, who
was interred with geeat pomp in the time of Ludovico Sforza, with this Epitaph
on his Tomb. Vixi aliis inter spinas mundique procellas.
Nunc sospes coelo Merula vivo mihi.


Over the Gate of the Convent of the preaching Friars (from whom many excellent
Theologians have issued) is placed the Pulpit, wherein Saint Petre the Martyr
being preaching to the People at noon day in Midsummer, obtained by his Merits
and the instance of his Prayers, that a Cloud hung over the Auditors in manner
of an Umbrella preserving them from that intolerable heat; near the said
Church gusheth out the fountain of Saint Barnabas, where though an unpolished*
place, he baptized and said Mass, of which water, who drinks is immediately
delivered from the malignity of any Fever.

The Temple of S. Lorenzo, formerly dedicated to Herod, was much more
sumptuous than the abovenamed Churches, which in the year 1085. being in great
part burnt, received great damage in the Mosaic of Gold, and in the
destruction of many Brass figures about the Pillars.

The royal Church of Saint Aquilino founded by ^lacida, Sister of Honorius the
Emperor, and wife to Constantine, shows on its Front fair Marble Colums, and
within as noble Pillars of Porphiry. In the Church of Stephano was flain with
many stabs the Duke Caleazzo Maria Sforzo. In S. Giovanni lies the Tomb of
Barnabo Visconte Prince of Milan.

The Church of S. Statiro and Celso, is proud of the excelling Genius and
Architecture of Bramante, the Limner of Urbin, in many works he wrought there;
The Front of that of Saint Mary, of its excellent Statues wrought with so much
art, that all conclude it impossible to equal them: and that of the Peace or
Pace of its rare painting of the history of the blessed Virgin and her Father
by the hand of Gaudentius, and moreover the Virgin her self painted by Marco
Uglono the Painter, which stand near the Cross, and lively expresses a real
sorrow.

In the Church of Saint Francis, is a Tablet of the conception, together with
Saint Gio, the Baptist, a Child adoring our Lord, so well done by the hand of
Vincio, that they cannot be paralleled. In the Church della Passione, is a
stupendous piece of the celebration of the last Supper, where is truly
represented the amazement of the Apostles, by Christofero Cibo.

In the Church delle Gratie, founded by Germano Rusca, and aggrandized by
Ludovico Sforza, is painted in a Tablet the Picture of our Lord crowned with
Thorns, by Titian the worthy of eternal memory, about the Cupula are Angels
formed by Gaudentius, whose vestments are rarely wrought, and in another place
Sain Paul painted, writing and contemplating, Herein lies buried Beatrice the
Duchess, so well beloved by Ludovico her Husband, that he vowed never to sit at
table again at eating, and lived so a year about: One Epitaph over the Gate of
the Cloisters, artificially made, shall be here inserted. Infelix partus,
amissa ante vita, quam in lucem ederet, infelicior, quod matri moriens vitam
ademi, and parentem consorte sua orbavi; in tam adverso fato, hoc solum mihi
potest jucundum esse, quod Divi parents ne Ludovicus and Beatrix Mediolanen.
Duces gennere, 1497. tertio Non. Ianuarii.

In this Church lies Giovanni Simonetta, who wrote the history of the
Sforzeschi, and Giulio Camillo a most Learned Man, whose Epi taph, placed on
another door of the Cloisters, follows Iulio Camillo Viro ad omnia omnium
scientiarum sensa mirificam eruenda, and adscientias ipsam in suum ordinem apt
constituendas natura mire facto, qui apud Dominicum Saulium Idibus Maii 1544.
repentino mortuus concidit. Dominicns Saulius amico desideratissimo posuit.

Which Church is possessed by the preaching Fathers, with a stately Convent, to
be reckoned one of the chief of Europe, for largness and beauty of building and
the number of the learned and best Fathers, which that Order enjoys, where they
show in a refectory the Picture of our Savior with the Apostles at the last
supper, drawn by Leonardo Uinci with such vivacity and Spirit that they seem to
move, and be sensible of the passions of Love, Sorrow, Joy, admiration,
Suspicion, etc. particularly in the Face of Judas one sees expressed that
Treafon, which he had conceived in his mind; Leonardo Vinci, having completed
all the Apostles, not wanting more to its finishing than the visage of our
Savionr, it happened that he could never accomplish it, because he had
expressed so great beauty and glory in the Faces of Saint James the greater and
the less, that he had left no possibility for his fancy to draw any thing
beyond them: Whence pondring the impossibility of the thing, he resolved to
consult with Bernardo Zenale another worthy Painter of those times; who its
reported made him this answer. This Picture has one Error which God only can
rectify, for it is not imaginable that thou or any other Painter in the World
can express more grace and Majesty, than thou have presented in the one and
the other James, wherefore leave it as it is; Lonardo did so, as appears at this
day, yet not so demonstrable, because time has in part defaced the glory of
those Faces. There also are the effigies of Lodovico, Beatrice, and both their
Sons afterward Dukes, Massiminiano, and Francesco. In the Church of S.
Vittorie of the Friars of the Mount of Olives, is seen a Saint George, giving
death to the Serpent, wrought by Raffael of Urbino.

The great and sumptuous Domo or Cathedral, was founded with infinite expense
by the Duke Giovan Galeazzo, built with such industry, that for its greatness
and Architecture, the pretiousness of the Marbles and workmanship, few Temples
of the World can be paralleled unto it. It Is all of white Marble, and about it
are 500. Statues of the same. Its length from East to West is 250. Cubits, and
breadth 130. It has six Cupolaes, one 80. cubits high, two 50. another forty,
and the others 30. The four Pilastres of the greater Cupola are 32 cubis
distant one from the other; It has three proportionated Isles with sive gates in
the front; the Casements, and Arches are of a Pyramid form, the Iron Bars which
sustain this great work, are so hugely bigg, that the Architectors of Charles
the fifth beholding them from the ground were amazed at them; Among the other
Statues, there are two most stupedious, the one of Adam, the other of S.
Bartolomeo flleaed, divinely carved by Christopher Cibo, in one of which may be
clearly discerned the whole Anatomy of Man, which is unparalleld. It has two
great Organs, in one of which stands David the Prophet, playing on the Symbal
before the Ark, wrought with great artifice by Gioseffo of Monza. It has two
noble Vestries, wherein they preserve their Vestments, rich Ornaments, and
Vessels given them by Archbishops, and Dukes, with many relics of Saints. It
has besides a stately Chorus, where the Dukes of Milan are intombed, and
before the great Altar stands the Grave of Cardinal Carlo Borromeo, whose
sanctity of Life, and the form of good living, prescribed by him to others,
has raised this opinion, that his Soul ascended immediately out of his Body
into Heaven: In another part is the Tomb of Giacomo Medici, Marquis of
Melignano, a Captain of great valor, and his statue with his natural Visage,
and Military habit in Brass, made by Leone Aretino. In this Church they
reverently keep also one of the Nayls wherewith our Savior was nailed to the
Cross, given by Theodosius the Emperor.

Among the other pious places, is the great Hospital of Milan, praisable,
seated in an Island, and environed with Columns, and Porches, it is 600. rods
about, 150. of a side; It Is divided into four most capacious appartments, having
underneath many little Shops made on purpose for the workers, employed for the
use of the Hospitals: In the middle walk are 112. Beds for sick persons, all
hung with Curtains, equally distant one from another, and accommodated in such
manner, that at the saying of Mass all may hear. Its revenue is 50000. Crowns,
sometimes exceeds 90000. Crowns per. Ann. It maintains 4000. Souls, and for its
noble Structure may be fit for the greatest Prince. Five miles out of Milan on
the Road of Come, is the Lazuretto of Saint George, (for the infected of the
Plague) which edifice is four-squared, 1800 yards in circuit, round i^ runs a
Channel; and within it are infinite beds with sufficient provision of all
necessaries.

In this City are many Noble, Lordly, and magnificent Families, among others
the Ancient house of the Pusturley, the Turriani, who came from Valle Sassiuo,
and sometime governed here, from this Family came Matteo Turriano, who being
Captain for Conradus the second Emperor, in Arabia against the Moors, was
taken Prisoner, and Martyrd for the Faith of Christ. The Visconti, as some say,
were descended from the Trojani, who built Angiera, near the Lake Maggiore,
which City they long possessed, when being the most potent Family in Lombardy,
Matteo Visconte was constituted imperial Vicar of Milan, and all Lombardy, and
permitted to carry the Eagle in his ensigns. Others say this Family had its
original from the Kings of the Longobards, Be it as twill, twelve Princes of
the Visconti held the dominion of Milan 170. years Under Duke John Galleazzo it
commanded 29. Cities besides Lumbardy, among others Genoua, Bologna, Pisa,
Belluno, and Trento. From the illustrious Family of Sforzaes have descended six
Dukes of Milan, Cardinals, Queens, and one Empress. And besides the aforenamed,
the Families of the Trivultii, Biraghi, Medici, Ruschi, Mezenti, Bezzozzi, and
others are of Milan.

It produced 4. Popes, Urban the third, Celestine the fourth, Pius the fourth,
and Gregory the 14th. Two Emperors, Didius Julianus, and Maximinianus
Herculeus, who built the Hercolean hot Baths, and here in Milan deposed and
quit the Emperial Diademme; as also Virginius Rufus, thrice Consul, with many
Cardinals, Bishops, Saints, with eminent scholars in all ages, as Salvio
Giuliano, Grandsire to Giuliano the Emperor, Paulo Eleazarno, Gioan Lignano,
Giasone del Maino, Filippo Deno, Andrea Alciato, Marco Massimo the Historian,
and Astrologer, Cecilio the Comic Poet, the Cardinal Paulo Emilio Sfrondato
Nephew of Pope Gregory the 14. a person worthy of much praise, for his goodness
and integrity of life.

The Arch Bishop of Milan has the Title of Prince, and has a long time
enjoyed the primacy thereof: Its Jurisdiction extended it self heretofore to
Genoua, Bologno, and some parts of Sicilia, and proceeded from its riches and
pride, to that rashness, that for 200. years it with drew it self from the
Roman Bishops, but Carlo Borromeo has taken off much of that obliquy, by the
splendor he has given to that Arch Bishopric by his holy conversation, whom
Cardinal Federick his Nephew succeeded, a worthy imitator of his Uncle.

Before a Palace near the Porta Lodivica, is an Altar of Marble Stones, where
on one side is earve^ Diana Luci fera (as Cicero calls her) with a burning
Torch, as Lucillus writes in his Satyrs. -- Et Regyna videbis Maenia, tum
Liparas, facelinae templa Dianae.


For this Godess was in this manner adored in the Island, Lipari, and at its
Feet is a Blood-hound with the eyes toward the Goddess, on the other fide is
Apollo Medico, leaning on a Tripode, with a Bow in his right hand, and a quiver
of arrows hanging at his shoulder, near his feet a Scepter, and the Serpent
Pitone, who is therefore called by the Poets Pitio, and Citaredeo, before the
said Altar may be read this inscription. AEsculapio and Hygiae Sacrum C.
Oppius. G. L. Leonas VI. Vir. and Aug. Honoratus. In Tribu. GL. Patrum, and
liberum Clientium. and Adcensus Patroni. Sanctissimis Communicipibus suis. DD.
Quorum. Dedicatione Singulis Decurionibus *III. Augustalibus. *II. Et Colonis.
Cenam. Dedit L. D. D. D.

There are in Milan II. Collegiat Churches, 71. Parochials, 30. Convents of
Friars, and 8 of Regulars, 36. Monasteries of Nuns, 32. Confraternities or
Fryeries, which with diverse others amount to 238. Churches, with 120. Schools,
where Boys are instructed in Christian Doctrine and other Learning.

It has therefore worthily attributed to it the name of Milan the great, and
the estimation of one of the four great Cities of Italy, that is, Roma,
Venetia, Milano, Napoli, and Autonio Callo reckons it one of the ten greatest
of Europe, it well may be accounted and taken for the greatest of any
Metropolis in a Duchy.

Going forth of the Gate Camasina, toward the North, and the Como
Mountains, at 25. miles distance one arivies at Como, which rea^ affords
nothing worthy observation, but the Town Bersalina, where Bersalina
Saint Peetro the Martyr was slain by the Heretics, and in that place where he
wrote the 12. Articles of Faith, with his blood, there is a Grott where they
continually digg Earth, and yet it appears no hollow; Over that place they
pretend likewise to see a great splendor, which God shows for the glory of
that holy Body there inhumanly slain.

COMO.
COmo is a City famous for the genteelness of her Citizens and flourishing Muse
of Paolo Giovo, is seated in a Plain environed with Mountains, and near the
Lake Lario or Como, within which and opposite to Como is a small Town built as
it twere in a Peninsula, and at the lower end thereof stands a Palace, where
the abovenamed, Paolo, had embellished a Library with a noble collection of
Books, and the pourtrays of the most illustrious persons, as is expressed in
his books called gli. Elogii, but at present there remains nothing of it more
than certain pictures upon the Walls, The Images, Books, Robes of Prete Janni
King of AEthiopia, the Bows and other Arms of the Antipodes, with many other
curiosities not else where to be found, and of good value, are removed thence
to the Palace of the Giovii; within Como in the Dome or Cathedral Church on the
left hand is erected the sumptuons Tomb of Benedetto Giovo the famous writer,
in the City likewise may be read many epitaphs and writings, testifying their
antiquity and constant fidelity to the Rou^an CommonWealth.

The Lake Como, is 36. miles long, and somewhat more than three miles broad,
upon which (when calm) the Citizens in their boats recreate themselves, near
the end stands the Fountain of Pliny, and Belacio, a Palace of the Signori
Spondati, environed with spacious Belasio
Gardens, which are adorned with fair Arbours, and the Walls clothed with
Gessamines, Roses, Rosemary, and other sweets, together with some Woods of
Juneper Trees, which harbor all sorts of Birds.

Ten Miles distant from Milan, and between it and Como, stands the stately
Castle Monza, which is washed by the River Lambro, Monza
It was amplified by Thedorick first King of the Goths, and Teodolinae the
Queen, there erected a magnificent Temple dedicated to Saint John the Baptist,
endowing it with great riches, among others with a Saphyr of inestimable price,
a Brood Hen and Chickens of Gold, and many other vessels of Gold, therein also
are preserved many relics in Vessels, given to it by San Gregory. Somasca


Then appears Somasca upon the Mountains, a Town often named for the Original
of the Religious order of the regular Priests of Somasca; a little more
forward, you see (near the Banks of the Lake Como the impregnable Castle Leaco,
whence you pass by water to Como, and then advancing a little farther, the
Traveller comes to the Country of the Grizons, through which runs the River
Adda.

On the left hand of Monza, rise the Mountains of Bianza, which afford most
excellent Wines, and three miles distant from Monza on the right hand lies a
well-manured Campagna, wherein Francesco Secundo Sforza, defeated the French
Army, commanded by Lotrecco, where after the death of many thousand Soldiers,
on both sides, he obtained a glorious victory. On this fide also (before the
arrival at the River Varo, the boundary of Italy, appears the small River
Martesana, an Arm of the Adda, which runs under the Gorgongiola, over Martosana
which stands a Bridge, whence they descend to Milan, and thus we have
described the places on the Eastern Part.

Issuing out of the Gate of Milan, Vercella, toward the West, you meet the
complete Town To, near by which, passes an Arm of the To
Tesino to Milan, on the other side of which Rivolet, is Ensalaro with many
other Castles, whence taking the right hand way, you arrive at the Lago
Maggiore, at the very source of the River Tesino, which goes to Pavia, near
which stands Angiera whence the Signori d' Angiera, Angiera
now Viscounts, take their rise. Then at 17. miles distance from Milan upon a
Mountain, (being as twere one of the Boundaries to the Lake) appears the devout
Temple of Santa Maria del Monte, whither resort great concourse of People, to
obtain their requests from God at the intercession of the blessed Virgin Mary.
Then passing the Tessino, you find Viglebia, a new small City but fair, where
stands the magnificent Palace called the Ssorzesca, so named from Lodovico
Sforza, Duke of Milan, who built and gave it to the Religious Order of the
Dominican Friars, who to this day possess it.

From whence on the right hand way, lies Novarra, and the Country Lemellina,
and on the left hand, the Castle Mortarra, heretofore Novarra Mortara
called the fair Wood, but afterward from the great slaughter of the
Longobards, there made by Charles the great, sighting with Desiderius their
King, it was named Mortara. On the same side also is the Castle Valese, and the
Town Vatalle under the Mountains, where in Valese
burnt Earth is effigiated the Sepulcher of our Savior, with all the mysteries
of his passion in diverse little Chapels, to which much Application is made with
great reverence by the neighboring People; near which begins the Look Laguno,
and the Country of the Grizons.

The Journey from MILAN to PAVIA.
BEtween Milan and Pavia stands the most noble Monastery of Certosa, built by
Giovanno Galeazzo Visconte, first Duke of Milan, endowed with a great Revenue,
in whose Temple himself lies buried, in a stately Marble Tomb, wherein is
erected his Statue with his lively effigies, and inscribed a curious Epitaph,
containing his famous notable Deeds, which Church has many wonderful Statues,
Sculptures, and Pictures, fair Chapels, with Altars enriched with Gold, and
precious Stones, and a Vestry replete with Vests, and Vessels of Gold, and
Silver of good value, and many Reliqus of Saints.

Near which Monastery is a Park, environed with a Wall of twenty miles square,
wherein are plowed Lands, Meadows, and Woods, and therein are preserved great
quantity of Wild Beasts, for the Chase, as Hares, Roe-Bucks, Stags,
Fallow-Deer, with other Creatures, which was imparked by the same Galeazzo, but
is in some places fallen to the ground. Here Francesco the first King of
France, encamped his Army, when he besieged Pavia, in the year of our Salvation
1525. at which time himself with the King of Navarre, and many prime Barons of
France, were taken Prisoners by Monsiguors, of Lonato, and Barbone, Captains of
the Army of Charles the fifth Emperor.

PAVIA.
PAvia according to Pliny was built by the Levi, and Marini, a People of
Liguria, not far from the Poe: But Entropius and Paulus Diaconus will have it
to be founded by the Insubri and Boii, after the Declension of of the Roman
Empire, to whom it was for some time subject. It was subjugated afterward to
Attila King of the Hunns, then to Odoacro, King of the Heruli, who having taken
it by force, sacked it, burnt it, and levelled the Walls with the Earth: Then
it became under the power of the Longobardi, who there fixing the Regal Scat,
raised many sumptuous Edifices, as says Paolo Diacono, among others, the
Monastery of Santa Chiara, was built by Partarito, the Church of Santa Maria
della Pertiche, by Theodolinda the Queen, the Monastery of S. Pietro in Cielo
Aureo, by Lutruprando the King, who brought thither from Sardigna, the
venerable Corpse of Saint Augustine, there yet kept in a well-polisht Tomb of
Marble, with great reverence, with many other Structures, which for brevity
sake are passed over; here also, one may see the Castle built by Giovan
Galeazzo Visconte, and also that antique brass Statue on Horseback, called
Regisole, which many conjccture to be made for Antonius, from the Lineaments of
the Face add Beard.

There were 22. Kings of the Longobardi, and they reigned 202. years, whose
Nobles mueh adorned this City, making her the Regal Scat, and Mistress of their
Provinces.

It has produced many illustrious men, among other Giovan the XVIII. Pope, and
Tesore Baccaria, Abbot of Vall Ambroso, Martyred in Florence. It has many
noble Edifices. chiefly that Tower wherein the great Boethius quitted this
mortal veil. It is seated in a well tilled Vale near the Appenine Hills, and
the River Tesino, over which was carried a stately Bridge by the Duke Galleazzo
Visconte.

This City Pavia, as well in the forenamed Battle in 1525. as in several others
before and since in latter times, when the French undertook invasions into
Italy and beseiged it, has fatally proved the overthrow of their Armies, the
loss of their designs, and the Ruin of their Interest in that Country.

In this City was instituted a famous University, not much inferior to that of
Paris, by the Emperor Charles the Great, whose zeal to amplify the Christian
Religion, caused him to send thither learned Theologians, to teach publicly
the true Doctrine, as also other eminent Doctors well read in all the Sciences,
who were much encouraged to repair thither by their large Stipends and his
signal favors; Giacone the so much celebrated Doctor, among others, spent many
years in this Academy, also Baldo, having here read for some time, dyed, and
lies interred in the Convent of the Friars Franciscans, and it is conceived that
the sereneness of the Air, so much sharpens the Genius of the Students, that it
has thence acquired the name of a glorious University.

The Faith of Christ was first preached and taught to the Pavians by the
blessed Sirus of Aquleia, at the same time that the Apostle Saint Peter taught
in Rome, from which time to this day they have constantl professed the same.

Its Citizens coveting their own Liberty, presented themselves to Philip
Archbishop of Ravenna Legate of the Roman Church, in the year of Christ 1259.
whereby they were long time kept under the Apostolic Sea, no less in
Spirituals than Temporals, which the more evidently appears by the Oath which
the Podesta and other Magistrates solemnly took at their ingression into their
several Offices, precisely in this form. Ego Potestas, vel Consul Justitiae
Papiae, etc. Ad honorem Dei, and Virginis Mariae, ad honorem and reverentiam S.
R. Ecclesiae, and Serenis. DD. Ludovici Romanorum Regis, and Civitatis Papiae
bonum statum juro ad Sancta Dei Evangelia, corporaliter tactis scripturis, quod
sum and ero fidelis S. R. Ecclesiae, and Romans Imperii.

The Emperor Charles the great, taking a Journey into France, left for his
Lieutenants in this City, the Languschi, principal Gentlemen of Pavia, with the
title of Vicars, which constitution the succeeding Emperoors successively
approved, till the time of ^edrick Barbarossa, who granted them power to elect
their own Consuls to govern the City, whence it was that at the Treaty and
Peace made by the said Frederick with the People of Lumbardy, this City there
intervened as ^ree, and not subject to any others.

The Pavians (after the expiration of the 280. years wherein the Emperors
enjoyed her) elected Gio Galeazzo Visconte, for Count of Pavia, under which
capacity the Princes Visconte, and Sforzeschi successively possessed it, as
does now the King of Spain, to whom they surrendered themselves with another
title and jurisdiction, to show that this City holding themselves not at all
subject to the Duchy of Milan, but Muncipal, they might be acknowlged
particularly as Counts of the Roman Empire.

No City in Lombardy can better extinguish any Novelties or Uprores than this
of Pavia, and its Territory, which with the environing Rivers give limits to
and divides the Milaneses, Novareses and other People of the hilly Countries,
from the Genoveses, Tortoneses and those of Bobio Alexandria, and Casal, so
that those several People can neither make league nor unite at their own
pleasures without the consent of the Citizens of Pavia, which is duly called
the Fatal Gate and Key of Lombardy, from its dominion over the Rivers Poe, and
Tessino, and from its oportune site, being empowred to give or deny passage to
or from either sides and shores of those Rivers.

Hence we may go by Boat on the Tesino to Piacenza or Cremona. But journying by
Land, you leave on the right hand the Castle Vichiera, Tortona, Allessandria,
Montferrate, and then Piedmont.

The Journey from MILAN to BOLOGNA by the VIA EMILIA, afterward to FLORENCE,
and Lastly to ROME.
INtending to travel from Milan to Rome, you must proceed out at the Roman
Gate, and after some space toward Lodi, you meet on the right hand in the
Territory of Milan, the rich and famous Monastery of Chiaravalle, to which the
Abbot Manfredo Archinto, among other Farms, gave the great Vineyard
Pilastrello, which was formerly called the Vineyard of the Poor; for that the
wine there collected and thereof made, was usually dispensed among the Poor,
being to that end preserved in one entire Vessel, the greatest in the World,
which contained 600. measures, (each of which held about threegallons) was
conjoined with great Beams, and encompassed with large Hoops, which when empty,
has for its grandeur, been held a worthy object to many People, and to some
Princes, Kings, and Emperors, among which was Charles the fifth who disdained
not to enter therein. Somewhat further from whence in the Territory of Pavia
lies the Town- Landiciano, and at tenn miles distant from Lodi the noble and
rich Castle, Meregnana, and close by it runs the River Lambro, which brings
to it delight, and all sorts of provisions; near it is the place where Francis
the first King of France flew 16000. Switzers, by whose deaths Massimilian
Sforza happened to lose his Seignory and liberty; thence six miles stands the
Castle S. Angelo, washed by the Lambro, where every Wednesday, is kept a fair
Market; thence three miles you see the place where anciently stood Lodi the
Old. On the left of this fair way lies Cremona, and other places, whereof we
have formerly treated in the voyage from Brescia, to Milan; on all fides, you
behold this Country abounding with Fruit and manured with Vineyards.

LODI.
THis City was founded by Frederick Barbarossa, three miles distant from the
old Lodi, at whose foundation laying, the said Federick with himself brought
all his Princes, and endowed it with many privileges, which (under the shadow
of the Empire) preserved it a long time in Liberty. Afterward it chose for its
Lords the Vestarini, its own Citizens, and in the end submitted to the Dukes of
Milan. The old Lodi was called antientiy Laus Pompeia, for that it was restored
by Pompeius Strabo, Father of Pompey the great, and this new Lodi was made a
City by Corrado the second, Emperor, at the request of Erimberto, Arch* Bishop
of Milan, and though at his instance yet it no way abated the envy reigning in
the breasts of the Milanesi, for they in the year 1158. under Ussi, for the
great hatred between them, destroyed it, being not at all satisfied with their
throwing down of the Walls, and driving away the Inhabitants, un till they had
enforced the Citizens to live in villages separate one from another, at such
distance that they might not assemble nor take Counsel how to restore their
unhappy Country, prohibiting them traffic, and sale of any thing, or to join
in alliance, under penalty of losing their patrimony, and banishment; into the
like punishment fell such of them as went out of the place they were confined
to, under which misery and servitude they continued for 49. years. But the
Milanesi, were severely chastized for this their cruelty, by God the just
Judge. Their City Milan being not long after sacked and burnt by Frederick the
Emperor.

This City situate in a plain, is of two miles compass and a round form, having
a pleasant and sertile Territory environing it, which produces all sorts of
Grain, delicious Wines, ane lovely Frui ^: The Pasture, and Meadows, are
always in a flourishing green, being well preserved (from the scorching heat)
by the overflowing of the Waters, which for that convenience are conveyed in 4.
or 5. Channels, one above another almost to a wonder, and so much to their
advantage that they mow their Meadows 4. or 5. times a year, which with their
pasture affords them so much milk as is incredible to such as have not seen it,
wherewith they make abundance of Cheese and some of them weigh 500. weight,
here also they dry with salt those savory Calves Tongues* so much admired every
where.

It has many Rivers, and they afford excellent Fish, particularly most
delicate Eels, The City contains 12000. Souls, and many noble Families, among
others that of the Vestarini who a long time Reigned over it: It has also
given Birth to many Persons, no less eminent in Letters than Arms.

It received the light of the Christian Faith, from the preaching of Saint
Barnabas, at the time when Milan was therewith enlightened. S. Bassano, was
Bishop of this City* to whom a Church therein is dedicate, enriched with
sacerdotal habits, embroideries of Gold, and Jewels, Cups, Crosses, Censors,
and other valewable Vessels. It Is Adda
washed with the River Adda, over which there is raised a Bridge of Wood, fix
miles off which, is the rich Abbacy of Borgheto, and six miles thence stands
mount Columbano, much celebrated for the delicate Wines, and fruit; on the left
hand of the Strada Ricca, lies the Town Samalia, with an Hospital, and the
Abbacy of the Friars of Pusterlengo
Saint Gyralamo, a little fartherly Lorlesco, and Pusturlingo, built by the
noble Pusterli of Milan, whence (crossing the River by Boat) about a mile lies
Piacenza.

PIACENZA.
SOme will have this City to take its name from the Pleasantness of its fite,
and the beauty of its buildings, nor have we any other Original for Piacenza:
It Is seated near the Poe, in a delightful place, having a flourishing
Champagua, and fruitful Hills, The first yielding plenty of Corn, and other
things, for humane sustenance, the later incomparable Wines, delicate Fruits,
and Oil: The Meadows, (always green, by reason of the artificial flowing from
the surrounding Rivers) are continually stocked with great herds of Cattle,
whence they extract that cheese which for its goodness is so much cried up
through Enrope, that when they would commend any Cheese, they call it of
Piacentia; It affords also certain springs of salt water, (from which with fire
they extract the whitest salt) and some Mines of Iron, and Woods filled with
Creatures for the Chase.

It was reduced into a Colony of the Romans, together with Cremona* in the
350th. year after the building of Rome, by their expulsion of the French out of
that Country, as Livy says, who of it makes an honorable mention in diverse
places, as well as diverse other Historians, whence it is gathered, that it was very
flourishing in the time of the Romans, since when it has suffered many
calamities, more by civil than foreign invasions: In the 70th. year after the
Nativity of our Savior, when Vitellius waged War against Otho, the
Amphitheatre standing without its Wall was burnt, which made Silio to say
Quassata Placentia bello.

It is embellished with noble structures: As the ancient Fountain erected by
Augustus Caesar, the sumptuous Church of Santa Maria the Virgin, the Church of
Santo Antonio the Martyr, the fair Church of S. Giovanni officiated by the
Friars of S. Dominick, and that of San Sisto, with a worthy Monastery, but
above all is resplendent the Temple of Sant Augustino, attended by the
canonical Regulars, which at first was compassed about with a weak Wall, but
afterward so well fortifyed with strong Walls and a Fort built of Stone, that
it acquired a place among the strong holds of Italy: The City is four miles
compass, and the Ditches add one mile more, and is washed by the Rivers* Trebia
and Poe; after it had a long time enjoyed its liberty, it became subject to the
Scotti, Turriani, the Landi, the Dukes of Milan, the French, the Romans, the
holy Church, but at present it remains in peace under the Signori Farnesi.

Pliny draws a conclusion of the goodness and temperature of the Air, from the
old age the Inhabitants arrive to, who writes that in his time, one of its
Citizens lived to be 120. years old, and in its Territory were six persons, who
were 110: years old a piece, and one that was aged 140. years. The City
contains 18000. Souls, whereof 2000. religious, many noble Families of great
name flourish there at this day, at the Scotta, Landa, and Ansusciola, who
possess many Castles and Jurisdictions: Among many other illustrious and
virtuous persons, it gave birth to T. Tinca the old fluent Orator, and to Pope
Gregory the tenth, who dyed in Arezzo in Tuscany where many signs appeared of
his great merits.

Going out of Piacenza, toward the East and North appears the mouth of the
River Trebia, much spoken of by Historians, for the overthrow of the Roman
Army, given by Hannibal, but before it stands the Church of Saint Antonio, where
the six Soldiers were St. Antonio
miraculously burnt by fire, who blasphemed his name. Then you see Stradella
and the Castle of Saint Giovanni and Vichiera. On the Ieftly the Apeni^e Hills,
among which stands enclosed the City Bobio thirty Bobio
miles from Piacentia where Teodolenda Queen of the Longobardi, built a rich
and sumptuous Monastery, at the request of San Colombano, assigning it great
possessions for susteining the Monks who served God, from which Monastery have
issued thirty two Saints.

At Piacenza begins the Emilian Way, called Via Emilia, according to Livy,
which was set out by Emilius the Consul, and extends it self from thence to
Rimini, toward the South. On the right appears most sharp Mountains, wherein
are built fair Castles, Towns, and Villages, but none of moment, except Corte
Maggiore, belongi^g to the Pallavicini, and Arquato, much named for the sweet
Wines Arquato
there produced. On the left hand of the Emilian Way, stands Cremona, whither
you may go also by Water from Piacenza upon the Poe: Between Piacenza and
Cremona at 12. miles distance on the Via Emilia, appears the Castle Fiorenzola,
called Fidentia, by Tolomeo, and likewise Livy, wri^ing in his 88th. Book, that
Silla forced Carbone out of Italy, having overthrown his Army at Chinso,
Faenza, and Fidentia. Here is that famous Abbacy, where with royal and splendid
Fidenti
provision, Pietro Antonio the Abbot, received Francis the first King of
France, Charles the 5th. Emperor, and Paulus Tertius the Pope; more forward
stands the Burgo Saint Donnino, sortifyed with new St. Donnino
Forts, and created a City lately at the instance of Ranuecio Farnese, Duke of
Parma, Having repassed the Poe, you arrive at the River Varro, whence to Parma
is four miles, with a continued course of the Appenines on the right hand.

PARMA.
THis City is rich and adorned with stately Edifices, illustrious Families and
many Inhabitants. It has a delightful and fruitful Territory, yielding Corn,
Fruit, Oil, Wine, and Cheese known through the World, which has acquired it a
place among the rich and noble Cities of Italy.

It Is seated on the Via Emilia in a plain at five miles distance from the
Apenines, between which and the Suburb on the West, passes the River Parma,
over which is raised a Bridge of carved Stone conjoyning both the Banks: It Is
not known whether this River took its name from the City, or the City from the
River, no ancient Author making mention of it, but Livy, Polibius, and Cicero
with other grave Writers, speak honorably of the City. It was made a Colony
for the Romans together with M^dena, as Livy averrs, in his 39th. Book in these
words. Eodem anno Mutina and Parma Coloniae Romaenorum Civium sunt deductae
bina millia hominum in agrum, qui proxime Boio rum, ante Tuschorum fuerat,
Octona jugera Parmae, quina Mutinae acceperunt.

Its People are fair, and of as noble and spritefull Genius, disposed not only
for Government of the Republic, but also to Letters and Arms. It has a fair
and large Campagna, which nourishing immense numbers of sheep, affords them
plenty of fine Wool, whereof Martial says, Tondet and innumeros Gallica Parma
greges.
and in another place. Velleribus primis Apulia, Parma secundis
Nobilis, Altinum tertia laudat ovis.


Its Air is so temperate, that Pliny says in the time of Vespasian, there were
two men 123. years old each. The Campagnia is so spacious that all behold it
with wonder, where stands a Palace for the Dukes, embellished with Gardens and
Fountains.

It was subject to the Roman Empire, till the decay thereof, when it recovered
its liberty in the year of our Lord 1248. it was straightly besieged by
Frederick Barbarossa, determining not to depart thence, till he had destroyed
it, which resolution caused him to build a City near it, called Vittoria, 800
else long, and 600. broad, with eight Gates, and large dykes, but this his
design was prevented by a salley of the Parmezans, who assay ling his Army
overthrew it, and destroyed Vittoria.

The Domo of Cathedral Church is fair and sumptuous, having many Canons and
other Priests to officiate: In the Church of San Giovanni, dwell the Friars of
Saint Benedict: In the Church Steccata is stately Architecture, lovely Pictures
and Images: In the Church of the Cupucines, lies buried Alessandro Farnese the
invincible Captain and Madama Maria his devout Consort. Every Church has some
works of Parmegianino and Corregio, the famous Painters.

In Parma are the noble Families of the Pallavicini, Torelli, Rossi, Giberti,
Sanvitali, with others.

It has produced men eminent in Learning, Virtue and Arms, as Cassio the Poet,
Macrobio a worthy Writer, with others; It is subject to the most serene house
of the Farnesi, who have therein raised many stately Fabrics, and lately the
Duke Ranuccio erected a School for all the general sciences; drawing thither by
his large Stipends, the most eminent Doctors of Italy.

It is four miles in circuit, and contains 22. thousand Souls.

Forth of Parma toward the North is Colorno a well-governed Castle Colorno
with other fair places, and toward the South, having passed the River Taro
and traveled 35. miles you meet Borgo a noble Castle of the Dukes of Parma,
from which Country besides great plenty of all Bergo
necessaries for humane sustenance, they gather sometimes a hundred thousand
bushels of Chestnuts, and when least 50. thousand. It also produces Men
disposed to Letters, Arms, and Merchandise, it stands in the midst of the
Apenine Hills being surrounded with them, and has 23. Towns under it. More
forward is Pentremoli a fair Town, twelve miles further is the strong Fort
called la val di Mugello, then Bardo and Campiano, where the River Taro takes
its source, and passes at three miles distance by Borgo. Bardo


Travaling on the Via Emilia, from Parma, at the foot of the Apenines, appears
the Town and Castle Chiar^golo, whereof the illustrious Family of the Torelli
hold the Government, then in the plain Country Montechio, and San Ilario,
seated on the banks of the River Lenza, over which the Countess Matilda, with
great expense, built a Bridge of burnt Brick, then keeping the Emilian Way for
15. miles you arive at Reggio.

REGGIO.
THis City is built on the Via Emilia, and named Regium Lepidi, by Strabo,
^icero, Cornelius Tacitus and other writers: By whom it was built, is not
certainly known, many contending that Marius Lepidus one of the Triumvirate,
(who divided the Roman Empire) was its first sounder, others that it was built
long before his time, but by him made a Colony.

This City being destroyed by the Goths, under Alarico their King, Its Citizens
were constrained to abandon it, and fly to more secure places, till the
Longobardi were overcome and driven out of Italy by Charles the Great, when the
Citizens returning by degrees to their desolate City, began to restore it, and
immure it with a strong Wall. It was governed by it self for some time in
liberty after the manner of the other Cities of Italy, then it was governed by
others, till it delivered it self into the hands of the Marquess of Este*

It Is a noble City, well peopled, and abounding with all things, although the
air is not very good. It has fair and large streets with sum ptuous
Structures, as the magnificent Church of S. Prospero, Bishop of this City,
where his Corpse are devoutly kept, which has a plentiful revenue, and is
adorned with excellent Pictures, but particularly with some drawn by Coreggio,
worthy of eternal memory: In the Walls of the Orchard of the R. R. P. P. de
servi, was lately discovered an Image of the holy Virgin, where God does many
favors to such have recourse unto him through her merits. The City contains
many noble Families, as the Canossi, Manfredi, Fogliani, and Sessi, who possess
great Lordships and Castles.

Near unto Reggio, stand certain Hills, who are no less beautifyed with Towns
and Villages than delicate Vines and fruit Trees. Toward Parma one sees the
Castle (strengthened by its site) where Matilda the Countess preserved Pope
Gregory the seventh, from the snares of the Emperor Henry the fourth Enemy of
the Roman Church, who afterward repenting himself for that his crime, from
thence went on his naked feet and with his b^re Head in the midst of Winter
through Ice and Snow to the said Pope, to obtain pardon for his offense, whom
his Holness courteously received and pardoned, a remarkable instance of what
power that Dignity heretofore was. At this day the most noble Family of Canossa
are Masters of this Castle and the others surrounding it, from which a little
distance stands the Castles and other places of the Signori Monfredo.

Keeping the way of the Mountains, you arrive at the Country of Groffignana,
where stands Castle Novo, which has formerly given birth to many illustrious
persons, and in our days to Giulio Urbano Doctor and Apostolic Prothonotary,
who for his excellent doctrine was much esteemed by the Princes, and Cardinals
of the Court of Rome, who after he had long exercised the Office of Vicar
General for Cardinal Luiga Cornaro Bishop of Padoua, with grear praise in that
quality, deceased in the year 1592. leaving an excellent example to all
mortals. Whose Brother Urban, gave no less splendor to his Country, being
Captain of the Militia for the Venetians. At present lives Filippo Urbano,
their worthy Nephew, a Canon of the Domo or Cathedral Church of Padoua.

Returning to the Via Emilia you meet the Castle Scandiano, honored with the
title of a Marquesate, subject to the Signori Tieni, noble Vicentines, on the
left hand lies the Castle Roldo, belonging to the Family Sessi a feudatorie of
the Emperor, Saint Martino, Gonzaga, and Nuvilara.

Between Modena and Reggio, near the River Lenza, stands Correggio, a
well-governed and honorable Castle, and well peopled, it was created a City by
the Empire, and appertains to the most illustrious Family Correggio, formerly
great in Padova, and called Giberto, from which heretofore issued a Cardinal,
at this time Girolamo Bernero, of the preaching Order gives great honor to
this Country, who was assumed to a Cardinalship by Sisto Quinto, High Bishop,
for his incomparable virtue and goodness of Life, who continues a prudent lover
of the virtuous, and a great Zealot for the Christian Religion. Then where the
River Lecchia cuts in sunder the Emilian way, stands the ssrong Castle Rubiera,
with a well-made Bulwark, enviroroned with Hills, whence travailing in a large
Road, you arive at Modena.

MODENA.
THis noble City was reduced into a Colony of the Romans together with Parma,
in the 570th. year after the building of Rome, as Livy and other Historians
write, who in several places make thereof honorable mention, which testifies
that in that time it was rich and powerful, and this is also confirmed by the
many inscriptions and ancient Marbles which are extant up and down the same. It
was enough illustrated by that notable battle which was fought near it, when
Hirtio and Pansa were Consuls of Rome, the consequence whereof was the Loss of
the Senates authority, and the peoples liberty, for then Mar. Antonius besieged
Brutus in this City, who by the assistance of C. Octavins Caesar, obtained the
victory against the said Antonius. Afterward it suffered many ruins from the
Barbarous, as Saint Ambross mentions, that he saw it with the other adjacent
Places upon the Via Emilia, thrown down and derstoyed. It was laid waste by
the Goths, and Longobards, who afterward being driven out by the Emperor
Charles the great, and he having established his Son Pipin King of Italy, the
Sons of the Citizens of Modena assembled themselves together from their secure
retirements, and took counsel how to rebuild this City, which in process of
time they effected as is now seen, somewhat distant from the ancient Modena, as
Leandro more at large discourses.

The City is small, of an orbicular form, and seated in a plain abounding with
fruits, and delicate Wines. The Dukes of Este, Alfonso the second greatly
amplified this City, and raised fair edifices. In the domo they devoutly
preserve the bones of S. Giminiano, its Bishop, for whose merits God delivered
many possessed with Devils. It Is full of noble and ingenuous People, whence not
only many famous Captains, Counts and Marqueses, have proceeded, but also many
Cardinals, Bishops, and other prelates, with most learned men, of whom are
Sadoleto and Segonio, whose works are of note to all. It continued a long time
in liberty, as did the other Cities of Lumbardy, but is at present subject to
the Dukes of Este, who by their constant residence much ennoble and enrich it,
they here Make Vizards and Targets, much esteemed through Italy.

Forth of Modena toward the South under the Appenines stands Formegine,
Spezzano, and ten miles off it, Sassulo, a noble and civil Castle, with a
sumptuous Palace of the Family of Pia, washed by the River Secchia, where
stands a fair Church dedicated to the blessed Virgin, whither resort infinite
People to obtain Graces. Upon the said Mountain are many other Villages and
Hamlets, which also may be seen on that part of Modena toward the East.

These Castles heretofore subject to several Lords, and particularly to them of
Monte, who were then very potent in these Countries, and possessed all the
placs in the Graffignana, which confines with Bologna, and among them Sestola,
and Fanano. Then going Westward you see the Alps of San Pelligrino, and the
Castle Aquario famous Aquario
for its Baths. After turning to the South, by these Mountains runs the
Tyrrehene Sea; somewhat further near Bologna, on the Banks of the River Panaro,
appears Castle Vetro, and Spilimberto, of the Signori Rangori, whence four
miles you find Vignola a Town honored Vignola
with a Marquisate, subject to the Signori Boncompagio, which Town confines
with the Bolognian territories.

Toward the North is seated Correggio, at 12. miles distance, thence and
somewhat further the most noble Castle or rather Imperial City Carpi, which may
very well be paralleld to many Cities, both Carpi
for the great and ingenuous People, and the superfluity of all things
necessary. It has the title of a Principality, and was a long time enjoyed by
the Signori Pii, but is at present By the Duke of Modena.

On the Eastern part of Modena, is a Chanel upon which you may be conveied
eight miles by Boat, unto Finale, then passing on the Panaro, and entering the
Poe, they go to Terrara, upon the River Pinaro, Panaro
where the Chanel runs into it, stand Bon Porto, and San Felice, praised for
good Wines.

Along the Via Emilia, 3 miles distant from Modena, passes the River Panaro,
near which are the confines between the Modonesi, and the Bolognesi, in which
place Claudius the Consul copeing with the Enemies, took 15000. Prisoners, and
700. Liguri, moreover in the same place Rotari King of the Longobardi, routed
the Roman Army, and slew seven thousand of them.

There also the Army of the Modonesi being discomfited by the Bolognesi, Enzo
King of Sardegna, Son of Frderick the second, was taken Prisoner. On the other
side of the Panaro, is Novantola, with Novantola
an ancient and noble Monastery founded by Anselino, Kinsman of Astolfo King of
the Longobards, having been a worthy Captain in their Army, and there quitting
this World, created himself Captain of a thousand Monks, endowing the place
with store of Goods and Revenues, about the year of our Salvation 780. It was
afterward restored by the Countess Matilda, and is inhabited by many Monks,
who have Jurisdiction as far as Spain, wherein are kept the body of Saint
Adrian the Pope, and some part of S. Silvester, with many othet Relics, and
some ancient Books, particularly the Breviary of the said Matilda.

Near the Via Emilia, between Bologna and Novantola, stands S. Agata, Agata
a Castle built be Barbarossa the Emperor, and Crevalcore formerly called
All^gra Cuore where twice the Armies of Bernabo Visconte Lord of Milan, were
overthrown. Then one comes to San Giovanni, a Country yielding Wheat and other
Grains. On the left side of the Emilian Way, are seen Castiglione, and Casile
Franco, 15. miles from Bologna, in which Territory was lately raised an
inexpugnable Fort, by Pope Urban the 8th. from whose name it is denominated
Urbano. Near which is the Foro de Galli, where Irtio and Pansa, the Roman
Consuls fighting with M. Antonius, obtained a glorious Victory, but with it
their mortal wounds whereof they both dyed in the same place: Then appear
Piumanio, Bazano, and Crepellano, pleasant Castles, seated on those little
Hills, at the Feet of the Apenines.

On the left side of the Emilian Way five miles distant from Bologna, is the
River Lavino, and Ghironda, which joining togeher encompass Forcelli, in a
triangular form at one miles distant from the Via Forcelli
Emilia, where Octavianus, Marcus Antonius, and Marcus Lepidus, parted the
Monarchy between themselves, which Forcelli seems now a Peninsula, though it
may be perceived to have been an Island; afterward these two Rivers throw
themselves into the Poe: About a mile before you arrive at Bologna, there is a
very long Bridge, built of Stone, which reaches from the one side of the River
to the other whence to Bologna is an easiy mile.

BOLOGNA la Grassa or BOLONIA the Fatt.
BOlogna was anciently head of the 12. Cities which the Tuscans possessed on
that side of the Apenines, who being driven out by the French, and the French
by the Romans, it became a Colony of the Romans, who sent thither 3000. men to
inhabit. After the Romans it was subjected to the Graecians, the Longobards,
and to the Esarcato of Ravenna. Afterward recovered liberty like the other
Cities of Lumbardi, at which time the wicked factions of the Lambertazzi, and
Geremei arose, and reduced it to great misery and servitude, which their
sufferings caused them to recommend themselves to the Roman chief Bishop.
Afterward to the Pepoli, Visconti, Bentivogli, and finally it wholly put it
self under the wings of the Pope, who now enjoys it with peace.

It is situated at the Foot of the Apenines in the midst of the Via Emilia,
placed according to ^tolomeo in the 6th. Climate, at 33. degrees and a half,
having the said Apenines on the South, the Via Emilia or Roman Way, on the
East, and the pleasant and fertile Campagna leading to Ferrara, and Venetia on
the North; At its beginning it was formed a small City, according to the
accustomed manner of the Ancients, with two only Gates, the one toward Rome,
the other toward Lumbardi. Afterward in the time of Gratian the Emperor,
they adjoined two other Gates, and at the restoration, which San Petronio made
(after the destruction by Theodosius) they made 9. Gates, as some say, 12. as
others, where now are extant certain little Turrets called Turrosetti: At last
enlarged as at this day, the said Gates were made twelve, and was so much
increased, that certain yeerspast being measured within the Walls, Its circuit
was found to be 5. miles in length two miles want a quarter, and in breadth one
mile, from the Port S. Mammola, to the Port Galliera.

It is formed in the similitude of a Ship, more long tha^broad, at one side
showing the figure of a Prow, and at the other that of a Poop having in the
midst the most high Tower Asinelli, which represents the main Mast, the Tower
Garisenna the Scale, and the other small Towers, the Shrouds to the eye of the
beholder. Within it is no manner of fortification, the Citizens having cast
down those that were, who confiding in their own valor and prudence, content
themselves with a single Brick-Wall, which encompasses it; near it runs the
River Savona, and through it the Reno, which serves for transportation of
Merchandiz from Ferrara.

That Bologna abounds with all things is known to all, whereby they give it the
style of Fatt: Its Fields are fair and large, producing all sorts of Corn, and
Wines of the best sorts in Italy, with all kinds of Fruits, particularly
Olives, so bigg and sweet, that they give not place to them of Spain; it has
also Woods for Foul, and Beasts of Chase, and notwithstanding there be few
Lakes, yet it is plentisully served with fish from Comacchio and Argenta.

Here (to maintain their Epithet of Bologna la grassa) they make those famous
Salsages, which for their excellency are esteemed a costly dish through the
World, as also a Conserve of Quince and Sugar called gelo or gelly, fit for the
Table of a Prince. They here also work with great Art, Sheaths for Knives of
boiled Leather, and fair Harquebuses, and Flacks or Bottels. They have great
numbers of Silkworms, from whose labor they extract quantity of Silk, whereof
they make Sarcenet, Velvet, and other Silks, in such plenty, as that they not
only supply all Italy therewith, but England and the Low Countries.

Its Territory affords many Quarries of white Stones, and great store of Hemp
and Flax, some minerals of Alum, with medicinal Fountains both hot and cold.

It has but one Piazza, which yet for its largeness, may be said to be three
conjoined, in the midst whereof stands a sumptuous marble Fountain, whereon
stands a Brazen Neptune, made by Giovanni Bologna, a Flemish Sculptor, in very
much excellency, whence gusheth a most clear stream of Water. It has a general
uniformity of building, having straight and spacious Streets, and on each side
of them before the Houses Arches, of the same Structure, where the Citizens
recreate themselves without fear of the scorching Sun, or the dripping Rains.
There is one spacious Garden of the Poeti, and another of the Paselli. Near the
Church of S. Giacomo, where now appear a good space of old rinesu, was formerly
a regal Palace of the Bentivogli, (while they were Lords of Bolonia) whose
Majesty and Magnificence is treated on by Beroaldo.

It Is adorned with superb and spacious Edifices, as well for divine worship as
private use; Among others the Popes Palace, over the gate whereof is the Statue
of a Pope in Brass, and that of the Campeg gi, (where in the time of Giulio
Terzo, the Council of the Pepoli and Malvezzi met) are of such grandeur, that
any Prince may be received there. The Palace which fronts the Church San
Petronio, was built by the Bolonians, for a prison for Enzo King of Sardegna,
where he lived, and at the cost of the public was royally entertained for
twenty years, till his death.

Furthermore the Citizens Houses are beautified with Vests and other things, to
the pride of any others of Italy, and their Sellars so deep under ground that
they apprehend no Earthquake; The Tower Asmelli, so named from the founders,
and Garisenda so called from its pendency downwards, discover the great
ingenuity of the Architector.

Its principal Temples are, that of San Pietro the seat of the Bishop, where ly
many Cardinals, Bishops, and other learned Doctors, with many Relics of
Saints, Pictures, Sculptures, and Ornaments of gold and Silver of high value.
The Domo which stands on the Piazza, dedicate to San Petronio, Bishop and
Protector of the City, is so great and magnificent, that few Churches are equal
to it; here Charles the 5th. received from Pope Clement the 7th. the Crown of
the Empire: The Church of Saint Francis is well built, where Pope Alexander the
5th. a Bolonian lies buried, and Odoffredo and Accursio, two great Lights of
the Civil Law; then the magnificent Monastery of San Salvidore, and the noble
and rich Nunnery del Corpo di Christi, where lies enterred the blessed
Catharine, who was a Nun therein, whose nails upon the hands and feet grow as
if she were living: The Church of San Giacomo, with its Chapel built by
Giovanni secundo Bentivoglio, was a work only for a King, wherein lies the said
Bentivoglio, with many of his descendants, some of the Malvezzi, and other
illustrious persons, with many Relics of Saints, guarded in a rich and
stately Altar by Cardinal Poggio.

The Church of S. Martin, where repose the bones of Beroaldo and Alexandro
Achellini the Philosopher. The Church of San Giovanni, entombes an image of
Cecilia the Virgin Martyr, painted by the divine Rafael of Urban, the ashes of
the blessed Elena, and Carlo Raino a famous Doctor of Laws, four of these
Churches Canons have been Bishops of Bologna.

The Church of Saint Stephen the Proto-Martyr, is sumptuous built by S.
Petronio, where among other Relics they show the Ashes of S. Vitale, Agricola
and Petronio. The Church of Saint Benedict, encloseth is the Body of San
Proculo the Martyr, and the Cel wherein Gratian composed his Decretals. In the
Church of Saint Domenick, in whose Quyer is rarely effigiated the old and new
Testaments, here lies Enzo King of Sardegna in a proud Tomb, and many famous
Doctors of Civil Laws, and Physic, as also Tadeo and Giacomo Pepoli, who some
time were ^ords of Bolonia at the high Altar may be seen many Relics of
Saints, of which are the body of San Domenick, on whose Tomb are laid more
than 300. Figures of Gold and Silver, and one of the Thorns of the Crown of our
Savior, with the Bible writ ten by the hand of Esdras, in the Hebrew Tongue,
in white parchment; here reposes also the Body of San Domenick the Patriark,
and institutor of that Order, with many other stately Tombs, Candlesticks,
Lamps, Cenfers, and other Ornaments. This Church has a noble Convent, with
many Cloisters, and Dormitories for the Friars, and a large Refectory
excellently painted, and one of the largest Cellars of Italy; therein is
likewise a Cemetory wherein to bury the Friars. And an excellent Library,
scarce any equal, none better to be found, kept and increased daily by the
Fathers with great diligence, and here sits the Inquisition. In this Convent
dwell one hundred and fifty Religious, and here they keep the public Studies
of the Sciences, which has occasioned principally that five Popes, many
Cardinals, Bishops, and holy Fathers have proceeded hence, among which were San
Pietro the Martyr, San Ramundo and Egidir Foscararni Bishop of Modena, who
behaved himself prudently and learnedly at the Council of Trent.

The first Bishop of Bologna was SanZama, who in the 270th. year after Christ
first preached the Faith here, Dionisius being then Pope, whom 71. have
succeeded of good Doctrine and holy conversation, of whom nine are Canonized,
and two held for Saints.

Moreover from this excellent Country have Issued 6. Martyrs, 13. Confessors,
14. Men Saints, and 7. Women. It has 179. Churches, that is 33. for the
Company of Laics, 3. Abbacies, 2. Prepositors, 2. for the Regular Priests, 24.
for the Friars, 23. Monasteries for Nuns, 10. Hospitals, 5. Priorates, 2.
Collegiate Churches, and the Do^o, which is consecrate to Saint Peter, and
gives the title of Prince to its Bishop, with a great Revenew, with many other
Churches which are either Parochials or Oratories.

The Univerfity was placed in Bologna, by Theodosins the Emperor, in the year
of our Lord 425. and much amplified afterward by Charles the great, and
Lotario the Emperor; the first Reader of the Civil Laws here was Irnerio,
induced thither by the said Lotario, since when many wise and well-read men in
all sciences have proceeded hence; in the time of Giovan Andrea the Splendor
of the Canon Law and A^one the Fountain of the civil Law, we read there were
ten thousand Students in this City. Azone says Legalium studiorum semper (...)
chia^ ten^it Bononia, hence it is that Gregory the 9th. directed his decretals to
the Univerfity of Bolonia and Boniface the 8th. Sisto, and (...) the 24th. the
Book of the Clementines.

The Fabric of the University is very proud, with a large Hall and spacious
Courts. In the City are many Colleges for several Nations, and to speak its
praises in one word, it is a most happy University, and merits that Character
which all men give it, viz. Bononia docet, and Bononia matter Studiorum.

The City contains 80000. Souls, among them many noble Families, with many
titled, as Dukes, Marqueses, Counts, Captains of War, besides infinite Scholars.

Its Riches are great and equally divided among the Citizens, whence it is that
they always preserved a good reputation. It fought with Federick Barbarossa,
and took his Son Enzo Prisoner, maintaining him splendidly for 22. years. It
subjugated more than once, Forli, Imola, Faenza, Cesena, Cervia, and other
places. It gloriously maintained a War against the Venetians, for 3. years
together, with an Army of forty thousand men, and had some Families very
potent, as may appear by that of the Lambertazzi, who being banished with all
its followers, out of Bologna, in the year 1274. they say that what with Men,
Women, and Servants, they who by that decree went out, amounted to the number
of fifteen thousand persons.

The Buroughs and Suburbs of BOLONIA.
FOrth of Bolonia, toward the West, at the Foot of the Mountains, is the
Church of San Giofesso, and the Monastery of the Certonisi. Upon the top of the
Mountain Guardia, is reverenced an Image of the blessed Virgin drawn by the
hand of S. Luke. Out of the Gate toward the Emilian Way, there is a noble
Monastery of the Crutched Friars, and toward the South the Church
Misericordia, where reside the reverend Friars of Saint Augustine. Out of the
Gate San Mammolo, is a Monastery of the Jesuits, and upon the hill is the
miraculous Madonna del Monte, a Church of the Benedictine Friars, where are the
natural essigies of Bassarione and Nicholo Perotto.

Toward the East is the Church of San Vittore, placed among the Hills, where
Bartolo the most learned Doctor, resided 3. years as it were unknown, near
which are stately Palaces. Without the City also stands San Michelle in bosco,
upon a hill, with a rich and proud Monastery. The Church is garnished with fair
Colums, Statues, and Sculptures of Marble, and sumptuous Altars with rare
pictures, the Quire with excellent Land skips, there is a stately Library, and
refectory with excellent Pictures drawn by Vasari among, them the essigies of
Clement the 7th. in the Cloister lies buried Antonio di Butrio, a Doctor of
Laws, and Ramazzotto, a valourous Captain in the Wars. Its apportments are
excellent Architecture, and its gardens most delitious, from which Monastery,
besides the City and Territory of Bolonia, you have a full prospect of the
pleasant Country of Lumbardy so much commended by Polibius, in the second book
of his histories, as also of those Snowy hills the Alps, which appear like
Clouds, the Adriatic Sea, and the mouth of the Poe, which runs into the Sea by
many branches, and likewise of Mantoua, Ferrara, Imola, Mirandola, and other
surrounding places, which seem as so many fair Roses and flowers dispersed over
those Fields.

The Teritory of BOLOGNA.
TRavailing out of Bologna, South-West, you meet with the most ancient
Monastery or Priorate of Santa Maria del Reno, whence have proceeded ^ Popes,
with many Cardinals, Bishops, Saints, and other Religious. Then turning on the
left hand toward the Apenines, and keeping the River Reno, on the right, you
arrive at the Bridge Casale^chio, a little farther you see the Chiesa, which is
a Wall traversing the Reno from side to side, to force the Water down a Chanel,
cut artificially to Bologna, for the driving certain Engines and Mils for
grindidg Corn, for making Vessels of Copper, and Arms for War, for beating of
Spices, and Galnuts, for twisting of Silks, for burnishing of Arms, and for
edging of diverse Instruments, ^orm king of Paper, sawing of Planks, and diverse
other Mysteries, and in the end to convey the Barks to Malelbergo* and thence
on the Poe, to Ferrara. Then you enter the Vale Reno, between the River and the
Hills, which is most productive of all Grains and Fruits, in which Valley
stands the magnificent Palace of the Rossi, a Palace for R^ssi
its capaciousness and delights fit to lodge an Emperor; on the Hill near it is
the Town Colossina, which. before you can a^cend you must pass Colossina
under a Rock by a way cut through with Iron, on the left hand beholding a
prodigious hollow, through which the ^eni passes. Then you ^ind Panico, a Town
a long time possessed by the Family o^ Panico, Panico
which at this day is wholly extinct. More forward one discovers a fair Plain
called Misano, and in it certain footsteps of Edifices, and other Antiquities,
pursuing which way you arrive at the Town Vergata, the seat of the Captain who
has Jurisdiction over the Inhabitants Vergata
of the adjacent Villages, and is di^ant 15. miles from Bolonia. When^e
travailing on the right hand, show themselves Cesio, Barghi, and Cas^lighone,
Castles of the Signori Pepoli, near whereto are B^aghi
the confines of the Florentine Territories, but on the right h^nd along the
Banks of the Reno, are the Baths of Porretta, where from Porretta
Rocks gush out hot Waters very medicinal, whose virtue is manifested to all by
the Proverb which says Chi beve l'acqua della Borr^tta, ^ che lo ^pazza, o che
lo netta, thence taking the right-handway, you enter the Graffignana treated of
diffusely before.

Taking the Way through the Gate Galliera, toward Ferrara, you meet
Cor^icella, then pussing the Bridge over the Reno you see San Georgio a Castle
ten miles off Bologna, where leaving the Castles Cento and Pieve, on the left,
appears Poggio, appertaining to the noble Family Lambertini, intending then for
Ferrara you must keep the direct Poggio
Road.

On the right hand of which Way near the Canale, lies Bentivoglio, a ^umptuous
Palace with a Tower in the midst of a strong Fort, whence sailing down the
Canale in Boats, called Sandoli, one passes B^trio
by Malalbergo, an Inn infamous by name and Deeds, Bottifredi a Tavern, Minerbo
a Town, and Butrio a Castle, whose Country affords plenty of Hemp, which for
its length and strength is much esteemed at Venice, and by them used for
Cordage for their Vessels. Near the Emilian way toward the East, stand
Molinella a Palace, Boloniali Valti, a Village, Medicina a Castle, and
Ricardina a Town, between Rieardina
which was fought that sharp battle by the Army of Bartlomeo Cogliono agaiust
that of Galeazzo Sforza Son of the Duke Francesco, wherein the said Bartolomeo,
remained Conqueror, and near hereto, lies the Valley Argenta, and the Castle
Guelfo, where begin the Territories of Imola. Guelfo


On the Via Emilia toward Romagna^ five miles off Bologna on the right hand
lie most pleasant Hills, beautified with Palaces, Gardens and Fruit Trees, and
some Woods of Juneper the harbor of much Foul, which Hills afford the sweetest
and largest Olives of ^taly, not at all inferior to them of Spain. Near which.
lies the Way leading to Florence. Near the Emilian Way also runs the River
Savena, over which is built a Bridge of Brick, not far from which are
discovered the ruins of another stately Bridge, which was raised at the cost
of the Countess Matilda. On the right hand appear the feet of the Apeniues,
with some Hills embellished with Towns and Villages. On the left is a good and
fertile Plain, and the Road to Ferrara, and on one side Quaterna
of the Emilian Way, are the Ruins of the Ancient City Quaterna, which was
destroyed by the Bolonians, in the year 385. after a long Battle, and on the
other side is the Castle Butrio, ten miles off which you find the River
Selero, over which is a Bridge of stone; near which stands the Castle San
Pietro, built by the Bolonians, whose Fields afford San Pietro
plenty of Grain, Flax, and Fruit, and the Ferry no less gain; on the right
hand of Selero, stands Dozza, a Castle endowed with the Dozza
title of a Count, belonging to the Family Campeggi in Bolonia, and Paradello a
Convent of the Friars of the third order of San Francesco, called Minimi, built
with wonderful cost and Artifice by Pope Giulius the second, it is thence to
Imolo a mile

Having perused all the Territory of Bologna, nothing remains but the number of
People, which what in the Territories with the Cities and Buroughs amount to
207797. Souls.

The Gests or Journies from BOLOGNA to FLORENCE, SIENNA, and ROME
TO go to Florence, you must travail South-East, out of the Gate S. Steffano,
through a pleasant, and fertile Country, wherein rise some Hills, and having
gone ten miles, you arrive at Pianora, a Town filled with Hosteries, then at
Loiano, among the sharp Hills, Pianora
somewhat farther lies Scara, a place much honored by its Countryman Scarao
Romasciato, a famous Soldier, Petra Mala, and Fiorenzuola, a new Castle built
by the Florentines: Thence after passing the River, you must gain the top of
the Apenines through a rough and laborious way having no repose in all that
Straight three miles passage, till the arival at a little Hostery at the very
top, on the left hand of which passage lies a profound Valley, so deep and so
horrid, that it many times turns the brain of the Traveller to behold it, and
has occasioned some those in staggering whimses, to fall down to their
inevitable ruin. Descending from whence you attain Scarperia, so called from
its site, Scarperia
on the slopeness of the Apenines, whence the eye may behold the lovely places
of Tuscany: Finally having travalled fifty miles from Bologna you reach
Florence.

Fiorenzala Bella. FLORENCE the Fair.
FLorence does not boast it self much of antiquity, being foundedbut an
inconsiderable time before the Triumvirate, and diverse are the opinionsabout
its building, some will have it built by the Fiesolani, who considering the
difficulty and sharpness of the ascent, and descent of the Mountain whereon
Fiesole was built, by little and little abandoned Fiesole, and built their
habitations in the plain near the Banks of Arno, Others say by the Fl^entines
who here dwelt. As to its name, it was called Florence, either from its so
great felicity, in the suddainness of its increase, like a Flower to its
perfect beauty, or for that it was made a Colony to Rome, the Flower of the
World. It Is seated in a plain, and is cut through in two parts by the River
Arno. It Is compassed on the East and Northparts, in the likeness of a half
Theater by pleasant Hills, and on the West it has a glorious Plain, extending
it self forty miles broad, placed between Arezzo and Pisa, and is secured from
the force of the Enemy by the Ap^nines; it is five miles in compass, and rather
of a long than circular Form. Heretofore it had 4 principal Gates, and 4
Postern^s, when also it had 62. Towers the habitations of Gentlemen. Afterward
it was in great part destroyed by Attila King of the Goths, who slew some of
the Citizens. After which the Walls were cast down by the Fiesola^i, and the
barbarous, which molestations, enforced the ^ltizens to quit it and retreat to
adjacent Castles, and so it remained wholly deprived of inhabitants till the
year of the Incarnation of our Lord 802. When Charles the great from his
Crownation as Emperor at Rome, returning for France, stayed there some days,
and the place being agreeable to him he gave beginning to the Walls, and therein
erected 150 Towers, one hundred braces or Yards in the height, and enjoined
all the dispersed Citizens to re-inhabit it; from that time it augmented daily,
and was governed in Liberty, being (for all that) many times infinitely
perplexed with the wicked Factions of the Neri* and Bianchi, the Guelfi, and
Gibelli^i.

Anciently their Government was thus. They created two Consuls for one year,
giving them a Senate of one hundred Fathers wise men, afterward this Order
changed, and ten Citizens elected calling them Antiani, which order was also
several times changed, through the differences between the Gentlemen and
Citizens, and the Citizens and common people.

The Citizens by their Ingenuity heaped up much Riches, and that made their
pride so great, that the one would not give place to the other. It subdued many
Ciities of Tusea^y and Romagn^, particularly Pisa a potent Republic is at
present under one sole Prince with it.

The sereness and goodness of the Air generates many good Wit^ there, and their
Ingenuity procures great Riches. It is divided (as aforesaid) by the Arno, over
which are built four magnificent Bridges. It has plenty of all things, from
the environing Hills, Plains, and the navigable River. It stands as it were in
the heart of Italy, is the constant residence of its Prince, and its people are
so industrious that there is scarce a Merchandising City in the World without
some Florentine Merchants, which gave occasion to Pope Boniface the XI. to say
that the Florentines were the 5th. Element; no City in Europe (except Rome)
produced more Architectors, Painters, and Sculptors than this, whence it is that
it abounds with admirable Palaces, Temples, Pictures, and Statues, upon one of
the Bridges is the GoldSmiths Street, upon another of stately structure the
seasons of the year, in Marble. Opposite to this stands a Column of an immense
bigness, and upon the top thereof a Statue of Justice in Porphire, which Cos^s
the first great Duke raised as a Trophe in that place, for that walking for
pastime, the news there first reached him of the great Victory which the
Marquess Marignano, obtained over Pietro Strozzi, in the year 1555 and with it
Sienna, near it is the Palazzo de Strozzi, no less to be admired for the
immensity of its Fabrics, than for its rude Architecture. Here on the right
lies the Merchants vault supported with fair Pillars, and before it a Brazen
Bore, casting forth Water; strait on is the Piazza Maggiore, or great place, in
the midst whereof is the Statue of Cosmus the great Duke on Horse back in Brass
with this inscription on each side of the Basis. Cosmo Medici Magno, Etruriae
Duci Primo, Pio, Felici, Invicto, Iusto, Clementi, Sacrae Militiae, Pacisque in
Etruria Authori, Patri, and Principi Optimo, (...) F. Mag. Dux, Man. Dux I. I.
I. erexit. An. CIC. ICLXXXXIV. behind this, Profligatis hostibus, in deditionem
acceptis Senensibus. Plenis liberis Sen. Fl. Suffragiis Dux Patriae
renunciatur. Ob. Zelam Religionis praecipuumque Iustitiae Studium.

Between which Horse and the Piazzo Vecchio, is a Fountain, and round about its
Laver the Family of Neptune, with his Coloss of Marble in the midst; bore up by
sour Horses, the whole not to be paralleld, much less excelled by humane Art.

The Porch in the same Piazza is remarkable for its Arch and Statues, one
whereof is of Judith in Brass, and in another stone are pourtrayed three
persons, in several postures, cut all out of the same stone representing the
Rape of the Sabines.

Opposite unto the Piazza stands the Royal Palace of the Duke, at the entrance
into which, stands a Colossus of David, made by Michael Angelo, and another of
Hercules treading on ^acus; within is a stately Coutt set about with Pillars of
Corinthian Work, and over them painted the famous deeds of Cosmus the great
Duke and all the places subject unto that Duchy, above them is a spacious Hall
with diverse Statues, among them one of Pope Leo the tenth, another of Pope
^lement the seventh, both of the Family of the Medicies, from whence the Dukes
Gallery invites a view, in the lower story whereof sit the Courts of Justice,
with an Arcade to walk in, on each side above are the shops of the Dukes
Artisans, In the uppermost p^t are preserved as many wonders as things, some to
be admired for their richness, rarity, and Art, others for their antiquity, On
each side of the Gallery are placed above 80. Statues, among them that of the
Idol brought from the Temple of Apollo at Delphos with this verse on the
Pidestal. Ut potui huc veni Delpis and fratre relicto,


And that of Scipio Africanus, holding up his Gown under his Arm are most
admirable, over the Statues hang the Pictures of the most famous Scholars and
Soldiers of the modern times.

At the right hand of this Gallery are several Stanzaes of Curio^ities which
none can behold without astonishment at the richness and variety of observeable
things.

In the first Room, stands the Tabernacle or Altar destined for St Laurence
Chapel, all of choice Marble, compacted with Jewels and precious stones of an
inestimable value.

In the second is a Table with flowers and Birds in their natural Colors of
precious Stones, with a Cabinet of 200000. Crowns in value within which is the
passion of our Savior with the twelve Apostles all carved in Amber.

In the third is a Cabinet with Calcidon Pillars filled with ancient Medals of
Gold, and round about infinite other natural and artificial curiosities,
amongst them the Nayl turned half into Gold by Alchimy, and the Emperors head
cut on a Turquoise, as big as a Walnut; next is the Armory, and therein the
habits and diverse sorts of Arms of several Ages and People, amongst them the
King of Chinaes habit, Hannibals Headpiece, and Charlemains Sword. And
likewise a Magnet which attracts and supports fourscore pound weight of Iron.

In the la^t, is the curious Turnery of Ivory, and a Pillar of Oriental
Alablaster, and in the Gardrobe are 12. Cubbards of Silver Plate, and a service
of Massy Gold, and a Saddle embroidered all over with Pearls and Diamonds,
which with many other inestimable curiosities (a theme copious enough for a
volume) declare the Wealth of this Prince equal with any Kings in Christendom

From the said Gallery is a Corridor or private passage (wherein is an
admirable brass Statue of Perseus) to the proud Palace Pitti. on the other side
of the River, where the Duke keeps his Court. Its Front is very Majestique,
toward the basis of Dorick work, in the midst Ion^k, in the uppermost
Corinthian. In the Court is a Grot with Statues, and a Magnet of a prodigious
greatness, and over (...) Fountain. Its Gardens are most spacious, embellished
with Groves, Walk^, Labirynths, Fountains, wherein are Swans, Ostriches, Dee^,
Hares, and all other recreative Creatures. It also has a Seraglio, wherein his
Highness maintains all sorts of Savage Creatures in their several Stanzaes, as
Lions, Bears, Wolves, Tygres, etc. which according to their several species
there breed, and are placed in such order that all resorting beholders are
astonished at it.

The Streets are large, long, and strait; paved with Flint, and on each side of
them are many stately Palaces, bedecked with rare statues, Fountains, etc. by
which with its other singularities has the City acquired the Surname of
Florence the fair.

The Ch^rches are so much beautifyed, with the design of Architecture,
Sculpture, Picture, and other Curiosities, that who should describe them
particularly must write a volume, yet the wonderful Temple Santa Maria del
Fiore, must not be passed in silence, where Filino and Giotto, two excellent
men in Limning and Architecture ly buried. Therein are the twelve Apostles cut
in Marble by the most excellent Sculptors of that Age. The stupendous Cupola
(adorned with the pieces of Vasari and Zucharo, famous painters) erected by
Francesco Brunelesco at that height is so large that the brass Globe at top
will contain 16. persons, the Steeple is all built with incomparable Marble
stones and garnished with Statues, wrought by those famous Statuaries in
emulation one of another. Before which stands the Babtistery built in an
Octogon, anciently the Temple of Mars, herein stands that Egregious Vessel or
Font of precious Stones wherein they baptize their Infants, whose four Gates of
Brass are esteemed without their equal. Herein Baldessar Gossa once Pope of
Rome (deposed from the Papacy, at the Council of Costanza) lies buried in an
artificial Sepulcher of Brass made by Donatello, with his essigies and these
Letters. Balthazar Cossa, olim Ioannes vigesimus tertius.

The noble Temple Santa Maria Novella, for its mavelous Structure may be
compared to any other of Italy, which Michael Angelo was wont to call his Venus.

Among its other notable things appears the Sepulcher of the Patriarchs of
Constantinople who subscribed to the Council celebrated under Eugenius the
fourth, near to which Church adjoyns the sumptuous Monastery for the Friars,
wherein were celebrated certain sessions of A general Council, in the presence
of the Latin and Greek Church, the Pope, the Emperor and four Patriarchs.

The Mirror of Art and wonder of this Age Saint Laurence Chapel is so
glorious, that who enters must imagine himself in some place above terrestrial,
which is overlayed with fine polisht Stones, of all colors upon Earth dugg up
within the Dukes Territories, it was built by Cosmo Medici, and in the midst of
this Church stands his Sepulcher with this Epitaph, Decreto, publico, Patri
Patriae, with many other sumptuous tombs, therein also is a Library (not
despicable) founded by Pope Clement the 7th* the Church Santa Croce has a most
stately Pulpit, in it is the sumptuous Sepulcher of Leonardo Aretino, and the
Temple of Michael Angelo Bonorota, made by his own hand. Over his Urn stand
those three Arts he was so renowned for; bewailing the loss of their Patron.
Herein also is a fair Organ, set up at the charge of Cosmus the great Duke, the
very manufacture whereof cost 4000. Crowns. The Church Santo Spirito, is built
with the strict rules of Architure, and supported by vast long Columns of
Stone, and has a fair Cloister for the Iacobins, which was painted by the
Greeks, before the Italians knew that Art. The graceful Fabric of the
Monastery of Saint Mark, has a graceful Chapel for the Signori Salviati,
wherein is the Tomb of Saint Antonio Archbishop of Florence, and there one
may read this Epitaph of ^icus Mirandola an eminent Scholar. Ioannes jacet hic
Mirandula, caetera n orunt
Et Tagus, and Ganges forsan, and Antipodes*


The Annunciade, is a place of great Devotion, whither every season resort
infinite people to a Madenna, drawn by the hand of Saint Luke, it is a
magnificent Temple filled with ornaments of Gold and Silver Statues, gemmes and
other rich gifts, it has a sumptuous Monastery, and in it a fair Library and
St^dy. There are many fair Churches which for brevity sake are omitted. It has
37. Hospitals, 44. Parish Churches, 12 Priorates, 54. Monasteries of Nunns, 24.
of Friars, with other Confraternities of Children in great number, whence as
also from the infinite number of Friars of all Orders in this City, we may
collect, that the Florentines are more inclined to Religion, than any other
People of Italy.

This renowned Country has been the Birthplace of many excellent Ingenuities,
who have not only been a glory to it, but to all Italy. Some whereof follow
Saint Antonio, Archbishop of Florence, St. Gionan Gualbarto, St. Andrea
Carmelitano, St Filippo de Servi, with others, who have either instituted new
Religious Orders, or reformed the old. Four Popes, Leon the 10th. Clement the
7th. Leon the 11th. of the Family of the Medici, and Clement the 8th. of the
house of Aldobrandini, with many other Cardinals, Bishops and other Prelates of
the Court of Rome, many excellent Captains in War, among them Pietro Strozzi,
grand Marshal of France. And infinite Persons excelling in Letters, as Dante,
Petrarca, Bocacccio, Caval^ante, Beniviedi, Politiano, Crinito, Ficino,
Palmerio, Passavanti, Dino del Garbo, a Physician, Macchiavel Accucsir,
Glossatori, Donato Acciaivolo. And for Painters, Sculptors, and Architectors,
it has produced so many, that we may say those Arts are to them proper and
connatural. (...) has two Accademies, one for Painting, the other for the
vulgar Tongue, whereof the Florentines are heads and Masters. We must not omit
one good Argument of their state Abilities, which was that at one instant in
the time of Pope Boniface the 9th. there resided 13. Florentines, as
Ambassadors from diverse Princes at Rome. It has several noble Families,
whereof some are gone into France, where they dwell with Titles and
Principalities, others to Venice, and others to Rome, who all live in honor.
The City contains 85. thousand Souls.

For eight miles round about the City, there seems another Florence so full are
the Fields speckled with Country Seats, some for public use, as the sumptuous
Monastery called the Abba^y of Fiesole, founded by Cosmo Medici, the Monastery
of Saint Domenick, which yet retains the Episcopal Seat, one walk of Pyne Trees
two mile long, and another of Cipreses leading to Pioggio, with many more. And
others for private as Pratolino, much spoken of, which Francesco the great Duke
Pratolin^
built, adorning it with Palaces, Statues, Pictures, and Fountains, so well
contrived and disposed that it is worthily esteemed one of the pleasant places of
Italy.

Two miles forth of Florence at the Foot of the Apenines, appears Fiesole
some Footsteps of the ancient City Fiesole, where formerly the Southsayers,
and fortune tellers inhabited. It was anciently of that power, that it gave
assistance to Stilicone, the Roman Captain, for the destruction of the Goths,
whereof were then slain above one hundred thousand. The premises considered, we
may conclude there is no Province in Italy more furnished with delightful and
well-peopled Cities, than that of the Great Duke, whose Ancestors by uniting
the States of three Republics together, to wit, Pisa, Florence, and Siena,
does now entirely possess all Tuscany, the nobler part of Italy, his Revenue
exceeds 100000. pound sterling. per. Annum.

SCARPERIA.
ON the way which leads to Bologna stands Scarperia, being 16 miles from
Vlorence, noted for Knives, Cizers, and other such like things, there made. And
among those Mountains lies the most fruitful Mugello, Whose Inhabitants, are
called Mugellini. Here Cosmus Mugello
retreated for his delight, when he was solemnly styled Duke of Flouence,
commanding a Fort and Palace to be built and environed them within a spacious
Wall, wherein he kept wild beasts for the Chase. More forwards lies the Way to
Faenza, and Romagna, near it begins the Cresentino, contained between the Ronta
and Ar^o, reaching to Arezzo, well peopled and very fertile. And from the
higest Mountains, you may look down into the Valley Ombrose where Giovanni
Gualberto a Florentine, gave beginning to the Order named Religione di Valle
Ambrosa, in the year of our Lord 1070. and also into Umbria.

On the North-East part lies the Palace Poggio, of the great Dukes, a house
swarming with Statues, and rarities, and a Park for Beasts of Chase, where is
also a Fortezza. And opposite to it lies the noble Castle Prato accounted one
of the first four of Italy, here they make bread white as Snow, and here they
keep with great devotion the Garter of the Virgin Mary, a little more near the
Apenines, is Monte Murlo, much spoken of for the taking those Florentines,
which fled out of Florence, and there embodied, by Alessandro Vitelli, Captain
for Cosmus the Duke, which secured his Principality.

PISTOIA.
AFter which, entering a lovely Plain, you meet the City Pistoia, twenty miles
off Florence, which though little, is neatly compact and rich, and would have
been better, had it not much groned under the factions of its own Citizens.
Twenty miles of Pistoia stands Lucca, which governs it self in Liberty, and by
the strength of its Wall, the Richness of Trade, and the Industry of its own
Citizens, maintains it self well with all things necessary, it is an ancient
City, and was made a Colony of the Romans. Desiderius the King built its strong
Walls which with its site enabled it to endure a six months siege by Narsetes;
toward the Sea, stand yet the footsteps of the Temple of Hercules, the River
Serchio, runs close by Lucca, whence the famous baths of Italy are ten miles
distant. Lucca


Out of Florence toward the West in that spacious Plain, stands the Castles
Empoli, and Fucecchio, there is also a Lake of that name, as also San Miniato
al Todesco so called for that it was built by certain Germans under Desiderius
their King,

PISA.
COasting the River Arno, you attain Pisa, an ancient City built long before
Rome by the Grecians, and was one of the 12 Cities of Tuscany, it was powerful
at Sea, and obtained many victories against the Genovesi, it subdued Cartagine,
conquered the Island of Sardegna, and delivered its King Prisoner to the Pope.
It recovered Palermo in Sicilia out of the hands of the Sarazens who had long
enjoyed it, it slew the Sarazen King of Majorca. It sent 40 Galleys in
assistance to Almerico, King of Jerusalem, against the Sarazens, who possessed
Alexandria. It greatly assisted the Popes in their adversity. It was so potent,
happy, and rich, that Saint Thomaso treating of the four things, reckons it
among the four most potent Cities of Italy. But from that time that at the
instance and request of Frederick Barbarossa, it captivated so many Prelates of
the Romi^h Church, and two Cardinals which came from France to the Lateranian
Council, it only decayed from bad to worse, till it lost Liberty and Power, yet
in process of time by the residence of the Knights of S. Stefano, and the
University, it recovered and still preserves the Countenance of an honorable
City, Plato will have it well situated, being four miles then (now eight) from
the Sea, so that it is not placed upon the Sea shore, but near it, not upon the
Mountains but near them, in a Plain just so divided from the royal River Arno,
as Plato fancies his City. It Is endowed with four things which create wonder,
the Church of Saint John, the Domo, the Steeple, and ^ampo Santo, which was
raised with that very holy Earth, which they brought home in their Galleys,
when 50 of them were sent to assist the Emperor in the recovery of the holy
Land. On one side of it lies Lucca, on the other Livorgeo, or Ligorne. It Was
destroyed by the Florentines, in the year 1509.

Intending from Florence to Siena, you must go out at the Porta Romana, through
which Charles the fifth entered after his Victory in Africa, and so passing by
the Monastery Certosini, attain Cassano, Tavernelli, and Staggia, by a direct
way, having pleasant hills and fruitful Valleys, on each side. In the way
appears the Castle Certaldo, the Birthplace of Giovani Boccaccio, the Prince
of Tuscan Poets, who dyed in the 62. year of his Age in the year of our Lord
1375. and was interred in a Marble Tomb in the Domo of Certaldo with this
Epitaph. Hac sub mole jacent cineres, ac ossa Ioannis.
Men's sedet ante Deum meritis ornata laborum
Mortalis vitae genitor Boccac^ius ^lli
Patria Certaldum, studium fuit alma Poesis.


Somewhat further stands the Bourg Saint Geminiano, famous for its good wine
Vernace. It Is adorned with fair Churches, noble Palaces, illustrious persons,
and a gentle people, built by Desiderius King of the Longobardi. Westward from
which lies the antique City Volterra, which was founded 100. years before the
firing of Troy, and 500. before the building of Rome, it is built on a hill, the
ascent to whose top is 3 miles, its Walls are of squared stones, 6 foot long,
laid and cemented without Mortar, It has five gates and before each a
Fountain of clear water and within them two other stately Fountains with many
antie^t statues and on the^ old Epitaphs, it has a rich Territory, is subject
to the great Duke, it produced Persio the poet, and diverse other wits, beyond
it lies the Sea. On its left hand lies Ancis^ the Country of St. Francis the
Patriark, Fighine and other good places.

AREZZO.
TRavailing toward the East, you meet Arezzo, accounted one of the ancient
twelve. The Aretines contributed 30000. Crowns as many Celades with other Kinds
of Weapons to the Romans, and 120000. bushels of Wheat to furnish the Armada of
40 Galleys, which was to convoy Scipio against the Carthaginians. It has
suffered many and many calamities, but with the government of Cosmus the great
Duke, it began to take breath and restore it self. Pliny says their Vessels of
Earth were in his time esteemed the best of Italy. San Donato its Bishop was
there Martyred in the time of Valentinian the Emperor, who baptized L. Zembio
the Tribune, and then endowed the Church of Arezzo wherein lies buried S.
Loren^o and Pellegrino, brothers and Martyrs, and Gregory the 10th. chief
Bishop; the house of Petrark, is yet to be seen; there begins the State of the
Poggibonzi
Church. On the direct way to Siena, stands Poggibonzi, a place noted for the
perfumed Tobacco composed there, which the Italians take as profusely in powder
as the English in pipes, as also Ascia, and near it Siena.

SIENA Paolo V.
THis City was named Siena, from the Galli Senoni, who resided there under
Brennus their Captain, and built it on the back of the hill Tuffo, it was made a
Colony by the Romans, and afterward underwent the same misery with the other
Cities of Tuscanie, In process of time it recovered liberty, and therewith its
former emulation with Florence, against whom it fought and obtained a glorious
victory, after which it became subject to the Petrarci, its own Citizens, whom
discarding it continued a free State till the year 1555. when the great Duke
recovered it. Its air is very good and wholesome. Its Inhabitants very
courteous, who profess and speak the purity of the Italian Language. without
the Porta Romana, the City appears with a great deal of Majesty, being
beautifyed by the many Towers raised in honor of such persons as performed
some eminent service for the Common* Wealth, among these Towers (which yet
retein the memory of its former freedom) that of Mangio, surpasses for
height, which though founded in the bottom of the Piazza out tops all the
City, and serves for a Clock-house; from its top is an incomparable prospect to
the confines of Tuscany; at the foot of this hideous structure is a Marble
Chapel to which adjoyns the Senate house built by the Goths, at one end whereof
stands a column bearing Remus and Romulus sucking a Wolf in Brass, the Arms of
this City: Its Piazza lies in the heart of the City, so formed, that whosoever
passes over it must be seen by all: In the midst of it is a Marble Fountain
whence issues sweet Water out of the Wolves mouth: The whole City is paved with
Brick: The houses are for the most part built of Brick alla Moder^a, the
chiefest is that proud Palace built of squared stones by the Pope Pius the
second and the Archbishop, who is of the Family of the Picolomenies,

Among its Churches the Domo dedicated to the Virgin Mary is worth noting, for
though in comparison of others in Italy it be but small, yet for the pains and
charges which it must have cost, it is inferior to none, being both without and
within of black and white Marble. The Facade is admirably garnished with
Statues, about the inside are the heads of all the Popes. The Pulpit is an
unparalleled piece, beset with figures of Marble; but its singularity^ lies in
the Pavement, wherein many parts of the sacred history are so lively
represented in several colors of Marble, that no pencil can come near it,
though many Masters take pattern from those figures in stones: In it is a
Chapel, wherein is kept the Arm of Saint John Baptist given to a Pope by the
King of Pelopo^esus.

In the royal Church of Saint Domeni^k in Campo Regio, is kept the head of
Santa Caterina of Siena, and many Bodies of Saints, and near to it stands the
Hospital where Pilgrims may have their full refreshment for several days,
wherein is remarkable the diligence of the Attendants, in satisfying the
Appetites and necessities of the poor and infirm; in the Chapel lies the
Founder B. Susorius, as yet uncorrupted though ninehundred years since he dyed.

The Walls of Siena are of an exceeding compass yet but slight stocked with
caper Trees, that Fruit growing best in Mortar.

The City was reduced to the Faith of Christ by S. Ansano a Roman Citizen, who
was afterward beheaded; It particularly has a great devotion to Santa Maria
the Mother of God, as appears by the Motto round their Common Seal. Salve
Virgo, Senam Veterum, quae cernis amaenam.

Many illustrious Men has this City afforded, as Saint Bernard the restorer of
the Order of Minorites, the blessed Giovanni Colombino first Institutor of the
Jesuits Order, Saint Ambrogio de'Bianconi, the Institutor of the Canons
Regulars and of the Monks of Mount Olivet. Four Popes, as Alexander the third,
who by his pious life and exceeding patience overcame four Anti-Popes, set up
against him by Frederick Barbarossa, Pius the first, and Pius the second of the
Family Picolomini, and Paolo Quinto of the Borghesi, with many Cardinals,
Bishops, Prelates, and Doctors, in all the Sciences most famous.

The Country about Siena is filled with all sorts of great Chase, so that
Wild Bore and other Venison in its season is commonly sold in Butchers shops.
Its Territory is very pleasant and fruitful, and in a word the City is one of
the principal in Italy*

On the left hand at twelve miles distance Mount Oliveto discovers Mount Olivet
it self, much spoken of for the order of white Friars of Oliveto taking its
ri^e there, whereon is built a sumptuous Abbacy, and therein dwell a vast
number of Monks devoted to the service of God, whence (the river also being
past) you find San Querico, so called from a Church dedicated to that Saint,
and Radicofano, where Desiderius Radicofano
King of the Longobardi built a strong Fort, and the great Duke another, to
whom they are now subject; here ends the patrimony which the Countess Matilda
consigned the Church, whereof Viterbo is head. Between San Quirico and the
Banks of the River Orica, stands the City Pienza, the Country of Pope Pius the
second, and so calbed Pienza
from his name. Further upon a high and rough Mountain stands Chiusi, one of
the twelve Cities of Tuscany, where Porsenna King Chiuse
of the Tuscans, was buried, who there built a Labyrinth, wherein who entered
without a clew of thread, was certainly buried; at present this City is
depopulated. Monte Pulciano


Somewhat farther toward the North is Monte Pulciano, a City not very ancient,
but populous and rich; seated in a delightful Country abounding with all
things desirable. It gave birth to Marcellus the second chief Roman Bishop,
and Cardinal Bellarmine, who wrote acutely upon the disputed controversies of
all the Heresies; beyond which are many delightful places*

On the other side of the Road which goes from Quirico near the River Arbia,
are the Baths of Petriolo, and the mouth of the River Asso, near which are many
fair Bourgs, and the Maremma of Siena, wherein is the City Grossetto, in the
Jurisdiction of Siena, well fortified Grossetto
by the great Duke, and Montamata, where are great plenty of Acorns, and grain
to die Scarlet; under these Mountains lies the Bourg Santo Fiore, much honored
by the illustrious house of the Sforzaes, where they have a Stately Palace,
together with large possessions and Lands for hunting and other pastimes.

The Traveller is many times obliged to pass the River Paglia in this Journey,
which sometimes is dangerous, on the other side of which lies Aquapendente, (so
called from its site, on the hanging of a hill, and by it runs a rapid stream)
San Lorenzo, and Bolsena a good Town built Bolsena
out of the ruins of the ancient City named Urbs vulfimensium, then accounted
one of the twelve chief ones of Etruria. Its Territory is very fertile, as may
appear by the Olive Trees bearing in the first year planting according to
Pliny: Here they reverenced the Body of the Virgin San Christina, who being
cast into the Paglia, for the faith, thence returned without the least hurt,
leaving the track and impression of her Foot on the ground, which appears to
this day; here also happened the great miracle of the consecrated host, which
being in the hands of the Priest, (who doubted the truth of it) of a sudden
bled extremely, and so all bloody was carried to Orvieto, where with great
honor it is preserved in the Domo; in the River is an Island delightsome and
fertile, and a little Church Mauseolum or burying place of the Farnesi; here
the prudent and religious Queen Amala sunta was wickedly slain, at the command
of Theodato King of the Ostrogoths, whose gravity and sweetness of speech was
such, that arguing with condemned persons on death, she so much convinced them
of the good, that they little feared the punishment of it.

On the left side of the said Lake is Orvieto, Cagnarea, and Tevere all Cities.
On the right the City Soana, the birth place of Pope Tevere Soana
Gregory the 7th. at present almost uninhabited, Petigliano, and Farneso,
appertainning to the noble Family of Farnesi in Rome; somewhat further is the
City Castro, of the said Farnesies, so surrounded with Rocks and Cavernes, that
it appears to the Enterers rather an obscure Castro
Den for wild beasts, than habitations for Men.

From whence walking toward the Sea, you find Orbello, Talamoni, Orbello
Monte Argentaro, and Port Ercole, all stately places subject to the King of
Spain. On whose right hand they show the noble Castle Tuscanello, Tuscanello
subject to the Sea of Rome, so ancient, that (if it be permitted to believe
them) they say it was built by Askanius Son of Eneas, and upon one of the ports
appears an old Marble with an Epitaph carved thereon, showing his Original and
descent. As also the City Cornetto, Cornetto
by the ancient Tuscans dedicated to Pan, whose stately antique Walls, show it
to have been an honorable City; Pope Gregory the fifth was born there,
Giovanni Vitalesco a Cardinal, and Father Mutio a Jesuit, with many other
famous Men; seven miles off Cornetto stands Civita Vecchia on the Sea shore, a
fortified Port.

On the left hand of the Via Regia, lies Horti, an ancient City which is Horti
the Tuscan boundarie.

Further off is Tevere, and the Lake Basanello, in Latin, Lacus Vadimonis, and
hereabouts stands Bassanello Castello, Magliano, Civita Castellana, Galese, and
the Via Flaminia, which leads from Rimini to Rome.

In the way from Bolsena to Rome, is the Grove Monte Fiascone, where the
Ancients with great ceremony and solemnity were wont to sacrifice to the
Goddess Gi^one, near which stands the old City Mionte Fiascome, which was a
long time besieged by Camillus, who was not able to reduce it, for the strength
of its site. Its Territory yields Moscatella.

Monte Fiascone being passed, you enter a large and pleasant Plain, Viterbo
in which stands Viterbo, anciently called Vetulania, but Desiderius the King
having enclosed it, Longhola Tussa, and Turrenna, within one Wall, by his
Edict, yet to be read in a white Marble Tablet in the Palace of Viterbo,
commanded it to be called Viterbo; it is head of the Church Patrimony, and behind
it lies Monte Cimeno. It Is adorned with stately Edifices, amongst which the Domo
is famous, where four Popes ly buried, John the 21. Alexander the 4th. Adrian
the 5th. and Clement the 4th. and the Church Santa Rosa, wherein that Saints
body is kept entire, and an admirable Fountain, casting out great quantity of
water. This City was a long time subject to the Vecchi and Gotti, its Citizens,
who driven out, it submitted to the Pope. It Is well inhabited with a civil
people, and abounds with Corn, Oil, Wine, and Fruits; in its Territory are
eleven Rivers, which store it with excellent Fish. It wants not Baths of warm
water, among the rest those of Bolicano are named for their Miraculous virtue.
A mile forth the City stands the Church Quierria dedicate to the Virgin Maria;
finally it has afforded Men of excelling Judgments.

From this City you ascend the Mountain Viterbo, called Mons Cyminus by the
Latins, upon which is the Castle Canepina; near thereto Canepina
stood formerly the Castle Corito, built by Corito King of Tuscany, whose
foundations yet remain, there also was then a thick and terrible Wood, through
which none durst pass, no more than the Calidonian or Hercinian Wood, but at
present the Trees are cut and a way comodiously laid out. At the Foot of this
Mountain toward Lag^ * Vico
the South, is the Lake Vico, in Latin called Lacus Cyminus, near it stands the
Village Viro, and the Castle Soriano, where there was an inexpugnable Fort,
whence for 60, years the Brittons Soldiers could not be expelled.

Pursuing the way toward Rome, you find Ronciglione, which has a lovely
Fountain, and Caprinica, inhabited by 500. Families; beyond which lies Sutri an
ancient City, built (as is believed) by Sutri.
the Pelasgi a Grecian people, before Saturnus came into Italy. The Romans
taking the advantage of this City, assaulted the Tuscans and overcame an Army
of 60: thosand Tuscans Spoletines and Ombri: Its ill air renders it near
uninhabited. Beyond Ronciglione lies Caprarola, a Castle of the Farnlsies,
where whatever can be desired for Recreation is competently pro vided for, by
Cardinal Alexandro Farnese.

Not far distanr from it is Civita a City now of small importance, Civita:
though anciently because they would not assist the Romans (then afflicted by
Hannibal) we find them by the Romans condemned al Doppio. Rofolo.


Passing on the Via Regia, one meets Rofolo a Bourg adjacent to a Lake of
immense profundity, and two miles beyond it Campagnana, and npon the same way a
standing Pool, where was Cremera a Castle built by the Fabii and destroyed by
the Vesenti, here we^eslain in one day Cremera.
by the said Vesenti, 500. Servants, and 300. persons of that Family, for
having privately complotted an insurrection for their Country Rome against them,
one Child sleeping in a Cradle escaped and became the restorer of the Fabii in
Rome. More forward stands the Town Baccano, and the Wood called Bosco di
Baccano, which was lately a harbor for Assassinates and other people disposed
to ill, whence it grew into a proverb when we would advise any one to stand
upon his, guard to say. Perch siamo nel Bosco de Baccano, but through the
vigilance and care of the late Popes, it is almost a secured passage.

On the right hand stands Anguillara a Town of much Fame, whose Lords having
behaved themselves gallantly have acquired to themselves and Country eternal
honor. The Signori Orsini possess it, and Bracciano, which is entitled a
Duchy. From the aforenamed Lake runs the River Arone, whence the Romans convey
by pipes the water they called Sabatina, from the Lakes name Sabatina. Toward
the Sea lies the Monastery Santo Severa, made now a Fort, and Ceri a Castle
upon the shore. On the left hand of the Via Regia, lies the Via Flaminea, and
six miles beyond Beccano Isola, then Storta, two Towns, and thence it is seven
miles to Rome. One may also travail from Bologna to Rome, on the Via Emilia,
and so pass Imola, Faenza, Forli, Cesena, and Rimini.

IMOLA.
IMola called in Latin Forum Cornelii, enjoyes a good Air, a fruitful
Territory, a commodious situation for all things, Narsetes in the year of
Christ, 550. destroyed it, but Dasone second King of the Longobardi, restored
it, and called it Imola, Galeazzo Sforza, Son of Francis Duke of Milan
possessed it, and gave it in Dowry to Girolamo Riario Savonese, in Anno 1473.
some time after it was taken forcibly by Caesar Borgia, Son of Pope Alexander the
6th. finally (after several other Lords) it became under the power of the
Church, who yet keep it in peace. Martial the famous Poet, resided here for
some time, as may be drawn from his verses, and many Illustrious persons were
born here.

COTIGNOLA.
BEtween Imola and Faenza, stands Cotignola, a Castle small, but strong, near
the River Senio, encompassed with thick Walls, and profound Dikes; the Castle
was built by the Forlevesi, and Faentini, but the Walls and Ditches by Giovanni
Aguto, Captain and Standard Bearer to the Roman Church, to whom it was given by
Pope Gregory the 11th. It was the Birthplace of Sforza, Attendolo, the first
of the Sforzesean Family, who wrought himself at a Pickax, and yet in less than
one hundred years his line and Family, has yielded one Empress, many Queens,
Marqueses, Dukes, Counts, Captains, Bishops, Archbishops, Cardinals, and other
eminent persons.

FAENZA.
FAenza is divided by the River Lamone, which passes between the Bourg and the
City, where there is a strong bridge of Stone, which conjoyns the City with the
Bourg, and the Via Emilia. It Is ancient, and the first Founders are unknown; it
enjoys a serene healthful Air, a fertile Territory, and a people good-natured
and lovers of their Country. Here they make the best and finest Vessels of
Earth of all Italy. It has produced men eminent in all the Sciences. It was
several times destroyed by Totila King of the Goths, Frederick Barbarossa, and
by a Captain of the Brittones, but Frederick the second Nephew of the first,
built that Fort, cast down and levelled the Walls in the year 1240. which now
are seen, for that by their fidelity to the Church, they gave him great
difficulty to take it: The Manfredi then got it, and rebuilt the Walls, from
them the Bolonians took it, from them Mainardo Pagano, its Citizen, a great
Captain, and from him the Venetians, from whom after the rout, they received at
Giarad Adda by Lewis the 12th. King of France, it returned again to the
devotion of the Church, under whom it has ever since continued.

BRISIGELLA.
THis Town is seated in part on a Plain, and in part on the side of a hill, it
has two Forts, the one on the East called the Tower, where with the touch of a
Bell they give notice how many Horses enter, the other on the West, both set at
the outmost part of the Town. It has two Fountains, the Water of the one so
sweet and light, that none is accounted better, the other so gross and heavy,
that they give it not to their Beasts, but account it only fit for cooling
their Wine, and cleansing and dying their silks, which shine more here than
elsewhere, and that is attributed to the crudity of this water. Its Territory
is called la Valle d'Amone from the River so named, which having its sourse
from the top of the Alps of Florence (with little water in a short course
driving Mills) runs through the Valley to Faenza*

This Valley and Territory contains 48. Villages, every one having its own
Parish, and a sufficient allowance for its Pastors. The Farmers are rich and
civil, they muster 800. Men, who are well exercised youth, and the best armed
of any in the Ecclesiastic State. Which Villages are all contained under the
name Bresigiella.

The said Valley is so fertile in Wine, Oil, Corn and other necessaries, that
though there be 18000. Souls, yet one years crop affords sustenance enough for
all them for two years, were it not exported into other Countries.

It has one noble Palace belonging to the * Signori Spadi, which has all the
coumodities of Church, Fishponds, Fountains, Gardens, Vineyards, Wood for Foul,
Conservatories for Snow, with all sorts of trees of exquisite fruit, Citrons,
Lemons, Oranges, Pynes, and other delights that may be required, and this is
always so well accommodated with all necessaries for the Kitchen,
household stuff, and Plate, that whenever any Prince or Ambassador arrives, they
need not transport thither the least thing, there is one Oak which five men
cannot brace.

This Town has one eminent Collegiate for the Prelates; every Wednesday they
keep here a Market, so great for all things, that it attracts infinite People,
for which they pay no toll. It flourished in Arms two Ages past, through the
nobility, generofity, and Valor of the Family of Naldi, the statues of Vicenso
and Dionisio Naldi, are in Venice erected. And in Religion and Learning, by
many famous Men.

The Voyage or Journey from MILAN to CREMONA, to MANTOVA, to FERRARA, and to
RIMINI.
IF you would see the places, distant from the Via Emilia, when you are arrived
at Lodi, you must go toward the Adda Eastward, and at twelve miles distance
meet Castiglone, and see Castle Novo, and Pizzichotone, a famed Place, for that
Francis the first King of France, being taken Prisoner, by the Imperialists,
under Pavia, was retained there, till by Order of the Emperor Charles the fifth,
they embarked him at Genoua for Spain, hence it is but 15. mile to Cremona, all
good and direct even way.

CREMONA the Faithful.
CRemona is built on the banks of the Poe, in the 7th. Climat, on the West
parts of Italy, it is eight miles in circuit, environed with Walls Bastions, and
Ditches, and has one Citadel on the Eastpart, the most stupendous, strong
and formidable work in all Italy. Its first Founders are not known, but their
judgments approved for its good Air. It was a good Colony of the Romans, and
always maintained such fidelity to its Princes, that among the Cities of Italy
it merited the surname of faithful. In the time of the Triumvirate of
Augustus, Antony, and Lepidus, it suffered much misery, its Territories being
divided also among the Soldiers, whose neighborhood to Mantoua, made it
participate in misery, and caused Virgil to lament in his 9th. Ecloge, Mantoua
vel miserae ni^ium vicina Cremonae.

Cornelius Tacitus relates its then woeful sufferings. Afterward in Anno 630.
it was all cast down by the Goths, Longobards and Slaves and 600. years, after
that destroyed by Frederick Barbarossa, and depopulated. But afterward it was
restored and amplified, and governed in liberty, till through civil discords
Uberto Palavicino got the dominion, who driven out, certain lesser Lords kept
it in servitude, as now Cavadabo, now the Ponzoni, now the Fonduli, now the
Visconti, whoever of them was conqueror got it, and with the conquered it
always suffered. Also the Venetians, French, and Sforzeschi had it by Arms,
but now the King of Spain reigns in it, and maintains in great tranquillity.

Sigismond the Emperor to gratify Gabrino Fondalio, granted it license for a
public University, with all such privileges, immunities and exemptions, as
those of Paris or Bologna, enjoyed.

The ordinary buildings are so great, that they may be termed Palaces, reared
with great expense and excellent Architecture. Ir has broad streets, with
Orchards, Gardens, and Mills as well within as without the City, a chanel for
driving them being brought from the River through the City.

It has one Tower so high that it is reckoned among the wonders of Europe,
which was built in the year 1284. Upon it at one instant were, Pope John the
22th. Sigismond the Emperor, with Gabrino Fondulio, Lord of the City, who
afterward was sad at the heart, that he had not precipitated the Emperor and
Pope to eternalize his memory, as did Herostrato, who only to commemorate his
name gave fire to and burnt that stupendnous Temple of Diana, built in Ephesus
at the common charge of all the Potentates of Asia, in two hundred years. It
has a Cathedral with a good Revenue, and many other stately Churches, wherein
are kept many Relics of Saints, and much riches, several Hospitals and other
pious places.

The Families of Cremona, are for the most part descended from the Romans, who
there made a Colony, others from the veterane Soldiers, who for reward of
their Labors had houses and Lands there assigned them, and others from the
Goths, Longobardi, French, Germans, and other people of Italy; it has given
birth to many eminent Ecclesiastics, Lawyers, Physicians, Soldiers, and
Poets. The people are of an industrious and accute wit, and have invented
several sorts of Stuffs, Silks and Clothes, and make excellent Swords.

Without the Gate Puleselia, stands the Church San Guglielmo, where is a large
Pond which did formerly contain troubled and stinking water, but San Domenick
and Francis, who dwelt there, making the sign of the Cross over it, they were
there by miraculously converted into clear and sweet waters.

Near the Porta San Michaele, stood a Temple dedicate to the Goddess Februa,
whereof naught appears now. Close by the Walls runs the noble River Oglio. On
its West part lies nhe Territory of Lodi, on the North Bergamo and Brescia, on
the East Mantona, and on the South Piacenza.

Between Towns and Hamlets this City possesses 41. places, and all its Country
round about is a plain planted with trees in excellent order with Vines
clinging to them, and most productive of all grains herbage and other
necessaries.

From Cremona to Mantoua, leads a direct even road, and upon or near it lie
Piadena, the Country of Bartolomeo Platina, close by which Piadena
passes the Oglio, Canesdo, where the Oglio spends it self in the Poe, the
Castles Asola, and Acquanegria, Bozzolo a Town, and San Martino where Scipion
Gonzaga the Splendour of the College of Cardinals lies buried. Then the River
passed which crosses the Road, you leave Gazuolo
the Bourg Marcheria, and Gazuolo, where there is a sumptuous and royal Palace
of the Gonzaghi, whose also are the 3 Castles, from Gazuolo, to Mantoua twelve
miles.

But the way from Cremona to Mantoua, on the left side of the Poe lies thus,
first to the Town San Giovanni, and Ricardo, then to Ponzono, Gusnola, and
Casal Maggiore, and then to Sabioneda, an imperial City, very fair and stately,
a draught whereof was taken by order of the Duke Vespasiano. Beyond which lies
Viadona, and Pomponesco, where lies the pass over the Poe, whence it is eight
mile to Mantoua, in the way are Montecchio, a manor of the Palavicini, Colorno
under the Parmesans, the Castle Bresegello of the Dokes of Este, formerly a
City, but destroyed by the Lougobardi, whose King Alboino there, slew Totila
King of the Goths, and by that victory made himself Lord of Italy, Gonzaga,
where the Duke of Mantoua has a noble Palace, Reggio, Huolara, Luzzara, and
Guastallo entitled with a Principality, thence to Borgo Forte, and so to
Mantoua.

MANTOUA
FOr its antiquity gives place to no City of Italy, being founded not only
before Rome, but before the destruction of Troy, (which happened according to
Eusebius, Saint Jerome and others, 430. years before the building of Rome)
Leandro Alberti, shows that Mantoua was built 1183. years before the coming of
our Lord into the flesh. And as it was more ancient than the rest, so was its
Original more noble, being founded by Ocno Bianoro, the most ancient King of
Tuscany, who was Son of Tiberino King of Tuscany, and Manto Tebena his Queen,
and so called it Mantoua from the name of his Mother. It was first inhabited by
three noble people, the Tebani, Veneti, and Toscani, as Virgil the Prince of
Poets celebrating the nobleness of this his Country testifies in his 10. book
of his AEneades. Ille etiam patriis agmenciet Ocnus ab oris
Fatidicae Manthus, and Tusci filius amnis,
Qui muros, matrisque dedit tibi Mantoua nomen.
Mantoua Dives avis, sed non genus omnibus unum.
Gens illi triplex, populi sub gente quaterni
Ipsa caput populis Tusco de sanguine vires.


It Is seated among the Marshes created by the River Mencio, is strong by nature
and art, large and well built, adorned with sumptuous Palaces and fair
Churches, noble Piazzaes, spacious recreative places, and direct streets. It Is a
merchandising City, and copious of all trading through the convenience of the
waters. The people are of an acute genius, and not less disposed to Learning,
Arms, and all Sciences, than to Traffic and Merchandising.

In the Church of the reverend Fathers of Saint Domenick, is the Tomb of
Giovanni de Medici, Father of Cosmus great Duke of Tuscany, where may be read
this Epitaph. Joannes Medices hic situs est inusitatae virtutis
Dux, qui ad Mincium tormento ictus, Italiae
fato, potius quam suo cecidit. 1526.


In the Church of the Carmelites lies Batista Spagnuolo, General of that order,
with this Epitaph. Reverend. P. Magister Baptiste Mantuanus Carmelita,
Theologus, Philosophus, Poeta, and Orator Clarissimus, Latinae, Graecae, and
Hebraicae linguae peritissimus.

In the sumptuous Temple Saint Andrea, is some of the precious blood of our
Lord, and the body of San Longino the Martyr, Montigna Padouano lies likewise
buried here with this Inscription. Ossa Andreae Mantiniae famosissimi Pictoris
cum duobus filiis insepulchro per Andream Mantiniam nepotem ex filio constructo.

And underneath are these two verses. Esse parem hunc noris, si non praeponis
Apelli,
Enea Mantiniae, qui simulacra vides.


In the Duomo (where the lngenuity of Giulio Romano a famous Architector has
expatiated it self) lies the entire body of San Anselmo Bishop of Lucca. In San
Egidio, lies Bernardo Tasso.

Mantoua has eight Gates, is in compass four miles, has in it 50. thousand
Souls, and the aforesaid Lake or Marish, lies 20. miles round it, near it is
the Royal Palace of Te, built by Giulio Romano.

Five miles off Mantoua Westward, stands a Temple dedicate to the Virgin
Mary, filled with presents, and vows, wherein lies the body of Baldassar
Casiiglione in a fair Tomb. St. Benedict


Twelve miles distant from it Southward, is the magnificent and sumptuous
Monastery of Saint Benedict, seated in a Plain near the Poe, which was built by
Bonisace, Marquess of Mantoua, Count of Conossa, and Uncle of Matilda, in the
year of our Savior 984. which for its Magnificense, Riches, and sumptuousness
of building, and what more imports, for its observance in Religion, antecedes
all the other Monasteries of Italy The Friars Benedictines have possessed it
for 200 years, from whom have issued many Religious, filled with sanctity, good
doctrine, and grave customs. Its possessions traverse a great space of ground,
and from the privileges of Pope Pasquale the second, we may collect they had
dominion in spirituals and temporals, over the Towns Guernelo and Quistello,
with 38. parish Churches in the Diocese of Mantoua, Luca, Bologna, Ferrara,
Parma, Malamocco, and Chioza, The most illustrious Countess Matilda, (whom none
comes near for her signal benefits conferred on the Roman Church) being 69.
years old here finished her days, in the year 1161. and was laid in a Marble
Sepulcher in the Chapel of the blessed Virgin, which being opened 320. years
after, her body was found unperisht and untouched, her Effigies upon a Mare
(like unto a man) stands upon her Tomb, in a long red Gown, and a Pomgranade
in her hand, where among her other Epitaphs, this old one may be read. Stirpe,
opibus, forma, gestis, and nomine quondam
Inclyta Mathildus, hic jacet astra tenens.


In that part of the Monastery where now is the common Kitchen below, and
Graneries above, was the Palace of Matilda; It has as much Land as 382. yoke
of Oxen can till. It has a Rampart goes round a great part of its Lands about,
7 miles long, which cost in raising above 27000. Crowns, which in Anno 1560.
was made in a few months to stop the inundations of the Poe.

Two miles beyond Mantoua at the mouth of the River Mincio, which issues from
the Lake, and goes to Ferrara, stands the Bourge Ande now called Pietole, where
Virgil was born, beyond that Hostia, and Roveredo, and then Lago Scuro; where
you imbark for Venice; hence after three miles travail you arrive at Ferrara.

FERRARA.
THis City is seated on the Banks of the Poe, which washes it on the East and
South parts; it is garnished with stately and sump tuous structures, and spacious
and noble Piazzaes which was first paved with brick, by the Marquess Lionello,
filled with noble Families and rich Citizens, and it is moreover famous for the
University here established by the Emperor Frederick the second, in despite of
the Bolonians. And although this City cannot boast its antiquity from the
Trojans, Grecians or Romans (being not a thousand years since it was walled by
order of the Emperor Mauritius) yet through the diligence and love of its
Princes, it is so increased in Edifices and Riches, that it has deserved a place
amongst the chief Cities of Italy, which increase happened under the
Illustrious Family of Este, Giulio Caesar della Scala a famous Poet commends
Ferrara thus. Inclyta quae patulo fruitur Ferraria coelo,
Reginas rerum limine ditat aquas;
Aurea nobilitat, studiorum nobilis ocii
Ingenia, audaci pectora prompta majus,
Magnanimique Duces, genus alto e sanguine Divum.


And this shall suffice touching Ferraras antiquity, which in the year 1598.
came into the power and patrimony of S. Petre, by the industry and pains of
Pope Clement the eighth.

In the Duomo lies Pope Urban the 8th. in a sumptuous Marble monument, near
which one may read of the learned Man Gregorio Geraldo, what ensues, viz. Quid
hospes adstas? tymbion
Vides Gyraldi Lilii,
Fortunae ntramque paginam
Qui pertulit, sed pessimae
Est usus, altera nihil
Opte ferente Apolline.
Nil scire refert amplius
Tua aut sua, in tuam rem abi.
Lil. Greg. Giraldus Prothon. Apostol. mortalitatis memor
Anno 72. V. S. P. Cur. 1550.


In the Church of Laint Domenick, near the Gate, is a stately Tomb with this
inscription. D. M. Nicolao Leoniceno Vicentino, qui sibi Ferrariam patriam
maluit, ubi annos 60. Italos, and provinciales magna celebritate Graece, and
Latin instituit, continua serie apud Principes Estenses magno in honor
habitus, Unus omnium magis pectore, quam lingua philosophiam professus rerum
naturae abditissimarum experientissimus, qui primus herbariam been desitam, and
sylvam rei medicae injuria temporum negligenter habitam in dispositionem magna
open mortalium revocavit, in barbaros conditores pertinaciter stylum
perstrinxit, and studio veritatis, cum omni antiquitate acerrime depugnavit,
annos natus sex and nonaginta, cum jam aeternis monumentis in arcem
immortalitatis sibi gradum fecisset, homo esse defiit Alphonsus Estensis, Dux
Tertius, and S. P. Q. Ferrariens. benemerito posuere, sexto idus Junii. M. D.
XXIV, Bonaventura Pistopholo grato ipsius discipulo pocurante.

In the noble Church of the Benedictines, upon a Column of the Prince of
Italian Poets, may be read thus. Ludovico Areosto Poetae Patritio Ferrariensi
Augustinus Mustus tanto viro, ac dese been meren. Tumulum, and Effigiem
marmoream, aere proprio P. C. Anno salutis M. D. LXXXIII. Alphonso Secondo
Duce, vixit annos 56. obiit anno sal. 1533. 8. Idus Junii.

And a little below, that of the composition of Lorenzo Frizoli. Hic Areostus
situs est, qui comico,
Aures sparsit Teatri Urbanos sale
Satyraque mores strinxit, acer improbos
Heroa culto, qui ferentem carmine,
Ducumque curas cecinit, ac praelia
Vales corona dignus unus triplici,
Cui trina constant, quae fuerevatibus
Gratiis, Latinis, vixque Hetruscis Singula.


In the Cloister of the Carmelites stands a Marble Tablet with a memorial of
Manardo thus. Jo. Manardo Ferrariensi viro uni omnium integerr. ac sanctis.
Philosopho, and Medic. doctis. qui ann. P. M. LX. continenter tum docendo, and
scribendo, tum innocentis. medendo omnem medicinam ex arce bonarum literar.
foede prolapsam, and in barbar. potestatem, ac ditionem redactam prostratis, ac
profligatis hostium copiis identidem, ut Hydra renascentibus in antiquum
pristinumque statum, ac nitorem stituit. Lauream omnium bonorum consensu
adeptus IIII. and LXX. ann. agens omnibus omnium ordinum sui desiderium
relinquens humilise hoc sarcophago condijussit. Julia Marandauxor. moestiss.
quod ab eo optabat posuit Haec brevis exuvias magni capit urna Manardi Nam
virtus late docta per ora volat. Men's pia cum superis caeli colit aurea templa
Hinc hospes vitae sint documenta tuae. M. D. XXXVI. Men. Mart.

The Journey from FERRARA to VENICE.
CHIOZA.
PArting from Ferrara five miles upon the Poe, stands Francolino, where
embarking, and passing by the several Towns Ronigo, Papoza, Corbola, and
Arriano, you embark on the Sea, near the Port Goro, whence coasting the Land
Northward, you shall arrive at Chioza a City which has a good Port, The
people consist for the most part of Mariners Fishermen, and good Gardiners.
Chioza is famous for the deeds of Arms performed there between the Genovesi,
and the Venetians and was much increased by the people of Este and Monselice,
who fled thither to to save themselves at the inroade of the Hunns In the time
of Ordelafo Faliero, Duke of Venice, the Bishopric of the City Malimacco,
(overflowed by the Sea) was transferred thither, and for that cause it was
created a City. On the East part of Chioza in the Sea lies a Ridge of Sand in
the Sea in the nature of a Rampart pose to oppose the fury of the Adriatic
Sea, 30 miles long from South to North. It Is almost incredible what vast
quantities of Commodities are extracted from it to Venice, which are there
produced by the ingenuity of the Gardiners, the fertility of the Soil, and the
natural Orchards full of greens whereof and of gardens it most consists, which
are ordered exactly well. From Chioza sailing South ward you se Ancona, Pesaro,
Rimini, Cesenna, and Ravenna, but going by Land, discover many Ports, as Goro,
Bebe, Volano, Magnavacca, Primano, and Brondolo:

From Chioza to Venice are 20. miles, in which space stands Malomocco, an
Island heretofore enobled by the Duke of Venice his Residence, there is the
Porto Malomocco, which through its profundity is rendered dangerous. And also
Poveggia, now an uninhabited Island, but at the first Venetians planting,
well-peopled, in it still remains a miraculous Crucifix, together with many
other small Islands, Monasteries, Hospitals, Orchards, and Gardens, between
which lies the most noble City Venice, who scarce finds a Parallel.

The Journey from FERRARA to RAVENNA, and to RIMINI.
IN the Suburbs of Ferrara toward Ostro the Poe being past by a certain long
Bridge of Wood, stands the Church of S. Gregorio, wherein the Body of S.
Maurelio first Bishop of Ferrara, is carefully laid up. Here the Poe parts
with a great Arm, which having bathed the great Level, runs by Mejaro,
Mejarino, and other places into the Adriatic Sea; But the greater Chanel runs
Southward, and at 8. miles distance has on its Banks the Bourg Argenta, so
named from from the quantity of Sylver which every so many years, it paid to
the Church of Ravenna, on its right hand are many deep Trenches filled with
good fish.

Three miles beyond Argenta stood Bastia, a Fort (now demolished) where the
Armies of Pope Giulius the second, and Alphonso first Duke of Ferrara, fought a
sharp Battle. Ten miles beyond it lies Lugo a noble Town, Bagnac avollo, a
Bourg, and Cotignana the native Country of the Sforzeschan Princes, Babiano,
Mazolino, Imola, and Faenza with others.

On the left side of the Poe, are fertile Fields, and a Palace of the Prince of
Este, so large and well furnished, that it may give a reception to a great
King. In this neighborhood were anciently twelve large Towns: whose
inhabitants by one unanimous consent built Ferrara.

Pursuing the Poe for twenty miles, lie many fair and pleasant Towns, as
Longastino and Filo, so called for that there the Poe, runs for six miles as
strait as a thread or line. San Alberto, and Priniaro where the Poe runs into
the Sea, from Sant Alberto looking Northward you may see Comacchio, near the
Sea shore, with a Lake or standing Pool round it, wherein they take vast
quantities of Mullets, and Eeles, some weighing 30. pound, Comacchio was
anciently a famous City, but now it is near destroyed by the waters, hereabouts
also lies the Abbacy of Pomposa. On the left of Saint Albergo, are Fenny
Fields, wherein to this day may be seen the Fossa Messanitia, made by our
Ancestors, but now it is a narrow Chanel to navigate to Ravenua, in small Barks,
it formerly run 50. miles navigable, and was called Padusa.

RAVENNA.
THis City is more memorable for its antiquity than fair building being first
built by the Thessalonians, who being perplexed and molested by the Ombrians,
and Sabines, voluntarily gave it them up* and returned into Greece, but the
Ombrians were thence driven by the French, and they by the Romans, under whom
it remained till they with the Heruli took the Country Odouacre, but then they
were driven out by the Ostrogoths, under Theodorick their King who made it his
Regal Seat, under whom it remained 70. years, and then they were beaten out by
Narsete, Prefect of Justinian the Emperor, under the Title of Exarchi, after
whom 17. more Exarchi governed it 170. years, who were all that time held in
continual skirmishes with the Longobardi, who were called into Italy by
Narsete, against the said Emperor of Constantinople. For Narsete being accused
to Giustino, Successor to Justinian, for some crime, whereat Giustino was
offended which backed with the instigation of the Emperors wife, caused the
Emperor to send another to be Exarche in his Room, who being exasperated
against the Emperor for it, invited in the Longobardi against the Empire, by
whose hands the Exarcate of Italy was extinct. This Exarche was in the nature
of a King, having plenary Jurisdiction in all things without appeal: Astolfo
some time after being overcome by Pipino King of the French, gave up Ravenna to
the Church of Rome, but Desiderius successor to Astolfo, not regarding his
Faith after the retreat of Pipin with the French Army, possessed himself again
of Ravenna and other Towns, but the Emperor Charles the Great returning into
Italy with the French Army, overcame and took him Prisoner, when the Longobardi
were forced to quit Italy altogether, so that it has suffered many disgraces,
and was afterward sacked by the French, and destroyed by civil discord.

Strabo says that in his time Ravenna stood upon certain Piles driven into the
Fennes, and that the water passed under it, so that no coming was to it but by
Bridges or Boats, and when the waters were high, then the people were forced to
get up into the upper Rooms, yet for all that it was healthful, as Alexandria in
Egypt, but now the Waters are so dried up that the Fenns are become Excellent
Meadows, Pastures, and Corn Grouuds, many Historians agree that it was much
beautified by Augustus Caesar, accommodating it with a great Bridge, and
erecting the high Tower called Faro, where he encamped an Army for defense of
the Gulfs and lodged the Soldiers in the midst of the City, in a form like a
Castle, which afterward was called the Fortezza of Ravenna, it had another
Fort called Cesarea, with Walls and Bastions, which strongly fortifyed the Port
of Ravenna, but at present neither the Ports nor Forts appear, only some
certain old Churches and Monasteries of little moment. On the Porta Speriosa,
for its structure, and good Marble called Aurea, is this Title. TI. CLAUDIUS.
DRUSI. F. CAESAR. AUG. GERMANICUS. PONT. MAX. TR. POT. COS. II. DES. III. IMP.
III. P. P. DEDIT.

Whence it is supposed that the Emperor Claudius fortifyed Ravenna with Walls
and a new Port, Biondo affirms, that Ravenna was amplified by Placida Galla,
sister of Arcadio, and Honorius the Emperors, and by her Sons Valentiniano,
and Tiberio, also Theodrick King of the Goths, beautified it with stately
edifices, and enriched it with the spoil of the other Provinces, as appears by
those Churches, Palaces, and other structures raised by him and his successors,
and yet extant.

In Ravenna near the Piazza Santa Maria stands a great Convent, and in it the
magnificent Tomb of Dante Algieri, erected to him by Bernardo Bembo the
Venetian Podesta in Ravenna, with this Inscription by the said Bembo. Exiguo
tumulo Danthes, hic sort jacebas
Squallenti nulli cognito pene situ,
At nunc marmoreo subnixus conderis arcu,
Omnibus and cultu splendidiore nites,
Nimirum Bembus Musis incensus Hetruscis
Hoc tibi, quem in primi hae coluere, didit.


And with this other Inscription which the said Dante near his death composed.
Iura Monarchiae, superos Phlegetonta, lacusque
Lustrando cecini, voluerunt Fata quousque
Sed qua pars cesset meliorib. hospita castris,
Actorumque suum petiit faelicior astris,
Hic claudor Danthes patriis extortis ab oris,
Quem genuit parui Florentia matter amoris.


The biggest Church of Ravenna, is the Archbishops, upon whose high Altar was
formerly sustained a massy Silver heaven or canopy on four Pillars, which was
worth 30000. Crowns, with excellent ornaments wrought with Gold, all which were
taken away by the sacriligious people of Lewis the 12th. King of France, when
without any difference he sacked this City, for which they afterward received
from the most high condign punishment, being most of them cut in pieces, or
forced to leap into the Poe, or Tesino, where they drowned themselves. In a
Semicircular Chapel, are Limned those first Archbishops of Ravenna (elected by
the showing of a Dove) in Mosaic work, a fair piece, whose election was after
this manner.

Sant Apollinare (believed one of the 72 Disciples of Christ, then ascended
into Heaven,) departing from Antiochia, with Saint Peter togo to Rome, had in
his passage taught the Christian Faith at Ravenna, and afterward stayed there
to govern it, whom none of the Disciples by him left judged themselves sit to
succeed to govern that Church where fore all of them together withdrew
themselves into a Temple to pray to God to demonstrate to w^h of them it would
please his Divine Majesty to commit that care, whereat the holy Spirit in the
form of a Dove descended upon the head of one, who was understood by it to be
elected by God to that Dignity, after which manner eleaven Archbishops were
successively chosen. And the Casement, whereat the Dove entered is yet apparent
though half shut, over the Arch of the high Altar in the Church of Spirito
Santo in this City, in which Church on the left hand is a heap of Bricks, near
which in a Corner stood Severus a mean person and a simple Man, upon whose head
the holy Spirit descended visible to all, he being the last of the eleaven.

It Is worth ones pains to view the Church of Saint Apollinare, called the golden
heaven, built most sumptuously by Theodorick, King of the Ostrogoths, it has
two ranks of most noble great Columns, brought hither by that King from
Constantinople, and is garnished with many precious Marbles, extracted from
Rome, and other places of Italy, and also some other Churches.

In Ravenna are many antiquities, Epitaphs, and ancient Memorials, whose
Letters and words require a University of Interpreters. The ruins of a stately
Palace (supposed King Theoricks) appear yet in the midst of its Fountain is a
statue of Hercules Horarius, not elsewhere found. Hercules stands like an
Atlas, bending with his left knee as ready to rise, who with his two hands
elevated and his head together supports a Solar Horologe, whereon the shadow of
the needle from the Sun shows the hour of the day. A like statue of Hercules
was found in Rome in the Vineyard of Steffano del Buffalo, which instead of the
Horologe supported a round Globe with the Celestial Signs, distinctly figured,
but this difference is not of any great moment, nearly weighing the
Signification of the thing for the knowledge of the hour arose from the
observation of the Celestial motion, and it is the Sun distinguishes the hour,
who by his annual course visites the whole Cirk of the Firmament, which has
caused some to conjecture, that Hercules signifies the Sun, and that the 12
labors counted as of a Man's, is the Ingress of the Sun through the twelve
Signs in the circuit of the skies, whereby the Sun of it selfcasts forth its
beams, persuing which Opinion, misteriously though with somewhat accult sense
they apply to the sun all the other Fables of Hercules, which are two tedious
here to be applied, let it suffice to have spoken so much to the purpose, of
that statue, to rouse up our youth into a more near Scrutiny of the sense of
the Fables of the ancients, from the knowledge wherein may be extracted many
natural secrets, hid under those their sayings and Fables.

Before Ravenna stands a most ancient round Church of the blessed Virgin, being
so fair and large, that the inward circle is 25. foot in diametre: The walls
are finely wrought, and all the pavement is laid with small stones of various
colors, disposed into diverse pleasing figures after the Mosaic work, the
Roofis of one squared entire hard stone hollowed, in the midst whereof is the
Cupola, whereby the light penetrates, it is scarce imaginable how or by what Art
so great a stone could be mounted so high, nor where had the Edge or Plate on
the Walls at top as near as can be guessed are about 35 foot in circuit, above
the said Edge on the top four fair Collumns in former times sustained the noble
Sepulcher of Theodorick King of the Ostrogothes, of Porphire, specled with
white, being one entire stone eight foot long, and four foot high, with a cover
of Brass figured and wrought to admiration with gold and othergarnishments,
which Tomb it is supposed Amalesunta his Daughter erected, but in the time of
the French war, the wicked Soldiers of Lewis the 12th. King of France, with
hopes of some great booty within, drew it down and broke it, whereof some
Relics yet remain.

Three miles forth the City in the way to Forli, runs the River Ronco, on the
Bank whereof stands a Cross of stone, in testimony that in the year 1512.
Gastone de Fois Captain of the French Army, there obtained a victory with the
loss of his own life, for that being too fiercly bent against his enemies. he
advanced two forward with very few in full speed of his Horse, and of a sudden
was dead, in which battle dyed that day eighteen thousand Soldiers, between
French, Spaniards, Italians, Germans and Switzers.

CERVIA.
NEar Ravenna lies that notable Wood called Pigneda, from the infinite number
of Pyne trees there growing, whose Fruit supply all Italy. Some miles beyond
which stands Cervia, a City, but ill peopled by reason of the malignant air,
all whose Inhabitants are such as get a livelihood by making Salt, with
Saltwater dried in the Sun, whereof they make such quantity, that white Salt
lies in Mountains. In it is naught worth noting, unless the model of so old a
City, built merely for necessity. The Cathedral Church, although it has a good
revenue, seems but a Church of a Villa near it lies a Tomb of Marble, in form
of a Pyramide, with two lovely Children carved at the foot of it. After it had
been under several Lords in Anno 1527. it became a part of the Church Patrimony
and so continues.

Whence you must pass the River Savio in whose Port Caesar Octavianus prepared
a great Armada, and then to the River Pistatello formerly called Rubicone,
famous not only for that the Romans made it the bound of two Provinces, calling
the one toward Rome, Italia, and the other toward the Alps, Gallia
Cisalpina, and commanded that no Commander of what quality soever, should
presume to pass that River toward Rome with armed Soldiers; but also for that
Julius Caesar afterward (against the determination of the Senate and people of
Rome) conducted his Army over that River toward Rome, where he first consulted
by reason of the dangerous consequence might ensue so rash a Deed, and in the
end resolved and passed saying, Eatur quo Deorum ostenta, and inimicorum
iniquitas vocant, Iacta sit alea: and upon his demurr, there he saw certain
Birds fly, called Augurii which (to his Judgment) seemed to invite him to
transport those Soldiers he had commanded in France, to commence a War against
Rome his Mother and Country.

Travailing from Ravenna to Rimini, on one hand lies the Sea, and on the other
fertile and pleasant Fields, the Via Flaminia, and Alps, at whose Feet stands
the stately City Forli.

FORLI.
It Is believed, that (after Asdrubal was slain by the Roman Consul Livio
Salinatore then united with Claudius Nero) certain old Soldiers built a Castle
and called it Livio, in honor of the said Livius the Consul, a mile and
halfe's distance from where Forli now stands, but because in the Via Maestra,
there was a fair Town wherein they made their Mart for Merchandise, and Seat of
Judicature, for that cause called Foro, they say that the Inhabitants of Livio,
after some time cousidering that it was more comodious to inhabit the said Town
than their Castle Livio, agreed with the Towns* men to cohabite together, and
accordingly by Common consent, with leave of Augustas, which was easily
obtained through the mediation of Livia his consort, and Cornelio Gallo a
Liviese, they conjoined those two names, Foro and Livio, and for brevity called
the place Forli, which in Latin by the name clearly appears being called forum
Livii, which union was made in the time that our Lord Christ was being on the
Earth, and 208. years after, the first foundation of the Castle Livio, Forli is
placed between the Rivers Ronco and Montone, enjoyes a delicate air with a most
fertile Country, in Wines, Oils, Corn, and Fruit together with Coriander, seed,
Anniseed, Cuminseed, and Woad in great abundance.

The men of Forli are for the most part gallant beyond measure, and retains the
martial disposition of their first Founders. It was a long time subject to the
Romans, after them to the Bolonians, and because four Bolonians banished out of
Bolonia, were courteously entertained in Forli, the Bolonians raised a great
Army against them, but in a Battle received such an overthrow by the Forlesi,
that they never could raise their heads after it, whereby the Bolonians power
being abated. the Forlesi yielded themselves up to the Roman Church, from whom
afterward revolting Martin the 4th. dismantled it, and threw down the Walls,
consigning it to the Family Monfredi, from whom it passed to the Ordelasi, who
again Walled it round, but Sistus the 4th. gave it to Giorlamo Biario Savonese,
whom Caesar Borgia Son of Alexander the 6th. expelled and and took it by force
of Arms, but at last in the time of Giulius the second, it again returned to
the Church under whom to this day, it continnes in peace and fidelity, it has
yielded many learned and brave men, as Guidon Bonato, Rainiero, Biondi, and
others.

BRITTONORO.
ABove Forli stands Brittonoro, called in Latin Forum Trijarinorum, this City
is built upon a hill, and above it has a strong Fort fatal to Frederick the
second, it was a Town, but created a City at the instance of Egidius Carrilla a
Spanish Cardinal, and Legate of Italy, who having destroyed Forlimpopoli,
transferred thence his Episcopal Seat, to Brittonoro, in Anno 137. it
participates a most happy Air, and rich Country, in Olives, Figgs, Vynes,
Fruitful Trees, and good Waters. It has one place erected intentionally for a
prospect, where you have a full view of the Adriatic Sea, of Dalmatia,
Croatia, Venetia, and all Romagna, at one instant; Barbarossa the Emperor, at
the instance of Pope Alexander the third, being reconciled to the Venetians,
for this beautiful prospects sake requested Brittonora, of the Pope for his
habitation, but the Pope perpending the constant fidelity of this People to the
Sea of Rome, prevayled with the Emperor by fair words, not to take from the
Churches government, a place that in all occasions had demonstrated so sincere
a Faith to it, and so it continued under it till Alexander the 6th. consigned
it to Caesar Borgio, his Son, after whom the civil discords had almost
destroyed it, its Inhabitants being so prone to Arms that they know not how to
live in Peace, Finally Clement the seventh, consigned it to the Family Pii,
who yet enjoy it.

FORIMPOPOLI.
A Mile and half from Brittonoro, on the Via Emilia stand Forlimpopoli, called
in Latin Forum Popilii, which is one of the four Fori recorded in Pliny, on
the Via Emilia. It Was a City, but in the year 700. Vitaliano being Pope,
Griomaldo King of the Longobardi, secretly entered it on the Sabbath day, when
all the People with the Bishop were at Divine Service, and slew all the Males
and Females, which done he sacked the City, and levelled it with the ground. It
was afterward renewed by the Forlinesi, and again destroyed by Egiddio Carilla
the Popes Legate dwelling in Avignone, who in the year 1370. plowed it and
sowed it with salt for its utter extirpation, transfer^ng the Episcopal Seat to
Brittonoro as afore*aid, twenty years after which Sinibaldo Ordelafo Lord of
Forli, repaired it, and built the formidable Castle now there. It enjoyes a
good air, fertile Fields, and a great Ferry affording ample profit. Bofello a
most holy man of of stupenduous miracles, was its Bishop, in the Catalogue of
Saints, whose holy bones now lie in the Church called Santa Lucia, Antonel lo
Armuzzo with his Sons Meleagro, and Brunoro, much honored this Country, who by
his Genius and strength from a mean person acquired the dignity of being
Captain, of the Popes Cavalry.

SARSINA.
NEar Forlumpopoli is seated the City Sarsino, at the foot of the Appenines,
whose Citizens furnished 20000. Armed Soldiers in supply to the Romans against
the French, when they made a most furious eruption over the Alps into Italy,
Its air is healthful, and Territory abounds with Olivs; Vines and other
fruitful Trees. It continued a long time under Malatesti, but when Rimini
became subject to the Church Sarsina yielded with it afterward, Leo the 10th.
bestowed it on the house of Pii, this City gave birth to Vicino Bishop of
Liguria a most holy man, and famous for working miracles, which property his
body (lying in the Cathedral Church) yet retains, in operation over such
persous as were oppressed with evil spirits lie expelling them. As also to
Plautus that ancient and famous Comic Latin Poet, who (it is commonly held for
truth) wrought here at the Bake-house, as a Baker for a livelihood, and when
he had any spare time, he composed his Comedies, and sold them, the better to
supply his necessities. Which Opinion Eusebius also confirms.

CESENA.
CEsena lies at the foot of a Hill near the River Savio, which so rapidly runs
by it down from the Apenines that it overflows and infests, many grounds,
before it runs into the Sea. This City has a strong Citadel upon the hill
adjoining to the heart of the City by means of a Pyle, built by Frederick the
second Emperor now near ruined. It Is worth ones pains to see the Church, where
on the roof hangs a piece of a poudered Hog, nailed to it in remembrance of a
Miracle wrought thus. San Pietro the Martyr, caused the Convent of Saint
Domenick to be built, in the time of whose strncture, craving Alms for the
Love of God, it happened that this piece of the Poudred Hoggs flesh was
bestowed on him, whereof he gave and fed the Workmen and Laborers till the
said Convent was finished, and still there remained that which now hangs up
there, for that what ever the Saint cut off, grew and increased day by day in
the same manner and quantity, as in its first state, as if it had not been at
all touched or diminished. It abounds with excellent wines and all other
necessaries. Its original is not known, yet it was ever and is still well
peopled. It was under the Emperors, the Church, the Bolonians, the Ordolasi,
Mighardo di Sussenna, and the Malatesti, the last of whom Malatesto Novello,
collected a stately Library, not now so despicable also to be passed without a
view, in the Monastery of Saint Fraucis, who surrendered the City to the Church
from whom it was wrested by Caesar Borgio called Duke Valentino Son of Alexander
the 6th. and from him it once more returned in obedtence to the Church, and so
continued in quiet ever since; on the Mount near it is a Church called Maria
del Monte Cesena, where the Benedictines serve.

RIMINI.
THe number of Antiquities through this City show it very ancient: It Was
beautifyed diverse times by Augustus Caesar, and the succeeding Emperors, with
sumptuous Fabrics, whereof the relics yet remaining give asussicient
testimony many Historians relate, that it was made a Colony of the Romans before
the first Punick War, together with Benevento, Publius Sempronius Sofo, and
Appius Claudius, Son of the Blind, being Consuls, which was 485 years after the
foundation of Rome. After which it was held and inhabited by the Romans, as a
Fortezza in those Confines against the French, and there most of the Roman
Commanders (designed with Armies to foreign Countries) were wont to make their
Rendezvous, signifying to their People, what day they should there render
themselves, as Livy more plainly sets down. It Was called Rimini from the River
Rimini which washes it. The Picenti first justly held it, but they were
overcome by Appius Claudius who triumphed for it, and dilated the Empire from
Esino, or Fiumef^no to the River Pissatello. It Is seated in a most fertile
Plain, having on the East and West parts of it excellent plow-Lands, on the
South great plenty of Gardens, Orchards, OliveWoods, and Vineyards upon the
hills of the Apenine Mountains, and on the North the Adriatic Sea, all which
as twere in emulation strive which shall exceed the other in affording of
necessaries and delicacies of all sorts to its Inhabitants.

It Is a comodious and fair City, replenished with structures alla Mo derna, in
the Piazza is a glorious fountain sprouting sweet and clear waters through
several pipes. Toward the Sea are some Relics of a stately Theater; over the
River Arimino stands a Bridge built with large square Marble stones by
Augustus, which conjoins the Via Flaminia, to the Via Emilia, and the City to
the Suburb, which is 200. foot long in 5. Arches, and 15. broad, whose sides
are wrought in Dorick structure, upon one of which is inscribed the Titles of
Augustus Caesar, and on another those of Tiberius Caesar, whence we compute
this Bridge was finished 778. years after the foundation of Rome, C. Calvisius,
and Gn. Lentulus than Consuls, being begun by Augustus (who much labored to
beautify and accomodate the ViaFlaminia sparing no cost) and finished in the
days of Tiberius. Some part of the old Port appears yet but so inconfiderable,
that it can only receive small boats. But how great and magnificent this has
been, may be collected from that proud and stupendous structure, the Church
San Francesco, which was built by Sigismond Maltesta, Prince of this City, with
the Marble Stones haled out of the old Port.

At the Porta Orientale, leading to Pesaro, is a fair Marble Arch, erected
there in honor of Augustus Caesar, when having been seven times Consul, he
was elected for the eighth, he having fortified and adorned (by commission of
the Senate, and Will of the People of Rome) the five chief Roads of Italy, as
may be guessed, from those few legible fragments of carved Letters yet
remaining, whereby it appears that the Via Flaminia, was of great
consideration, Augustus having assumed to himself the care of accommodating
that Road from Rome to Rimini (as Suetonicus recounts) and given the charge of
accommodating the rest to certain illustrious Men, with order to dispose what
ever spoils they took from the Enemies, to that purpose. For a memorial of
which public benefit, are yetextant certain moneys or medals of Gold then
stamped with the Effigies of Augustus, with his titles on the one side, and on
the other an Arch with two Doors elevated over a Way, on the top whereof sits
Victory driving a triumphal Chariot, with these words, Quod viae munit^ sint,
which words declare the occasion of that great honor done to Caesar was for
his care and cost in amending the high Ways and public Roads. Of which Arch
now wholly destroyed, many Reliquesly on the Via Flaminia even to Rome.

But the shortest way to Rome, is to go over the Hills which ly Southward from
Rimini, where stands the Castle Fiore, to pass the River Isauro, thirty miles
whence is Urbino, and eight miles more is Acqualagna, there to enter the Via
Flam^nia, and travail to Umbria. In the Via Flaminia, on the right hand upon a
Hill is Verucchio, the first habitation of the Malatesta, to whom it was given
by Otho the Emperor, and higher in the Mountains is the Bourg S. Martino, in in
Latin Acer Mons, a noble rich and well-peopled Place. which has ever
preserved it self in full Liberty, nor was it ever conquered, which at a
distance looks like a confused heap of Mountains, without way or means to
ascend to. On the same way 15. miles off Rimini begins the Plain, which reaches
without obstacle of hill to the Alpi Cottie, which divide Italy from France,
this Plain is very spacious and fertile in all things, filled with Towns and
Villages on all sides. In view whereof lies Poggio, Imperial, at whose
foundatian Frederick the third Emperor laid the first stone, where the
Pictures of all the line of Austeria, are excellently delineated.

PESARO.
THis City was built by the Romans 119. years before the coming of Christ, near
the River Isaurus, whence with little alteration it took its name. Its Walls
and Bulwarks were begun by Francesco Maria del Rovere, and finished by Guidi
Baldo, his Son; it is beautifyed with stately structures for divine, public and
private Use, worth a view. Without the City is built the Princes Palace. In
Pesaro they hold certain Fairs whither resort Merchants from far Countries,
but in regard the Port is stopped so that none but small Boats may enter, they
carry their Merchandise on Asses and Mules. It Was made a Colony of the Romans
569. years after the foundation of Rome, Claudius Pulchrus and Lucius Porticus
Licinus being then Consuls, and among the rest sent thither to inhabit was L.
Acius the excellent Tragic Poet, born of Father and Mother that were
Libertines. Plutark (in the life of Antonius) records this City to have
received much damage by a Cleft or falling in of the Earth, after that M.
Antony had a second time conducted Romans to inhabit there, which was a short
time before that War, a wherein himself with Cleopatra were overcome by
Augustus. At the Palace of the Governor is a Magazine furnished with excellent
and various Arms.

From Pesaro you must go to Fano, and along the shore to Senigalia. Near the
Porta of Rimini is a Bridge over the River Foglia, which is the Confines of the
Provinces of Marcad' Aucona and Romagna. On the way appears Novellara Monte
Abate, Monte Barucio, and 15. other Towns Pesaro yields such store of the best
Figgs that they are there dried to transport over Italy, and are accounted
better than those from Sclavonia.

FANO.
THis City was so denominated from the Temple of Fortune here erected, which in
Latin is called Fanum. It stands on the Via Flaminia, in a good Soil, which
yields all sorts of Corn, Wine, and Oil, in great plenty. Many say Augustus
Caesar made it a Colony, conducting thither Roman People to inhabit, at that
time when he (as Suetonius writes) drew out of Rome 28. Colonies, and Pomponius
Mela says, that from the name of Julia Claesare, it was called Giulio Fanestre,
as may be also collected from certain old inscriptions there exta^ From the
Relics of the old Walls, and from the Arch placed over the Gate by which you
enter coming from Rome on the Via Flaminia, may be drawn, that it was begirt with
Walls by Augustus, and restored afterward by Costantio, and Costanto, Sonns of
the great Constantine.

The said Arch remained entire till the time of Pope Pius the second, and was
made with great Art, carved with figures and Letters, but was destroyed by the
Artillery in the War against the Farnesi, though for its remembrance a draught
of it was taken and carved on the Walls of the Church S. Michiele, at their
common charge, whereof, nor of any thing else of antiquity does ought entire
appear.

In its neighborhood beyond the River Metauro, are some places famons for the
Deeds of Arms there performed. For M. Livius, Salinato and ^laud. Nerone
Consuls overcame and slew Asdrubal Brother of Hannibal the Carthaginian, on the
Banks of the River, which made Hannibal despair of maintaining Carthage against
the Romans, seeing the head of his Brother carried at the head of the Roman
Army for his view whereby to render him cowardly. Somewhat beyond which place
is the Field where Totila King of the Goths was overcome by Narsete Evenucho,
the first Exarck and Legate of Justinian the Emperor, which victory wholly
freed Italy from the Government or rather Tyranny of the Goths, for that
Totila being mortally wounded fled thence to the Apenines (as Procopius in his
third Book of the Gothic history relates) and there dyed.

The Voyage or Journey from FANO to FVLIGNO by the VIA EMILIA
FOSSVMBRVNO.
TRavaling Westward from Fano appear many villages among the Mountains, and
then taking the Via Flaminia Southward on the right hand shore of the River
Metauro, you arrive at Fossumbruno, a City plaeed as twere in the midst of the
Plain between the Hill and the River. Its Frabricks are modern, by reason that
the old were wholly cast down by the Goths or Longobardi, In the biggest
Church remain some old Inscriptions, denoting its antiquity; from which City
pursuing the Journey you must pass the River Metauro by a wooden Bridge, then
entering the Via Flaminia, on each side passing by pleasant and fertile Fields,
you reach the River Candiano, near which lies the Hill Asdrubal, so denominated
from the overthrow there given Asdrubal by the abovenamed Consnls. Whence the
Via Flaminia, was paved by Augustus to Rome, half a miles length whereof was
out through a stony Rock with a Chizel, which is twelve paces broad, it is called
Forlo, Then were certain Letters inscribed, which age has worn out, yet their
sense remains, viz. That that noble and and laborious, work was performed by
Titus Vespasian, Candiano runs for three miles along the Hills, which passed,
lies a Plain, and 10. miles thence is Acqualagna, where dyed Totila, King of
the Goths overcome by Narsete as aforesaid, beyond which is the City Cagli,
and the Bourg Cariano, built out of the Ruins of the City Lucerla, heretofore
standing where now the Bridge is, but destroyed by Narsete, when the perfidious
Elenterio, arrogating to himself the Title of Emperor was discomfited* beyond
which is the height of the Alps which terminate the Province of Ancona, and
Senigaglia, Sigello and Galdo.

NOCERA.
LAstly upon one of the Apenines, stands Nocera, heretofore famous for the
Earthen Vessels there curiously made, now for the Abundance of the Wine called
Muscatello, at the foot of the Mountain whereon Nocera stands, is the Valley
Trinia, so named from the River Trinia, whereof Silius speaksthus, Triniaeque
inglorious humor, calling it un worthy among Rivers, for not being navigable.
The way through which Valley is very dangerous, beacuse of the necessity to wade
several times through the River, where sometimes the poor Travelers are
bemired, by reason that in the bottom there is a most stiff mudd, whereby they
are often drowned through their Ignorance of certain Whirl-pools, covered with
mudd, not easily to be avoided but by such as are well skilled in the passage.
The said vale is 12 miles long, and in it is Foligno.

The Journey from FANA to FOLIGNO and ROME, by a better but longer Way.
BEeyond Fano upon the Adriatic Sea, is Sinigaglia a famous and ancient City,
first called Sena, from the Senoni who built it. When the Senoni were driven
out by the Romans, they made it a Colony together with Castro and Hadria,
Dolabella being Consul, about the time that Italy was extended beyond the River
Ese, and the Duchy of Spoleto added to it. Titus Livius in his 27th. book
assures us that M. Livius Salinatorus the Consul quartered in Senigaglia when
Asdrubal was not above half a mile distant, overlooking all Italy and raising
in it great terror, when C. Nerone Colleague of Livy, withdrawing himself from
Basiloc^ta, with a flying Army of 6000. Foot and 1000. Horse, by a nights
march, conjoined himself with Livy, and the next morn the two Consuls cut in
pieces the Army of Asdrubal, and slew the said Captain, while he designed to
fly over the Metauro, as before declared.

ANCONA.
It Is a famous noble rich City, and has the most eminent Port in all Italy:
whence the Merchants out of Sclavonia, Greece, Dalmatia, and all Europe
frequent it. All Writers agree it had its foundation from the Siracusany,
flying from the Tyrany of Dionisius, It Is likely it became a Colony of the
Romans, 485. years after Romes building* when the Marchiani were overcome by
Publius Sempronius, the Consul, and the Confines of Italy enlarged. For then
it was necessary to place Roman People on those boundaries. It took its name from
Ancon in Greek which signifies an Elbow, in which form is its Port and Harbor
a secure Station for Ships. Many Writers (worthy belief) say, that in the time
of the Roman Empire it was a renowned City aed well Inhabited for the convenience
of the Harbor, and nobly restored by Trajan the Emperor with incredible
expense, whereof some Relics remain.

It has fair Fabrics, rich Merchandise, business, and People in good number.
It Is environed with Walls and Bulworks, there erected, at the charge of the
Popes to enable it with resistance against invasions a good part of the Walls
are yet of Marble, anciently it was all of Marble, the Port has strong Pillars
to fasten shipping to, and convenient descents to the Water, as also strong
Cranes for removing Goods into, and out of the Vessels. Some Medals are yet
extant stamped in honor of Trajane with the form of that Port, and a Neptune
Crowned in water before the Mouth of the Port, with the Rudder of a ship in
his right hand, and a Dolphin near. It has two chains wherewith they shut up
the entrance, therein are at all times Ships and Galleys of all sorts. There is
an Arch most stately, raised in honor of Trajane, in grateful acknowledgment
of that public benefit, his restoring the Port, by the Senate and People of
Rome, which Arch although dispoiled of those Ornaments, it formerly had, yet
(like the Picture of a fair Woman) it attracts the eyes of the beholders
raising wonder in them, moving the Fancy to consider the Art, beauty and
proportion of that Piece, from the great squares of Marble and degrees yet to
be seen, on all sides showing a most proportionate and beautiful appearance.

It Is of no small consideration: That all the Statues and other Ornaments, are
carved into, or inlaid in those great square stones, and not fixed outwardly,
which Squares too are so close connexed that it is impossible to put in the point
of a Knife between them, but looks as if twere one entire Rock, which shows
the skill and Art of the Artificer. On it is inscribed as follows. IMP.
CAESARI. DIVI. NERVAE. F. NERVAE. TRAIANO. OPTIMO. AVG. GERMANIC. DACI. CO.
PONT. MAX. TR. POT. XIX. IMP. IX. COS. VI. P. P. PROVIDENTISSIMO: PRINCIPI.
SENATVS. P. Q. R. QVOD. AC* CESSVM. ITALIAE. HOC. ETIAM. ADDITO. EX. PECVNIA.
SVA. PORTV. TVTIOREM. NAVIGANTIBVS. REDDIDERIT. On the Right Hand. PLOTINAE.
AVG. CONIVGI. AVG. On the Left Hand. DIVAE. M*ARCINAE. SORORI. AVG. Thereby we
see that Divine honors were then given to Trajan and his Sister.

It Is not ill spent time neither to ascend the Mount Ancona, and behold its
Rarities, which is the promontory Cumero, where first is the ancient Cathedral
Church Saint Ciriaro, of admirable Architecture, and curious Marbles, in its
Vestry are infinite Relics of Saints, and offirings of great value presented
for devotion. One may gather from some verses of Iuvenal that not far distant
was dedicate a Temple to Venus but no thing now remains of it. From that height
may be seen a large space of Sea, the bending of the Port, the placing of the
City and the site of the Promontory it self, so con-joyned with the Appenines,
that some say it appears their head, but others more rationally its Arm,
reaching hence to Mount Angelo, all along a shore of the Adriatic Sea. As also
many near Cities, Castles, and Burges, as Sirolo celebrious for the good Wine
called Anconitana, by Pliny, Orbino, Osimo, and others.

Upon a Mount near the River Musone, stands Cingola a Castle built by Titus
Labienus, out of the many robaries committed by him, while he was Ambassador of
C. Caesar and Proconsul in Gallia in that long War. The shape of which Castle
we find engraven upon certain pieces of silver and gold with his Titles, of
whose so great Riches, Cicero Silius, Valerius, Max. and Dion. speak
scornfully invectively, and bitterly, but now to our Voyage.

The holy house of LORETO.
FIfteen miles being passed you find placed upon a hill the famous Church of
the Virgin Maria de Loreto, visited from all parts of the World by Pilgrims,
either through penance enjoined thereto, or their own vows or devotion, It Is
called Loreto, for that in ancient timestood near it a Wood of Laurels. Some
will have, that in the same place viz the Mount, stood the Castle Cupra of the
Tuscans with the antique Temple of Juno Caprana now it is a Town but yet envroned
with Walls, Ditches, Fortresses, and Arms in readiness, to defend it self from
the violence and snares of the Corsari, banished Persons, Robers and other
wicked Men, whereby the Inhabitants live securely and are well proviin all
things for the receipt of strangers. It Is a most stately Church, built with
squared Stones of excellent Marble of great cost, in the midst whereof the
Pilgrims visit that most holy Chamber of the Virgin Mary with a great
devotion, which is compassed in with a surrounding square of Marbles engraven
and wrought with figures of admirable artifice, but so placed that it touches
not the Walls thereof in any part, and it is credibly held, that those Walls
within which the Queen of Heaven was born and brought up, ought not to be more
wrought or adorned by human industry. This Chamber was brought hither from
Palestina by Angels, and he is pronounced an Infidel that doubts thereof.
having so many grave Authors and daily Miracles to prove it.

The great quantity of Tablets, Offerings, and Presents, hung upon the Walls,
Pillars, and Cornishes of the Church, at the first entrance will raise a
certain proness to honor the place in the most obdurat heart. There it clearly
appears how great and inspeakable signs the most great God shows of his Power
for the Salvation of human kind, by granting all the prayers of such as with a
devout and sincere heart seek him, etc.

The infinite Miracles wrought there, show that God will be sought in one place
more than another, in the Church hang many pourtraies of human misery (as in a
theater) which notwithstanding our merciful God conduces to a good end, as
particularly by diverse accidents by Water, evil Times, Shipwracks, Thunderbolts
Earthquakes Destructions, Precipitous falls, braking of bones, Sicknesses,
diseases, Plague, Slaughters, Robberies, Prisons, Torments, hunger, Want, and
many others, which a hundred tongues can hardly explicate as Virgil says.

With which afflictions God is pleased to exercise his Children, to express
his Clemency more than his Justice, that by it we may more truly prepare our
hearts and our Souls worthy for his habitation, and for our eternal bliss.

In this Church are many rare and precious gifts of several Princes, dedicated
to the Virgin Mary, in the Vestry are kept the Vests, Vessels of Gold and
Silver and other Riches of immense value, and about the Chnrch are many Tablets
of Verses in praise of the Church.

The Nobleness and Magnificence of the Church of LORETO, compendiously drawn
out of the five Books of Floratio Torsellino a Jesuist.
ALthough no day passes wherein the Cel of the holy Virgin is not visited by
many strangers, as well Poles, Spaniards, Germans, Portugals, and other
Oltramontaneous and Oltramarine Nations as Italians) yet there are two seasons
in the year, when there is exceeding concourse to wit, Spring and Autumn. In
the Spring begins the solemnity, the day of the Conception of our Lord, and in
Autumn the day of the birth of our Lady, and each solemnity continues for 3.
Months, wherein each day the house of Loreto is repaired to by great
multitudes of people, the greater part whereof go in companies with their
Ensigns, having carried before them a Crucifix with the Images of Saints.
Every Company has its own governors and Priests who sing, and the Donatives
offered follow, which are of more or less value according to the quality of
the Persons and their Devotions, which method of going and singing prayers and
praises to God, excites great piety in the Pilgrims, and people who follow
(though not in order) in infinite multitudes. When at a distance the Companies
begin to see the Church (which is seated on a hill above the Fields) they
internally are moved to devotion, and cast themselves upon the ground weeping
for joy, saluting the Mother of God, and then pursue their journey, some
renting their garments and putting on sackcloth, others beating themselves, and
being beaten by others with many stripes on the nakedshoulders. In the mean
time the Priests of Loreto, go to meet these Companies, introducing them into
the Church, with solemn music, Trumpets, and Bells, when they approach the
door the Companies again fall flat on the ground saluting the Virgin from the
bottom of their hearts, with such zeal, that the beholders are moved to tears.

Arrived at the Chamber of the Virgin, which shines most clear by the many
lights brought in their hands, they contemplate the Effigies of the Madonna,
with such Piety, Tears, Sighs, and humility, as is wonderful, and many affix
them selves so much to consider the place and Actions which the Mother of
Christ there performed, that were they not driven out by other companies who
overtake them, they would never remove thence, but such as come from far
Countries, not being able to preserve the order of Companies, resort thither in
the best manner they can, the most part if not all communicate there, and leave
their offerings at the Altar, but the most precious offerings are consigned to
the deputies, whose charge is to set them and the givers names down in a Book,
for perpetual remembrance. The Altar erected by the Apostles, and the effigies
of the Virgin Mary, are always clothed from time to time with sumptuous
garments, and ornaments of great value both in Gold and Jemms.

The Church is always full with wax lights and Lamps burning, resounding with
music and Organs, but what more imports it is filled with the Spirit of God,
which terrifies the bad, rejoices the good, heals the infirm, and works
stupendous miracles. The number of the Pilgrims at Easter uses to be 12000.
and at the Penticost and nativity of the Virgin not much inferior if not more,
there has been the day of the said Nativity in our times, and the day
following above two hundred thousand Persons which has necessitated the
intendents, to make a rail round about the Cel whereby to exclude and admit
whom they think fit, that they may not be oppressed by Multitude. Moreover
because in all times the Companies of Soldiers intending for the Wars resort
thither first to confess and communicate, the Road is so well accommodated with
Inns and houses of Reception, that any Person though delicate and weak, may
make the journey on foot, besides that the continual concourse of fresh
companies to and fro, renders the way less heavy; this convenience invited M.
Antonio Colonna (not to speak of others) a famous, rich, and great Commander,
to take that Journey on foot. These Companies having seen the countenance of
the Virgin, rejoice spiritually, and commonly acknowledge they have gathered
great benefit from the Pilgrimage though difficult. Were it not too long and
difficult twere worth ones pains to recount the vows there made, and rendered
to God, how many there escape out of the mire of Sin, how many are there loosed
from the intricate ties of carnal and forbidden pleasures, how many there lay
down their hatred and old envy, how many men almost desperate to do more good,
and bound already to the Gates of hell by compact between them and the Devil,
yet there deliver themselves from the Enemy, and recover a state of Salvation;
finally, as the Soul is more precious than the Body, so the Miracles of the
blessed Virgin of Loreto wrought for the Soul, are more than those that are for
the Body, so that to discourse more at large the things touched here, were a
desire to measure and confine the divine power by humane frailty. Which to
avoid, it is better to let it alone, than undertaking it to rest unsatisfied, and
although for the most part Fame surpasses the thing spoken of; yet whoever
has seen Loreto, must confess Fame could not speak so much of it and its glory
as he there saw and contemplated.

The remarkable and wonderful Site of the House of LORETO.
It Is credibly reported, that the house of the blessed Virgin leaving (of its
own accord) Galilea, first went into Dolmatia and there stopped in a Wood of
Marchiano, whence it went into a Mountain belonging to two Brothers who were at
discord, but to remain there for a time, God having determinated that it should
stay where now it stands, and we hope will ever continue if some sins of the
adjcent People make not the place unworthy and it is presumed that since it came
from Galilee and the mount because the sins of the People there made it
unworthy, so the knowledge the Virgin had of the quality of this People made her
transmit her habitation hither and the often mutations of the places makes it
evident to all, that this is the true Stanza or Cell of the blessed Virgin
departed from Galilea.

It arrived in this Province in Italy, in the year 1295. and in less thana
year changed its place of stay three times though but within compass of a
mile, but who will consider its now aboade must find that the wit of man could
not invent a better.

P. Battista Mantouano Viccar General of the Garmelites (among other grave
Authers) to whom this house was first given in custody before it left Galilee)
averrs the trnth of the former relations: Societies of Priests, that are
Liuguists have it now in government whereby to be the better able to take the
confessions of all Nations and give absolutions, etc.

RECANATI.
FRom Loreto the way leads to Recanati, a new City built out of the Relics of
the old Helvia Ricina, whereof some will have Macerata to be built also, which
Helvia was once magnificently repaired by Helvio, many of its old foundations
and the bases of an Amphitheatre yet appear upon the Road. From Loreto to
Recanati, is three mile of very rough Way, over Mountains. In it is held a
public fair every year in September, in the great Church lies Pope Gregory the
12th. who in the Council of Constanza renounced the Papacy, it is seated on the
top of a high and spacious Mountain environed with the Apenines, Gingolo, the
Sea, and some other little Hills. Beyond which is a plain, in it, San Severino,
heretofore a Bourg, but made a City by Pope Sixtus quintus, Math^lica and
Fabriano, famous for the Pure writing paper there made, and then Gamerino, a
well fortisied place abounding no less in Riches than People. It always
assisted the Romans, and has produced many emminent Men. Through the Vale
Camerino, you may go to Foligno and Spoleto.

MACERATA.
KEEping the direct Way through the Mountains you meet Macerata, famous for
greatness and beauty, and the most noble City of the Marchiano. In it is a
College of Lawyers, called the Rota, deputed to hear Causes, and the Residence
of the Governors of all the Province, Two great Causes for its full peopling:
About it ly several Bourgs, Castles, and Towns, as Tolentino, where they
reverence the relics of San Nicolo, of the Angustine Order, who there lived
holily: Montalto, Fermo, Ascolo, and Seravalle, beyond which lies Santa
Anatolia, whence through a Valley lies the way to San Foligno, which is two
days journey from Loreto.

FOLIGNO.
THe Longobardi* having destroyed Foro Flaminio, the Inhabitants out of its
Ruins built Foligno. The City is rich in Merchandise, small but pleasant, it
has a goodly port, whence the Citizens repelled the assaults of the
Longobardi, the Cities Perugia and Assisiaare Westward twenty miles from
Foligno.

All along the Flaminian Way, ly most flourishing Fields, planted with all
sorts of Fruits, Vines, Gardens, Olive Trees, and Almonds, praised to the
skies, by Propertins Virgil, and other Poets.

On the right hand lies Mevania, the Country of Propertius and its Territory,
which produces large Bulls and Oxen, on the left was the Ancient Temple of
Metusca, near it is the Source of the River Clitumnus, issuing wirh a clear and
plentiful head of Water, enough to water the Fields of Bertagna, which at its
second stage, had the name of a God given it by the blind Gentiles, to whom it is
believed the neighboring Temple of Marble (now antique yet noble) was dedicate
in old time. It Is made in that form (which Vitruvius writing of the order of
Temples, teaches that those of Fountains, Nymphs, Venus, Flora, and
Proserpina. ought to have, to wit to have some similitude with their Gods) and
has in the Ornaments of the outside leaves of Bears-foot, and Holm tree, which
demonstrate the fruitfulness of Clitumnus, which the Ancients observed, so
fatned the adjacent Pastures, that thereby the Herds of Cattle grew very great,
and ( Pliny, Lucan, and Servius the Commentator of Virgil) a ver^ that those
Cattle drinking of the water of Clitumnus became white.

Out of these Herds the Roman Conquerors used to select the most fair, and in
their triumphs to sacrifice them for a happy Augury to the victory brought with
them. The same also were led by the Emperors, (which triumphed) with their
horns guilt, and bathed with the water of this River, unto the Campidoglio, and
there sacrificed to Jove and other Gods, which made the Spoleti^ to honor
Clitumnus as a God, and to it were dedicated by the ancients, Temples and
Groves, as may be collected from Propertins in these words. Qua formosa suo
Clitumnus flumina Luco
Integer, and niveos abluit unda boves.


Virgil the Prince of Poets in the second of his Gorgicks, speaking politely of
the praise of Italy, says thus. Hinc albi Clitumne greges and maxima tanrus
Victimae saepe tuo perfusi flumine sacro
Romanos ad templa Deum duxere triumphos.


Silius also touches upon this conceit in the Carthaginian War in few words to
wit Et lavit ingentem perfusum flumine sacro
Clitumnus taurum.


SPOLETO.
IN the same day the Traveller may go from Foligno, to Spoleto, a splendid City
deficient in nothing, the Refidence of the Longobardi Princes now ennobled by
the Title of the Duke of Ombra, anciently it was a strong Roman Colony so made by
Litius, and reduced by the Romans, when they had overthrown the Ombri, in the
Consulate of G. Claudius Centone, and Marius Sempronius Tuditanus. Which Colony
(after the Romans had received the Rout near Trasineno) was so bold as to
withstand Hannibal the Conqueror, and taught him to gather what vast strength
the Roman Empire was of from the power of one sole Colony, by forceing him to
turn tail, and retreat after the loss of many men into the Marchiana. The old
broken structures show that it flourished greatly in the Romans time. One may
yet see the Palace of Theodorick King of Goths, destroyed by the Goths but
rebuilt by Narsete Captain for Justinian the Emperor. The Temple of Concord,
the foundation of a Theater and of stately Aquiducts.

TERNI.
THe following day through the Valley Strattura (closed in by Hills, Rocks, and
cliffs of the Apenines) you reach Terni called Iteranna by the Ancients from
its enclosure between the branches of the River Nera. The old Ruins of the
Edifices show it to have been in all things greater than at present, and within
memory it is known much decay came to it by intestine hatred and civil discords.

Many ancient Marble Inscriptions show that it was a free City of the Romans, but
at what time it received the title of a free City, and the Prerogative of Roman
Denizenship, is not certainly known Pighius observes from a great Marblestone
fixed in the Walls of the Cathedral Church, that it was built 544. years before
the Consulate of C. Domitius Enobarbus, and M. Camillus Scribonianus, who were
Consuls 624. years after the foundation of Rome, and that sacrifice was made in
Terni, to the health of Liberty, and the Genius of the City, to gratify
Tiberius Caesar, who then elevated himself from the feet of Seianus: The said
Pighius deduceth thus much from the Title on the said Marble, and in his
Annals of the Senate and People of Row sets it down more distinctly: we
conclude from the whole that it was built 80. years after Rome, under Numa, and
then obtained its title of a Municipal City. The Territory of Terni through the
site, and the usefullnesse of the sweet Waters, is all of a fat soil, being
exposed to a benign Sun, which in some part appologizeth for what Pliny says,
to wit, that the Meadows are mowed 4 times in a year, and afterward fed,
besides that Turnips have there lately grown of 30. pound weight (whereof four
makes an Asses Load) and Pliny says 40. pound weight.

NARNI.
KEEping the Via Flaminia, you arrive at Narni, placed on a rough Hill of
difficult ascent, at the foot whereof runs the River Nera, roaring through the
breakings of the Rocks, wherewith it encounters; Livy and Stephano Gramatico,
derive the name of the City from that of the River, and Martial in the 7th.
book of his Epigrames describes it thus. Narnia sulphureo, quam gurgite
candidus amnis
Circuit ancipiti vix adeunda jugo.


The same Livy affirms, that the City was first called Nequino, and the
Inhabitants thence Nequinati, when subdued by the Romans, from the paultry and
wicked customs of the People, but afterward the Roman Colony despising that
name, called it Narni from the Rivers name.

The Triumphs in the Campidoglio set forth that the Nequinati were confederate
with the Sanniti, and with them overcome by M. Petinus the Consul, who therefore
triumphed in the 454th. year of Rome, and then made a Colony as aforesaid.

Now the Cities form is long, and fair in Fabrics, and plentifully supplied
from its near Campagna, though in the memory of our Ancestors, and since it
has been much turmoyled with troubles and Wars. Without Narni over the River
are wonderful great Arches of a Bridge, which did conjoyn two high and
precipitous Mountains between which the River passed, some believe this Bridge
was built by Augustus with the spoils of the Siacambri, and Procopius affirms
it, adding that more eminent Arches were never seen, the Relics now appearing
demonstrate it the work of a flourishing Empire, and of excessive expense,
Martial it is supposed speaks hereof in these words. Sed jam parce mihi, nec
abutere Narnia Quinto,
Perpetuo liceat sic tibi ponte frui.


The stones of this Bridge are cecmented with Iron and Lead, one Arch now to be
seen is 200. foot broad and 150. foot high, under which it is said is buried
great Treasure.

A stream is brought into the City which passes for 15. miles under most high
Mountains, and supplies thr^ brass fountains; there is also a water of N^ni
called caristia or Famine, because it never appear^ but the year before some
great fami^, as it happened in Anno 1589. it yields also many healthful wat^rs.

Forty miles off Narni to go in the way to Rome is a Mountainous Rock, through
which the Way is cut with Chizels 30. foot deep and 15 broad, beyond which is
pleasant way to Ottricoli a mile from Tevere.

Passing by the antiquities of the Via Flaminia and the vast mines of
Ottricoli, you come to Tevere, beholding by the way great Relics of public
structures, as Temples, Baths, Aqueduct^, Conservatories of water, a Theater
and Amphitheatre, which testify the grandezza and magnificence of that
municipal City, while the Roman Empire flourished.

Two inscriptions of statues dedicate to the Father and Daughter by the
public, make appear that they built those Baths at their own expense, and then
gave them to the public, both which are inscribed on Marble as follows. L.
Iulio L. F. Pal. Iuliano. IIII. Vir. AEd. III. 1. D. IIII. Vir Quin que Quinque
11. Dast Patr^no Municipi Plebs. Ob. Merita L. D. D. D. Iuliae Lucillae L.
Iulii. Iuliani. Fill Patroni municipi (...). P^ter Termas Ocriculanis ^ Solo.
E^ctas (...). ^ecunia* Donavit Dec Aug. Plebs L. D. D. D.

Whence you pass by the Town Tevere near the stone Bridge built by Augustus,
which Bridge was so great, that with its mines it tumed and hindered the course
of the River; thence coasting the foot of the Mountain Soratte, at night you
lodge at B^gnano.

Pope Clement the 8th commanded (imitating Augustus) to his great costs and no
less glory, this Bridge to be repaired; here terminated the Burro^ghs of Rome
in the time*of the Emperor Aurelianus; and we read that in former times Rome
was 150. miles in ci^cuit; and that while Constantin^ reigned, the Walls and
buildings from Tevere to Rome were so thick, that who was but seldom
conversant there took it for the City of Rome. The River being past you meet
Borgheto, the City Castellan, and Capr^rola, and farther on is the B^idge
Milvio or Mole, where God showed to Constantine a Cross wi^h these words, In
hoc signo vinces, with which encouragement Constantine fought and overcame
Maxentius the Tyrant, by which Bridge one passes the Tevere or Ti^er, and so
arrives to the Suburbs of Rome, entering the Porta Flaminia, now called Porta
del Popolo.

LUCCA.
THis City glories, in the universal agreement of all Authors, that it is one of
the most ancient of Italy, and they that speak of its latest Original attribute
it to Lucchio Lucnmone Laerte of Tuscany, who reigned 46. years after the
foundation of Rome. from whom some say it took its name Lucca, but some others
aver^ it was built long before that time, even by the Grecians before the
destruction of Troy. It always was for its strength and power of much
consideration: and that made C. Cempronius after the overthrow he received from
Hannibal at Trebbia, and the less fortunate day fought before Piacenza to
recover Lucca, with the remnant of his Army as to a place that yielded asecure
retreat; and the valorous Narsete, who for the Emperor Justinian, freed Italy
of the Goths, could not have gained it with his 7 Months tedious and most
rigorous siege, had he not by a certain wile and cunning persuaded or rather
entreated the Citizens to deliver their City of their own accord and with their
own terms. Its Seignors or Lords have so well added to its former strength,
that no City in Italy comes near it, for it has eleaven strong Bulworks in
less than 3. miles circuit, and a vast wall, with works within, upon which the
Trees planted, the pleasant and fertile hills surrounding it, and the stately
Palaces in the heart of it renders it a most delightful City.

Strabo reports the Romans often raised there many foot Soldiers and some
Horse, and Gasper Sardo writes that at the Naval fight bethe Christians and
Sarazens in anuo 1179. Lucca had seven Galleys, under the command of Nino
delli Obezi its Citizen, a valiant Captain, who was also Lieutenant of those of
the Church in the same Fleet, when they obtained immortal fame in that Victory,
and in 1303. the Lucchesi colleagued with the Florentines against the
Pistoiesi, and of the 16000. foot and 1600. Horse, then in the Army, the
Lucchesi had 10000. Foot, and 600. Horse.

This City was beloved, and held in great esteem by the Romans conceding to it,
the fo much coveted privilege of a municipal City, and making it a Colony.

We read in p^rticular, that (at the needful repairing of Rome) C. Caesar
passed a winter there with two hundred Senators. whereof we^ Pompey and Crasus,
who here complotted and constituted the first Triumvirate. Near the Church of
Saint A^gustine, are some Relics of a noble Temple dedicate to Saturn, with
the footsteps of an Amphitheatre, infallible testimonies of its Grandeur.

In the time that Tuscany with the rest of Italy divided into 12 Governments
was under the Longobardi, Lucca was the appointed, residence for the Regent of
Tuscany, where (as such) Desideri^s resided, when in a^no 577. he was created
King of the Longobardi. Afterward it was governed by Marqueses, who also resided
there as in the Metropolis of that Province, where the Marchese Adalberto dwelt
with infinite Splendor, and so nobly in anno 902. received there Lewi^ the
Emperor, that he admiring the Kingly magnificence and grea^nesse wherein the
Marchese lived, said to one of his Intimats, that ^ruly (abstracting from the
Title) he saw not wherein the Marquess was inferior to him. Among the,
Marqueses of Tuscany, Bonilf da Lucca for his great Riches, his own valor and
merits, was so much renowned, that he obtained for his wife, Beatrice Daughter
of Corradns the second, and Sister of Henry the third, whose Issue La Contessa
Matilda, in a short course of time, remained Heiress and Lady of this and many
other Cities of Italy, and at her death bequeathed the City Ferrara and that
state which is called the Patrimony of Saint Peter to the Roman Church, by her
last Will and Testament, which is yet preserved in Lucca.

Afterward Lucca began to relish the beloved fruits of its ancient Liberty,
and in the year 1288. obtained a confirmation of it from the Emperor
Rodolphus, in which times being chiefly ruled by the Guelfan Faction, it was a
long time preserved in good amity, and confederate with the Florentine
Republique. Wherefore in Anno 1304. when the Florentine Republique was much
perplexed by the Factions Bianchi, and Neri, the Lucchesi were requested by the
Florentines to aid them, in repressing their tumultuous and confused
Government, and when absolute power was given to the Lucchesi over all
Florence, from Lucca were sent some of the most prudent Citizens, accompanied
with 9000. Soldiers, the most part horse: Who being suddenly arrived, settled
their guards up and down the City as they pleased, and as if the City Florence
had been absolutely under their Do minion: which done, they took in hand the
government, and with the entire satisfaction of that Republique, in sixteen
days, they quieted the tumults and Factions, and established the form of the
Government for the future.

Some time after the which Lucca was governed by Ugoccione and by Castruccio
its Citizen, an excellent Captain, who with his own single valor kept the
neighboring Commonwealth in continual fear and suspicion, and finally after
it had undergon for several years through adverse fortune, the tyranny of
diverse Governors, its Usurpers; It reobtained for a certain sum of money its
former Liberty, from Charles the 4th. which (except from the year 1400. to 1430.
when it was usurped by Paolo Gusinigi its Citizen) it has ever since enjoyed
most happily, and does at present rejoice therein, and live in great
tranquillity yet under the protection of the Catholic King, and with such
security, that those Gentlemen to w^om the Government of the Republique is
committed, neither watch at, nor take care for any thing more than the public
good, and Union o^ all its Citizens, the two principal and necessary
Foundations, for the maintenance of the Republique. Its administration and
Government is an Oligarchy.

This Clty is replenisht with many good and Artfull Structures, and a great
number of stately Churches; Among which Its Cathedral, dedicate to Saint
Martin, retains the chief prerogative. This Church has been much adorned and
favored by the Popes, and first by Alexande^ the second, who in the year of
our Lord 1070. (as we read in Baronius) was pleased to take upon himself the
pains to consecrate it, then Urban the sixth in anno 1382. there celebrated
Mass the night of the Nativity of our Lord, and honored the chief standard
bearer, with the reading the Epistle by his order. The Bishop and Canons are
endowed with great Privileges: being allowed the use of the Archiepiscopal
Ornaments, that is a Cross and Pall: and the Canons are faculted to bear the
Priests cope, and purple Satin robes, and the Mitre of white Satin, More
Cardinalium, and the Bishop is so great, that the Canons acknowledge no other
Superior but the Apostolic Sea.

Among the many graces wherewith this Church is favored by the most high God,
some may especially be considered; first that Lucca was the first City of
Tuscany, that (as Fr. Leandro and others recount) received the light of the
holy faith, which happened in the 44th. year of our Salvation, by the means of
Saint Paulino Antiocheno, the Disciple of Saint Peter, crowned a Martyr upon
the hill S. Iuliano, by Anozino President in Pisa. Secondly, that in the time
of Charles the Great, with most singular favor it obtained the holy
Countenance or Visage, ( Volto Santo) formed and placed miraculously by a
divine hand, on the venerable Statue of the Savior of the World: framed by
Nichodemus his Disciple, when he stood as 'twere bereaved of senses, with
consulting to form the head with such perfection as might give honor to the
Statue.

In it lie the bodies of S. Paolino, Rigolo and Frediano. Its principal
Protectors, with those of 33. other Saints, whereof 14. were Lucchesi. In the
year 1588. was found here a Miraculous Image of our Lady, through whose
mediation God has here done wonderful graces to the faithful of diverse
Nations. It has afforded Popes, Cardinals, Lords, and famous Captains in great
numbers with exquisite Sholars: whereof one must be mentioned, to wit Friar
Panigni, having so great a renown through all parts of the world for his
elaborate and exact Translation of the holy Scripture out of the Hebrew into
the Latin Tongue, whom we will set alone though many others in several
Sciences, Qualities, and Honors might be well remembered with him. Many noble
Families quitted this their Country, either to avoid the plagues, or tyrannies
of Usurpers, and retreated to Venice and Genoua, where some of them are in that
honor as to be admitted Partners in the government of those States as if
originally of those Republiques.

The Territories of Lucca are small, but through the Industry of the
Inhabitants, most fertile and abounding in all things, and so well peopled,
that they have eighteen thousand Men enrolled in the Militia, besides those of
the City: In them lies those so health, affording Bathes, celebrated by many
Historians and other writers, whither annually resort from all parts infinite
infirm and Lame Persons, who for the most part return comforted and recovered:
In the way whereunto they pass two Bridges over the River Serchio, whose Arches
are so large that they are wonderful to the beholders: And it is certain all
Europe cannot show two Bridges so noble and fair.

Many other remarkable things might be inserted of this most noble City and its
State, but to avoid prolixity, and pursue the style begun, the more curious are
referred to the particular writers who treat thereof most copiously.

GENOUA.
THis City is head of the Province Liguria, situate on the Sea shore at the
foot of very high Mountains which though slerile by nature by the Inhabitants
industry are become most fertile and produce most necessaries besides those
delights which ly on the South part of it. Its air is good, though somewhat
enclineing to hot and dry it is built in part upon hills and in part upon a Plain
or Level. On the Maritine part Westward, It has a Port may well merit the name
of the most importent of Italy. It enjoyes the Treasure of Liberty, and is
governed in form of a Republique, all its state being content with that form,
knowing that to the obedient Life Honor and Goods, under that government are
in no hazard. It stands between two Rivers the one on the East 70. miles long,
the other on the West a 100. In the River on the Levant about 6. miles from the
City is the comely Town of Mervi, which plentifully stores it with Fruits and
Flowers all the Winter. It Is Mistress and sole Governess of the Island of
Corsica, whence in time of need they can advance a good quantity of Soldiers
not inferior in Arms or Valor to any other Nation. The People of Corsia most
willingly yielding them Obedience, for their protection, and that costs them
but a quarter of a Crown annually for each fire, and some other incensible tax.
Every two years the Republique sends thither a Governor and the other
Lawgivers and Judges, who haviug finished their Offices, are arraigned by two
Gentlemen empowered thither to that effect, who without any trouble to the
subject, do them justice against any Governor or Judge at their own doors, who
has done them wrong: Which rule they also observe through all other parts of
their state. On all part of the City are infinite pleasant Gardens and Palaces
beautified with all that Art can add to them or Riches procure their Structures
being alla Moderna though somewhat high in most parts by reason that the City
is but small, so that they are necessitated to make the best use of their Room
which renders the streets in most places narrow and in some a little obscure.
Though one street may be well termed the Mistress of the World called Strada
Nova, being spacious, long, even, and on each side embellished with most
stately Marble Palaces, the fairest whereof belongs to the Duke of Oria. It
has a most spacious Port in form of a Theater compassed in with noble
Structures, which though defended by a most magnificent Mole (judged the
greatest in Christendom) yet is when the South and Southwest Winds blow very
tempestuous. Opposite to it is a Pharos bearing a Lanthern (for light to ships
in the night time) of an extraordinary bigness. Darsina is a haven to it also,
which is a sure retreat for Galleys and shipping at all seasons: The Galleys
being there laid up in their several classis. For public Edifices it has the
Merchants Hall. The public Granaries the Dukes Palace with the Armory of
30000. Men. And their Churches which though (in respect of others of Italy)
they have not so much Beauty, that once seen they yield a Gusto to a second
view, yet for their polisht Marble and inward Ornaments, were they placed any
where but in Italy might well merit a larger Account. In Saint Lorenzo the
Cathedral Church is showed to Persons of quality an Emerald of inestible price:
as also the sumptuous Chapel of San Gio Battista, wherein they adore his Ashes.

Who delights to see Pictures of great Masters must repair to the Palace of
Prince D'Ora, reaching from the bottom of the shore to the top of the
Mountains, divided into three Gardens. In the first whereof the Terrases and
Porticues bore up one above another with Marble Pillars, the Fountain of
Eagles, and the Family of Neptune are very magnificent. On one side of which is
that famous Cage of Iron work of so vast extent, that it encloseth a wood of
Cypres and other Trees: The other two are filled with Grotts Orange Trees, and
other delights. And who is curious to see Statues and Pictures, may repair with
fredome to the Palaces of the Signori Giustiniano, Pallavicino, Horatio,
Chiavari, and Giovan, Caclo Doria; who have collections of such Rarities of so
great value, as is scarce to be believed a Treasure for a private Man. Two
Stautes which Giustiniano has for their incomparable and Price deserve
particular mention, to wit, an ancient Cupid of Marble sleeping, and an antique
head with a body to it, esteemed most rare antiquities.

Religion so flourishes in Genoua, that they may (with thanks to God) say that
it is there in the hig^h of Glory.

It contains about a hundred thousand Souls more or less: out of which in all
Ages have proceeded Eminent Sholars and Soldiers.

Which shall end the relation here with this short Addition, that whosoever for
delight sees Genoua, must repair thither in the beginning of Summer, who for
profit or Merchandise may take their own convenience. To take a perfect view,
and a full prospect of the City, in a calm and serene day you must embark in a
small Boat, and eloign on the Sea the distance of an ordinary Sight, where the
City seems so to be united with the Buroughs, and both so conjoined afford so
fair an Object, as must be confessed to be a most beautiful and noble
Prospective.

And who would behold Genoua from a high place, must ascend the Steeple of the
Church of S. Benigno, and the Pharos where the Lanthorn stands.

In the Church (...) Saint John the Baptist among its other Relics, they
pretend to have the heads of Saint Lavrence, and Saint Sebastian the Martyr,
the Arms of Saint Matthew and Saint Theodore the Martyr and the right hand of
Saint James the less, together with a certain vessel of Calcidonian stone,
bestowed on this Church by Pope Innocent the 8th. which they say to be the same
dish wherein the Daughter of Herodias brought in the head of Saint John Baptist
to her Mother. In the same Church lies the body of S. Siri, or rather Sylus,
the third Bishop of this City, under the high altar with this Epitaph. Hic,
recubat Sylus sacro baptismate dictus,
Cujus terra levis Florida menbra premi.


wherewith this Book concludes.
the end of the first Book.


THE HISTORY OF ITALY, BEING A Compendious DESCRIPTION OF ROME THE Mistress of
the WORLD, with an Account of all particulars therein worth Observation as well
Divine as Humane.
The Second PART.
Ammianus Marcellinus in the 14th. Book of his History speaks after this manner
of ROME.

It Is not a little wonder that Virtue and Fortune (whom the world conclude
almost at perpetual discord) should accord together in that instant of time,
when Rome for its agrandizing, had so much need of their united force. By which
their conjoined strengths, Rome augmented her Empire to that Greatness, that
she subjugated the whole World. It Is worth considering the Parallel between her
and a Child: Who in its first Infancy creeps, when she began to be built and
peopled: then it acquires vigor and strength, for Adolescential Exercises, so
she then warred only with her neighbors, but when arrived to more full
strength is employed in Manly disputes: So she when arived to be 300. years
old, and increased both in vigor and People, began to pass Mountains and Seas,
pursuing War into the farthest Countries, where she obtained and brought home
innumerable Victories and Triumphs from the Barbarous and wild Nations: In the
end, having made infinite noble Attempts, and acquired whatever upon Earth
through Valor was to be obtained (as twere arrived to mature Age) she begun to
acquiesce, whereby the better to enjoy those good benefits and Advantages,
which she had then provided for: Comitting the Troubles of Government to the
Emperors (as to her Natural Children) for her better and more pleasing repose:
At which time although the People participated of that public Ease and
Profit, and the Soldiery moved not for her further advancement: yet such was
the Care of her Greatness: that the Roman Majesty was no less Reverenced than
feared.

Virgil in praise of Rome wrote these Verses. Ipse Lupae fulvo nutricis tegmine
laetus
Romulus, Assaraci quem sanguinis Ilia Matter
Eduxit, genti Mavortia condidit olim
Maenia. Romanosque suo de nomine dixit.
Illius auspiciis rerum pulcherrima Roma
Imperium terris, animos aequavit Olimpo,
Septemque una sibi muro circumdedit Arces:
Felix prole virum: qualis Berecinthia Matter
Invehitur curru Phrygias turrita per Urbes,
Laeta Deum partu, centum complexa ne potes
Omnes caelicolas, omnes supera alta tenentes.
Hanc olim Indiginae Fauni, Nimphaeque tenebant:
Gensque virum truncis, and duro robore nata.
Quae duo disjectis tenuerunt oppida muris:
Hanc Ianus pater, hanc Saturnus condidit Urbem.
Ianiculum Huic, illi fuerat Saturnia nomen.


And Ovid surnamed Naso composed these of Rome. Crescendo formam mutavit Martia
Roma,
Appenini genae, quae proxima Tibridis undis
Mole sub ingenti posuit fundamina rerum,
Quanta nec est, nec erit, nec visa prioribus annis.
Hanc alii proceres per saecula longa potentem,
Sed dominam rerum de Sanguine natus Iuli
Effecit, quo, quum tellus fuit usa, fruuntur
AEthereae seeds, caelumque ^it exitus illi.


Who says also in another place: Hic ubi nunc Roma est, olim fuit arduasylva
Tan taque res pa^cis pascua bobus erat.


In another. Gentibus est aliis, tellus data limite certo,
Romanae spatium est urbis, and orbis idem.


Diverse other testimonies and Declarations of the Magnificence of Rome were
writ by Ausonius Claudianus, Rutilius Numantianus, old Authors, and by Julius
Caesar Scaliger, Faustus Sabeus a Brescian, and other modern writers, which for
brevity sake are here omitted but without comitting an unpardonable fault, we
must not leave out these elegant verses of Marcus Antonius Flaminius, viz.
Antiquum revocat decus
Divum Roma domus, and caput Urbium.
Vertex nobilis Imper I:
Matter magnanimum Roma Quiritium.
Fortunata per Oppida
Cornu fundit opes ^opia divite,
Virtuti suus est honos,
Et legum timor, and prisca redit fides.


Nor these of M. Valerius Martialis. Terrarum Dea, gentiumque Roma,
Cui par est nihil, and nihil secundum.


The praise of ROME written by STEFANO PIGHIO.
ROME the Glorious is replenisht with stupendous Structures, as well public,
appertaining to the Popes, as private, belonging to Cardinals and Princes, who
at this time frequent that City. The Gardens behind the Vatican called
Belvedere, from their beauty and pleasantness, are no less estimable: In which
Pope Sistus quartus, erected a noble Palace without regard to his expense, so
it might be excellently carved, painted, guilt, and embellish't with rare
figures, thereby to make it a Kingly Receptacle for entertainment of such
eminent Princes and Lords, as should repair to Rome: Before the Front of that
Palace where the Pope resides, is a most stately Porticue composed in the form
of a Theater, raised some steps above the Earth, and garnished with many marble
Statues: and on the western part is another Porticue which stands between the
one and the other Palace, ( Belveder being near the Popes Palace) and will be
when finished according to the design, a most stately Piece and of great value.

But of greater wonder are those footsteps and marks of old Rome which seem
rather the works of Giants than of ordinary men: although (compared to what
it was) much inferior by the great fallings and decays of Towers, and Walls in
diverse places, where stood formerly public Edifices. Martial in most elegant
Verse sets the Theater of Titus Vespacian, before the seven wonders of the
World: and not unworthily, since to this day, it creates admiration in all
judicious Men, by its prodigious Structure. Who admires not the Pantheon, or
the Circalean, Dioclesian, and Constantinian Baths, which Fabrics are built
with rare art, and so great that they seem Castles and Towns: Or the vast
number of Arches, Triumphals, Collumns, Sculptures of whole Armies figured to
the Life: Pyramids, and Obelisks, of so vast bigness, that who would transport
one of them must build a ship large and strong enough to float and sail laden
with a Mountain. What shall we say of the great entire Statues, of the Castori
on Horseback? of the great bodies of Rivers prostrate on the ground? of so many
brass Statues and Vessels capacious to bath in? or of those Marble Tablets and
Pillars with hundreds of other excellencies. Each of which are worthy of, and
would fill up a particular volume if worthily described.

The Gardens of Belvedere, contain some Statues of white Marble far bigger than
the body of a Man, as of Apollo, of Hercules, of Venus, of Mercury, of the
Genius of the Prince, thought by some to be of Anthony, of Adrian the Emperor,
of a Nymph leaning near a River, judged by some to be Cleopatra, and of Laocoon
the Trojan with his two Sons, enveloped in the twistings of the Serpents, a
piecemuch applauded by Pliny, cut out of one entire Stone, which that it might
receive as excelling shapes, and forms as could be carved by industry or Art,
Agesandro, Polidoro, and Asenodoro, three rare Rodian Sculptors applied their
joint Industry, study, and pains: This curious Sculpture, was preserved by
miracle of Fortune, at the destruction of the Palace of Titus Vespasian the
Emperor, as also of the River Tevere, or Tyber with the Wol^e giving suck to
Romulus and Remus carved out of one tire Stone, and likewise the great Nilus
leaning on a Sphinx, on the height whereof stand sixteen Children, denoting the
sixteen Cubits of the increase of that River, observed by the Egyptians, and
every one of those Children is in such manner figured, that it excellently
describes the effect, which at that rise and increase it wrought on the Land of
Egypt sa, for example, the sixteenth Child is placed upon a shoulder of the
River, with a basket of flowers and fruits upon its head, and this Child
signifies that the increase of the River, to the sixteenth Cubit, enriches the,
Earth to the production of great plenty of Fruit and brings gladness to it. The
15th, signifies that all is secure and well, and the 14th. brings joyfulness,
but all the other increases under 14. are unhappy and miserable as Pliny
observes in the ninth Chapter of his fifth Book of Natural Histories; and
moreover some Creatures which are only proper to that Country with its plants,
called Calamo a Cane, Colo Cassia Egyptian Bean, and Papiro called Papir Reed,
whereof they were wont to make great leaves to write on, and thereof was the
first paper made, and thence as is supposed was that name borrowed which are no
where to be found out of Egypt, no more than the Monsters to wit, Hippotami or
the Sea Horse, whose Feet are like an Ox, back and mayn like a Horse, tusks
like a Boar, with a long winding tail. Ichneumoni, the Indian or Egyptian
Ratt, whose property is to creep into the Crocodiles Mouth when he gapeth, to
eat his Bowels and so kill him: Trochili, a Sea-foul friend to the Crocodil,
somewhat like to a wagtail, or Sea Wood* cock: Ibidi the black stork, a Bird in
Egypt, which has stiff Legs, and a long Bill, wherewith when its sick, it
administreth it self a Glister of Sea Water, Sciachi, Land Crocodiles:
Crocodrili, Sea Crocodiles, which can only move the upper Jaw or Chaps. And
also the pourtraits of the Terrositi, a generation of Pigmies or dwarfs
incessant Men, perpetual Enemies of the Crocodiles, whereof Pliny in the 25th.
Chapter of his eighth Book of Natural Histories treats at large. together with
many other singular Statues in the said gardens of Belvedere, which when seen,
thoroughly examined, and understood by intelligent Persons, yield them great
delight and satisfaction.

In the B^th of Pope Pius the 4th. is a work of great esteem, being an Ocean
cut out of the fairest Marble. The Ancients thought the Ocean to be Prince of
the Waters, and Father of all things, a Friend to Prometheus; And that by means
of the humidity and liquidness of the Waters, all things seem to generate from
Seeds with the assistance of the Heavens: therefore they believed that every
thing received Life from Water, with the favorable friendship of the temperat
Genius of the Caelestial Bodies. This figure has the Body covered with a thin
vail, whereby they would signify, that the Sea shrouds the Heavens with Clouds
of its own vapors, meaning by the Sea, the whole generation of waters, and
they denote the Earths being covered with plants by the Hairs beard and
ordinary skinns beingall figured by the leaves of diverse tender Plants. It has
two horns placed upon the Forehead. First because the Sea provoked by the winds
roars like a Bull; and secondly because the Sea is governed by the Moons
motion, which they called Cornuta, thirdly, because the Sea is called Father of
Fountains and Rivers, which they figured Cornuti or horned. In its right hand
is put the Rudder of a Ship, in token that the Waters (by means of the Ships
being guided by these Rudders) are furrowed as best likes the Pilot, of which
Comodity they feigned Prometheus to be the Inventor, they have placed it upon a
Maritine Monster, to demonstrate that the Sea is generator of many wonderful
Monsters: One of which to the purpose is seen in Rome in the Antique marble
sphere of Atlas placed among the celestial signs, upon this very occasion: It Is
said that Andromada contending for beauty with the Nymphs of the Sea, being
overcome, was by them given to this Monster, which devoured her, out of whose
body (slain on the shore of Perseus who would have saved that Virgin) there
issued so much blood, that it dyed the Sea red, whence that Sea was afterward
called Citreo or the Red Sea, for all which the Citreo is not that gulf, which
is vulgarly called the red Sea, but is that part of the Ocean affianced to the
Gulf, which washes Arabia on the South, but now to our relation of Rome.

The first and chief part whereof to be visited through devotion, are the 7.
principal Churches, and then the others in their order: wherein are preserved
infinite relics of Saints, and some remarkable Ones of the holy Jesus our
Lord and Savior as the the Towel of Santa Veronica with the effigies of
Christ, the Speer of Longinus wherewith he was run into the Breast. One of
those Nayls, wherewith our Lord was nailed to the Cross. One of those thirty
pence, which as the price of Treason were given to Judas the Traitor by the
wicked Jews, all which you are obliged particularly to search out as exceeding
singularities not elsewhere to be found.

Of ROME the Old, and ROME the New, and of its admirable Excellencies.
ROME formerly the Empress of the World cannot be enough praised: Her power was
so great, her Riches so immense, her subjects so innumerable, her Territories
and Dominions so vast: That well might Saint Hierome (in his three wishes for
intermixing that concerning her with so divine things) be pardonable, which
three wishes were, To have seen our Savior in the flesh, to have heard Saint
Paul preach, and to have seen Rome in her Glory: which had so spread her self
over the whole Earth that a perfect Idea of her cannot be comprehended, and
must needs have been the happiest sight that mortal eye could attain to. But
when considered what she was, and how since devoured by fire by the insatiable
Nero, and how pillaged sacked and thousands of mischiefs done her by the
Barbarous, at the decay of the Roman Empire; One may well wonder how the new
Rome, should be even emulous to exceed the Old: Being at this day the Queen of
Cities, the Flower of Italy, and as one may say an Epitome of the whole Earth.
She is the Lodging for all Nations. The theater of the best Ingenuities of the
World, the Habitation of virtue, of Empire, of dignity, of Fortune, The Native
Country of the Laws, and of all People derivatively, the Fountain of
Instruction, the Head of Religion, the Rule of Justice, and finally the
Original of infinite blessings, although the Heretics, Enemies of the truth,
will not confess it, as this Author is pleased to term those of the Reformed
Religion.

A Better nor more concise description of the glory and destruction of Rome the
Old cannot be given than is in these two Verses out of an elegant Poet an
English Man. Stapylton
Roma fuit quondam Terrae, Regina Marisque,
At nunc nec Terras, nec Mare Roma regit.


The same Poet likewise with noe less elegancy describes the Grandeur and
Eminency of Rome the New, under the Popes in these two ensuing Verses. Roma
fuit quondam Terrae Regina Marisque,
Nunc mare nunc Terras, amplius illa regit.


Rome is situate in a Country sterile enough, and is subject to the Sea, the
Winds, and an obscure thick Air.

The Circumference of Rome, when in her greatest splendor was fifty miles, but
now (though not much inferior comparing her Ecclesiastics and her immediate
possessions with her former Empire) she exceeds not thirteen miles in circuit:
In those days she had twenty eight spacious principal Streets, which yet may be
traced out and their names with great certainty set down, to wit.

La Via
Appia. Tiberina. Proenestina. Quintia. Flaminia. Tiburtina. Cornelia.
Collatina. Solaria. Aurelia. Latina. Nomentana. Cimina. Valeria. Pormense.
Laurentia. Claudia. Gallicana. Emilia. Labicana. Campana. Setina. Ostiense.
Pretoriana. Ardeatina. Cassia. Ianiculense. Trionfale.
With these were others of name, that is to say L'alta Sommita, upon the Monte
Cavallo, now called Quirinale, near the Campo Martio, Via Lata, La Suburra near
San Pietro in Vincula. La Nova by the Bathes of Antonius, La Trionfale near the
Porta Vaticana, La Vitellia contiguous with San Pietro in Montorio. that is at
the Gianiculo, La Deta in the Campo Martio, La Fornicata near to the Flaminia.

The Ancient and Famous Gates of ROME are 15.
LA Flaminia, called now Porta del Popolo, the Gate of the People, La Gabiosa,
now di san Methodio. La Collatina, now Princiana, La Ferentina, now Latina; La
Quirinale, now called Agonia, La Capena, now di san Paolo, or Ostiense, La
Tiburtin^, now shut up. La Portuense, now Porta Ripa L'Esquilina now di san
Lorenza, L'Aurelia, now di san Paneratio. La Nevia, now Porta Maggiore, La
Fontinale, now Settimiana, La Celimontana, now di Sti Giovanni, La Vaticana,
which lies on the shore of the River Tevere. Tyber.

Moreover the Buroughs have these ensuing Gates, which were latelier made than
those above named; to wit, Port di Castello, de Cavalli Leggieri, l'Angelica,
la Pertusa, and di san Spirito, now the Triumfale, by which the Country Men
were not permitted to enter.

The Hills comprehended within the Walls of Rome are ten viz.

Il Capitolino, or Tarpeio, upon which were standing in the time of Tarquin
more than Sixty Temples, between great and small with most high Towers, it was
compassed with a Wall, and then called the dwelling of the Gods.

Il Palatino, or Pallazzo Maggiore, all hollowed undernea^h; This at present is
filled with gardens and the ruins of old structures, where stood formerly many
noble Fabrics, as the Palace of the Emperors, the great house of Augustus, of
Cicero, of Hortensi^, and of Cataline, but now in lieu thereof is the stately
and spacious Garden of the Farnezes.

L'Aventino now called Santa Sabina, upon which was the first dwelling of the
Christian Popes.

Il Celio, which rise where now stands the Church Laterinense, and Santa Croce,
of Jerusalem, in the place of many signal Temples of the Gentiles, and fair
Aqueducts.

L'Esquelino, where stands now Saint Pietro in Vincola: in the stead of the
houses of Virgil, of Propertius, and the gardens of of Mecenas.

Il Viminale, where stands now in lieu of the old House of Crassus, The
Churches of Santa Prudentia, and of San Lorenzo in Palesperna.

Il Quirinale, now called Monte Cavallo, where anciently flourished the Palace
and Gardens of Salustius and the Houses of Catullus and Aquilius.

Which said seven Hills were those ancient Hills in Rome, whence she was
denominated Settigemina. Afterward upon diverse occasions these following were
added.

Il Colle de gli hortuli, or Pincio, called vulgarly di Santa Trinita upon
which formerly stood a Temple of the Sun: where now is that round Fabric, and
deep well.

Il Vaticano, where now stands the Church of Saint Pietro and the Palace of
the Pope.

Il Gianicolo, called Montorio, where the Churches of San Onofrio, and Saint
Pietro di Montorio now stand.

Il Testaceo, which is no other than great heaps of broken pieces of potters
Vessels, the Street and residence of those Handicrafts Men being there, they
cast those broken pieces which were of no use, into that place which raised
this Hill, which Hill or heap rather of broken Vessels is near the Porta
Ostiense, and near it the famous Sepulcher of Cicero.

CHURCHES.
IN ROME are above 300. Churches all much frequented, but of them, seven are
more particularly visited through devotion: To wit, San Pietro nel Vaticano,
San Paolo in the Via Ostiense, S. Maria maggiore in the Via Esquilina, San
Sebastiano without the Gate Capena or S. Sebastiano, San Giovanni Lateranense
in Monte Celio, Santa Croce, in Jerusalem, in Monte Celio, San Lorenzo without
the Porta Esquilina, called San Lorenzo vulgarly.

These five following Churches are beautifyed with noble Brass Gates San Pietro
nel Vaticano, Santa Maria Rotonda, Santo Adriano anciently the Temple of
Saturn, Sauti Cosma, and Damiane (formerly the Temple of Castor and Pollux, and
San Paolo in the Via Ostiense.

In Rome are five principle Church yards or Burying places the first of which
lies near Saint Agnese, the second near Saint Pancratio, the third by Saint
Sebastiano, the fourth by San Lorenzo, the fifth by San Priscella, besides
which and many other smaller burying places of such primitive Christians as
were marty red or dyed (to this day held in great Veneration) there are above
twenty even now without the City.

In it are many Hospitals so well provided that possibly they may be reckoned
the most worthy object of the modern Excellencies in Rome, whereof some are
Common for all Nations and all persons as L'Hospitale di San Spirito in the
Vati^n: San Gioanni, Laterano, in Monte Celio, San Gi^como di Augusta, in Valle
Martia, Santa Maria dell^, Consolatione in Velabro, and Santo Antonio, in
Fsqui^ino, into any of which the infirm of all Countries with great love and
diligence are received governed and taken care of for their perfect ease and
cure of their diseases.

The Hospitals deputed to particular Nations are these. The Hospital of Santa
Maria dell'Annima, for the Germans and Flemings, San Lodovico for the French:
San Giacomo for the Spaniards: San Tomaso for the English: San Pietro for the
Hungarians, Santa Brigida for the Swedes San Giovanni, and San Andrea, for the
Dutch, San Giovanni Battista for the Florentines, San Giovanni Battista near
the Banks of the Tyber, for the Gen^veses, instituted and endowed by Media
dusto Cicala, besides many houses both for poor and Orfanes, of which no
particular Catalogue is set down, least filling the volume with the less
conside rabble, we leave not space for the more observable things in Rome.

In the Popes Palace called the Vatican are the Libraries: The one contains
selected choice books always shut up. The other two filled with Latin and
Greek Books, written by the Pen in parchment, are as much open: and free to any
students for two hours in the day, which were furnished by Pope Nicholas the
5th. And now there is a new one collected by Pope Sistus the 5th. The
Inscriptions, Pictures and Verses of which were made public by the judicious
Pen of Angelo Rocca, Bishop of Tagasta.

Some other Libraries in Rome are worthy notice, to wit, that of Santa Maria
del Popolo. Of Santa Maria soprala Minerva. Of Santo: Agostino, of Vallicola,
of Saint Andrea, and of the Jesuists College: besides three others which at
the siege and sacking of Rome: were robbed or burnt.

The Popes Gardens, where Persons of Quality have free ingress together with
the houses and Gardens of the Cardinals and other noble Persons of Rome yield
ample solace and recreation to the Lovers of Antiquity by their great varieties
in those particulars.

These Palaces omitting many others deserve a serious and timely visit, to
wit, that of the Family of the Conservadori nel Campi doglio, of the Massini,
of the Busali, of the Rucellai; of the Furnesi, of the Colonne the Mattei,
Cevoli, and Borghesi, together with the Palace Latterenense royally repaired
by Pope Sistus the 5th.

The City Rome was anciently divided into nineteen Praecincts or Wards, whereof
at present remain but these 14. de Monti, della Colanna; del Ponte; del
Arenula, della Rogola, della Pigna, del Capitello di Transtevere di..... del
Campo Martio, di Sant Eustachio, di Sant Angelo, della Ripa, del Borgo.

The six stones Bridges built over the Tevere or Tyber, are these Ponte Molle
or Milvio, two miles distant from the City, without the Porta del (...). Ponte
Angelo or Elio anciently. Ponte Gianiculese built by Pope Sistus. Ponte Saint
Bartolemeo or Costio. Ponte Maria Egittiaca, or Palatino, and Ponte dei quatro
Capi formerly called Fabritio when also there was one more called Sublicio,
whose Pyles are yet to be seen near the Aventine hills: and another called
Triumfale whose pyles appear at San Spirito.

The Waters wherewith the City is supplied are these: L'acqua virgin which
runs through the Campo Martio, the work of Pope Nicholas the 5th. l'Alsietina
restored by Innocent the 8th. for the Vatican La Salonia canducted at the cost
of Pius the 4th. besides which many others waters were conveyed by Gregory the
13th. by others in ancient times.

The Piazzaes in Rome are many but those of most note at this day are La Piazza
Vaticana, La Navona, La Giudea and La Fiore.

The new Porticues, or open Galleries which are the chief, are three, viz: That
della Benedittione: That in the Vatican Palace fronting the Piazza and the
Cerridore toward Belvedere.

The Piazza or market place for Fish, stands now where in former time it was.

That for the Hoggs, Oxen, Cows, Sheep, etc. where anciently was the Foro
Romano.

The Bakers have four Piazzaes, and conjoined with them are the Shambles: in
the Piazza Nova^a, every Wednesday is held a great Market.

The Hills are very little inhabited the ruins of old structure rendering the
Air so unwholesome, as to be only fit for Gardens or Vineyards, not dwelling
Houses.

Pope Sistus the 5th caused many fair streets to be drawn by a Line.

The residing Palace of the Pope stands contiguous with the Church of Saint
Pietro, wherein are contained many stupendous things, as the Chapel of Pope
Sistus, the Paulina, replenisht with the excellent pictures of Michael Angelo,
Bonarota a Florentine, so complete perfect and exact, that twere the glory of
this age to find a modern Painter could approach then in art or Similitude.
Besides which his Holiness has Retreats for the Summer as one near, San Marco,
another near Santa Maria Maggiore, a third near the Fontana de Trevi, but the
most favored and therefore most ordinary retirement is Monte Cavallo,
heretofore called Quirinale.

The Palaces of the Cardinals are dispersed up and down the City as aforesaid.
The houses of the Citizens are not despicable, either in Structure,
Antiquities, Pictures and other noble Houshouldstuff, or Fountains. The Castle
Saint Angelo, or Mole d'Adriano, is a fair and strong Citadel, always
furnished with all warlike provisions, Herein they solem^ize great Feasts and
Holy days three times in the year: with the discharging of all the great Guns,
and Fireworks: To wit on the Festival day of San Pietro and Paolo, the second
is celebrated annually on the day whereon the immediate Pope is selected to the
Pontifical Chair, the third on the day the said immediate Pope is crowned: The
Guard of which Castle is committed to some Person of Quality: who is understood
to have completed his Charge and Government at 7 years end: and is then
commonly rewarded with a Cardinals ^ap, or some thousands of Crowns.

The Aqueducts of the old Romans with their conserves for waters were many: but
that of Acqua Claudia, was composed with so much Art, and at so vast expense,
that but only to repair and restore it to its ancient form cost five hundred
and sixty Talents besides which there was, l'acqua Martia, Aless andrina,
Giulia, Augusta, Sabbatina, Appia, Traiana, Tepula, Alsietina, di Mercurio,
della, Virgin, del'Aniene the old, and Antoniane the new, and others: together
with infinite Baths, as le Anliane; le Variane, le Titiane, le Gordiane, le
Novatiane, le Agrippine, le Alexandrine, le Manliane, le Dioclesiane, le
Deciane, and those Bathes appropriate to Trajan, Philip Adrian, Nero, Severus,
Constantine, Farnus, Domitian and Probus with many others.

The Piazzaes also in those days were diverse, a Sla Romana, that of the
Pistory. of Caesar, of Nerva, of Trajan, of Augustus, of Salustus, of
Dioclesian, of Enobarbus, and the Esquilina, wi^h those particularly used for
Herbs, Beasts, Fish, Sheep, Hoggs, Bakers, for the Country market people, and
the Transitoria.

The Triumphal Arches which are most famous follow, of Romulus, of Claudius, of
Titus Vespasian, of Constantine, of Lucius, Settimius Severus, of Domitian, of
Trajan, of Fabianus, of Gordianus, of Galienus, of Tiberius, Theodosius and
Camillus.

The Amphitheatres named were these, that of Stafilius Taurus, of Claudius, and
that of Titus Vespasian, which was capacious, enough for one hundred and fifty
thousand persons. The Theaters these, that of Scaurus, Pompejus, Marcellus,
Balbus, and Caligula.

The Circi or Show places in Rome were Il Massimo, l'Agonio, Il Flaminio, that
of Nero, and that of Alexandre.

The memorable Porticues or open Galleries Denomminations, ensue, Il Pompeio,
Il Corinthio, della Concordia, della Liberta, di Augusto, di Severo, di Panteo,
di Metello, di Constantino, di Q Catullo, del Foro, di Augusto, di Trajano, di
Livia, del circo Massino, di Nettuno, di Quirino, di Mercurio, di Venere
Cricina, di Ottavio, Iulia, and that called Tribunale Aurelio.

The famous Collumnes were, Lo Rostrata, la Lattaria, la Bellica, la Menia,
those of Trajan, of Caesar, of Antonius pius, and those in the Porticue of
Concordia.

The Piramides these, one in the Circo maximo, one in the Campo Martio, one in
the Mauseolo or rich Tomb of Augustus, one of the Sun of the Araceli, of the
Moon, of the holy Trinity, of the Vatican, of Saint Petre, and of San Mauro,
which flanks the Roman College.

In Rome were three Colossus, one of Nero, another of Apollo, a third of Mars
and two other Pyramides one of C Celtius, another of Scipio.

Also some places called Naumachie, appointed for Naval Fights, as large as the
Circus Maximus, and were called of Domitian, Nero, and Caesar. The proud
Fabrics named Settezonii were two, the one of Severus, which Pope Sextus the
5th. caused to be overwhelmed, the other of Titus.

Some Horses were erected composed of several Materials, as of Marcus Aurelius,
of Antoninus, in the Campidoglio of Domitianus, of L. Verus, Trajanus, Caesar.
Constantinus, of Fidia, and of Prasitelle, in the Quirinale, or Monte Cavallo.

The Names of such as have writ of the Famous things in ROME.
THese following Authors have wrote of the City ROME. P. Vittore wrote of the
Parts of the City; Aristides sofista in Greek an Oration in praise of Rome; but
the more modern are Giusto Lipsio, Lucio Fauno, Bartolameo Marliano, lately set
forth with Prints Lodovico Demonciosi, in a Book entitled Gallus hospes de
Urbe, printed at Rome: Poggio a Florentine, Fabriccio Varriano, Flavio Biondo,
Rafael Volaterrano, Francesco, Albertini, Rucellai, Sorlio, Giacomo Boissardo,
Mauro Andrea Fulvio, Rosino, Panuino, Vuolfango Lazio.

Of the modern state and greatness of Rome under the Pop^s Flavio, Biondo
Thomaso Bosio Eugubino, and Thomaso Stapletono an English Man, have at large
discoursed.

Of the seven Churches of Rome, Onofrio Panuino, (who wrote also of the burying
places) M. Attilio Serrano, and Pompeio Augonio the Roman Library keeper in the
vulgar Tongue, and of the other Churches Lorenzo Schradero Sassone in the
second Book of his Memorials of Italy.

Of the times and impresses of the Consuls and Emperors, Cassiodor^ a Roman
Senator, Marcellino, Vettor Tanunense, Gioanni Cuspiniano, Carlo Sigonio
Onofrio Panuino, Stefano Pighio, whose History is beautified with figures, and
Uberto Golizio, who did the same with the Meddals.

Passing by the Ancient Greek and Latin Authors. These ensuing have wrote the
Histories of the Roman Emperors, viz. Plutark, Dion, Herodian, Iulianus
Caesar, Ammianus, Lampridius, Spartianus, Aurelius, Victorius, with others who
have been often reprinted. Also the Images of those Emperors were treated of
and published by Uberto, Glotzio, Hiperbolita, Giacomo, Strada Mantoano,
Sebastiano, Or^zo, and others, moreover the Images of the said Emperors and
their wives were stamped in Copper by Levino Hulsio Gandavese in Spire.
Furthermore the Lives of the Emperors were set forth in Verse by Ausonio
Borgidolense, Gia, Micillo, and Orsino Velio.

Of the Columns of Rome, Pietro Giacone Alfonso Chianone and Pietro Gallesino,
the one of the Rostrata, or Pulpit bedecked with beaks of Ships, in the
Campidoglio, the second of that of Trajan, the third of that of Antoninus.

Of the Acqueducts and Waters entering Rome, Sesto Iulio Frontino, Aldus
Manutius, and Giovanni Servilio of the Acqua Virgin wrote Duca the Roman
Legist: Of the increase and Augmentation of the Tyber Lodovico Gomesio and
Giacomo Castiglione.

Of the Magistrates of Rome, Pamponeo Leto, Andrea Dominico Flano whose works
are erroneoufly attributed to Fenestela Carlo Sigonio Giovanni Bofino in his
seventh Book of the Roman Antiquities, and Giach^mo Perionio of the Provinces
Marian Scoto, and Guido Pancirolo.

Of the Senate, Aulo Gellio, Giovanni Zamosio, Great Chansellor of Polonia, and
Paul Manutius.

Of the Comitia, or Assemblies of the People for electing Officers, Nicolo
Grucchio, Carlo Sigonio, and Giovanni Rosino in his 6th Book of the Roman
Antiquities.

Of the Judges, Valerius Maximus, in his 7th. Book and Giovanni Rosino in his
7th. Book of the Antiquities of Rome.

Of the High Priests. Andrea Dominico Flacco, Pomponeo Leto, and Rosino
aforenamed.

Of the times of their Festivals, and of their Games, Ovidius Naso, Lidius
Geraldus, Rosinus and Josephus Scaliger in his Book, De Temporum emendatione.

Of the Triclinia, or Supping Parlours, or their Banquets and manner of sitting
at Table, Pietro Chiacon Toletano, Fulvio Orsino a Roman: Ramusio, De quaesitis
per Epistolam, and Andrea Baccio, De vini Natura.

Of the sharp pointed Steeple erected by Sixtus the 5th. Pietro Angelo Barba,
Pietro Galesino, Michel Mercator, and Giovanni Servilio.

Of the Theater, and Amphitheatres Iustus Lipsius, and Giovanni Servilio, in
his first Book of the wonderful works of the Ancient.

Of the Roman Militia, Polibius, Iustus Lipsius, Giovanni Antonio Valerin^,
Giovanni Servilio in 30. lib. De mirandis Carlo sigonio, and Giovanni Rosino.

Of the Provinces Sextus Rufus in his Breviary; and Carlo Sigonius, of the
Colonies Sextus Julius Frontinus, Onofrio Panuino, and Carlo Sigonio.

Of the Ciphers or Figures of the Ancient, Valerius Probus the Author of that
tenth Book added to Valerius Maximus of the Roman surnames, whereof also
Sigonius has writ, Panuinus and others.

Of the antiquity of the Edifices, and the ruins of Rome, Carolus Sigonius in
his Book De antiquo Iure Civium Romanorum. Paul^s Minutius, who wrote also of
the Laws of Rome, as did Antonius Agostinus and others.

The Figures of Romes Antiquities were stamped in Brass by Antonio Salamanca
and others. The Tablets in brass likewise by Onofrio Panuino and others: The
Statues in Rome, were published by Giovanni Giacomo Boissardo and others. The
Images of the illustrious Persons were taken from the Marble figures and
printed by Achille Statio, a Portuguese, and Theodore Galleo, by whom also were
set forth the lively Visages of the modern illustrious Italians, as also of the
nine learned Greeks, who being taken at Constantinople, first brought the Greek
letters into Italy and afterward conveyed the same into Gallia and those parts
beyond the Alps.

The old Inscriptions on Marble and other stones in Rome and elsewhere, were
divulged by Pietro Appiano, Maritino Smetio, Fulvio Orsino and diverse others.
The Epitaphs on Christians Tombs are collected by Lorenzo Scradero a Saxon, and
by Chitreus in his Book of delight in travails.

Of the Roman wonders Ubertus Glothzius has wrote an ample Book, which also
comprehends the Inscriptions and meddals of Apulia, and Sicilia, Sebastiano
Erizzo and others.

The Lives of the Roman Chief Bishops and Popes were made public by
Bartholomeo, Platina Papiro. Maxone and others: whom we must not read without
great circumspection Panuino has likewise presented to common view all their
Images taken by the life.

Of the Cardinals, their times, and appurtenances, Onofrius Panuinus Alfonso
Chiaccone a Spaniard and others have wrote, and Theodorus Gallus in Anvers,
engraved the Images and Elogies of twelve Cardinals.

Of the seven Churches of ROME, which are most visited, and more richly
fraught with Indulgencies and Privileges than the Rest.
THE Moddel of the Temples of Rome vary according to the different times and
humors of Men; sometimes building them Round, without Collumnes, without
traversing, and without Casements, leaving in the Covering an open hole or
Cupola for the light to enter in at. Of this sort is the Rotonda of Rome, a
Church worthy consideration for the Architecture. Which some times our
Ancestors made in an Orbicular form, but with rows of Pillars diversely
placed, as is San Stefano, in Monte Celio, heretofore the Temple of Juno, and
that of Costanza or Constantina in the Via nomentina, without the Porta
Viminale, which it is thought was anciently the Temple of Ba^chus. Sometimes they
used to build their Temples Square, with one or two Banks or Pillars, as now
appear S. Giovanni Lateranense in Monte Celiv, San Paolo in the Via Ostiense,
Sant Agnese without the Walls. And other times they formed them by entressing
or joining the Pillars together at Top, near to which just under the Roof they
fixed their little Casements, which. were more or less according to the
proportion of the Structure: of which Sort are many in Rome, with stately
Frontispieces, some of them being adorned with Columns of precious and diverse
colored Marble, and many others whose Pavement are wrought in figures with
little pieces of Marble alla Moisaca.

The First of the Seven principal Churches of ROME called Santa Crose, in
JERUSALEM.
THis Church is the first and chief in devotion, seated in Monte Celio, nobly
built by Helena Mother of the Emperor Constantine the Great: In it are 20.
Collumnes, and two fair tombs of black, red, and white Marble: the covering of
the High Altar is sustained by 4 Marble Pillars. One inscription there to be
read, shows that the ground or earth (the Foundation or Floor thereof) is the
true holy Earth brought from Jerusalem. It Is believed this was the Asylum or
Sanctuary in the life time of Romulus, and that Tullius Hostilius afterward
enlarged the City to the said Asylum. It Is observable that in the same place,
where Impunity for evil works was afforded to Malefactors under the first
Founders of Rome; under the ChristiReligion, Our Lord God is pleased to grant
remission of our Sins.

In this Church is the Tomb of Pope Benedict the 7th. with an Epitaph in
verse: and of Francesco Quigone a famous Sculptor. More of this Church will be
spoken in the second days Journey.

The Second Church of the Sainto, FABIANO and SEBASTIANO.
THis Church stands in the Via Appia, built with plain work in a long form, the
pavement Marble, contiguous with a fair Monastery now deserted. Herein were at
first reposed the Bodies of St. Peter, and St. Paul. The High Altar is
sustained with four Marble Pillars, and is raised with Stone, as are most
Altars in Rome. Under an Iron grate, lies the Body of St. Stephen the Pope a
Martyr, and of 46. other blessed Popes, with the Relics of above 74 thousand
Martyrs And for that this Church is so far distant. The Pope grants that
instead of visiting it in the extreme hot weather, The People should repair to
Santa Maria del Popolo for their Indulgencies. Of this Church more will be said
in the voyage of the second day to the Via App^a. And of Santa Maria del
Popolo, in the Catalogue of Churches.

The third Church named San GIOVANNI del LATERANO.
THis may be called the Chief amongst the seven principal Churches, having
been formerly the Abode of the Popes in Monte Celio, and Sixtus the 5th. though
in vain, reedified that Pontifical Palace even from the very foundations,
wherein was frequently celebrated the famous synod called Synodo Lateranenze in
Rome. The Roman Emperors used to receive the golden Crown in this Church. Its
pavement is wrought with lovely Marble, and Its Roof richly carved and guilt.
It has many Relics of Saints, as the heads of St. Peter and St. Paul, the
Vest of St. Stephen bloody and corn by those Stones cast at him, and diverse
other things worthy veneration: Of which the Bulls of Pope Sixtus quartus, and
of Pope Gregory cut in Marble, affirm the Verity. This Church was repaired in
many places by Nicholas the 4th. in the year 1291, the testimony whereof yet
remains in the Front. It Is reported, That its Collumnes were transported by
Vespatian from Jerusalem to Rome. This is one of the five Patriarchal Churches.

The Baptistary is conjoined to the said Church, wherein Constantine the
Emperor was baptized by the Pope St. Sylvester. Into one of the Chapels
whereof dedicated to St. John Baptist, no Woman is permitted to enter under
pain of Excomunication, in memorial that One Woman was cause of the death of
St. John Baptist, who first published Baptism. The Collumnes of Porphyr therein
standing, being rubbed with ones hand, smell as sweet as any Violet, they were
brought from Pilates House, together with one of its Gates, and the Collumne
whereon the Cock stood, who by his thrice crowing put St. Peter in mind of the
words of our Savior. In Saint John they preserved the Ark of the old
Testament, the Rod of Aaron, the Ladder brought from the Palace of Pilate,
whereto Christ was bound when whipped with rods, the drops of whose blood yet
appear on it. The stone whereon the Jews cast lots, with other notable things,
particularly treated on by the Authors aforenamed. These things are publicly
showed to Pilgrims. the Epitaphs of Pope Sylvester the second, and of Antonio
Cardinale Porthogese, are legible in verse, as also of Lorenzo Valle, a Canon
of this Church who deceased 50 years old in Anno. 1465. In whose commendation
this Elogy was set up* Laurens Valla jacet, Romanae gloria linguae.
Primus eni^ docuit, qua decet art loqui.


Here is the Porta Santa, which at the beginning of the year of Jubilee the
Popes use to set open. In the Voyage of the second day other things will be
mentioned of this Church.

The third Church named SAN LORENZO without the PORTA ESQUILINA.
THis large Church is sustained by 36 Marble Pillars, and connexed with it is
the Monastery of the Canon Regulars of St. Austin, which is called di san
Salvadore. Here is one of those places under ground (as St. Sebastiano) wherein
are laid many of the bones of Martyrs brought from the Cemeterio Ciriaco, and
here are the Relics of San Lorenzo, among which is the stone, whereon that
blessed St. being taken off the Gridiron was placed, and expired, which stone
is covered with an Iron Grate. On the left side of the high Altar, stands the
Tomb of Eustachius Nephew of Pope Innocent the 4th whereon are carved some
fair statues, as 'twere actually endeavoring to bring a Lamb to the
Sacrifice. This was one of the five Patriarchal Churches, and will be farther
spoken of in the Voyage of the second day:

The Fifth of the principal Churches called SANTA MARIA MAGGIORE nel MONTE
ESQUILINO.
THis in respect of the other Churches is small but polite, 312. foot long, and
112. broad, Its pavement is wrought with Figures in Mosaic work, and the Roof
guilt. In it is one Altar of Porphyr, and a Tomb of Porphyr wherein lies
Giovanni Patricio, who built this Church. In a Vault under ground is kept the
Crib or Manger wherein our Savior was laid at his Birth, often visited, with
Mas^es and Prayers, for which end Sixtus quintus, there built a glorious
Chapel, deputing to it Clerks, who ought there continually to attend for
divine Worship.

Here are engraven the works of Pope Pius the 5th. for the service and
propagation of the Christian Religion, in perpetual remembrance of so good a
Pastor: whose Body he ordered also should be put in ^n honorable Tomb on the
one side, and his own to be placed on the other side, when it should please the
Lord to call him to himself. On the right side of the high Altar lies the body
of Pope Nicholas the 4th. near whose Tomb stands an Image of the blessed Virgin
painted by Saint Luke. Here also is the Sepulcher of San Girolame. And here ly
buried Alberto and Giovanni Normando. Platina who wrote completely the lives of
the Popes. Lucco Gaurico a famous Mathematician and Bishop of Civita. Francesco
Toledo a Jesuit^ Zforseschi da Santa Fiora and i Cesis, three Cardinals. Upon
the Pillars are some ancient Pictures of such as undertook the Argument for the
Catholic Faith against the Heretics (who condemned images) when that point
was disputed in the Council. Before this Church Sixtus Quintus reared an
Obelisk, which is the least of the four in Rome, and is without Hieroglyp^ick
notes, as that before Saint Giovanni Laterano has. On the back part of this
Church is erected a Marble Collumn, not so great as neat, in memory of the
Absolution which Henry fourth King of France and Navarre, obtained from Clement
the eighth in Ann. 1593. This was one of the five Patriarchall Churches, and
will be further treated of in the third days Journey.

The Sixth of the Principal Churches, called SAN PAOLO NELLA VIA OSTIENSE.
THis is the fairest and biggest Church of Rome being 120 paces long and 85
broad built by Constantine the great, and sustained (as may be said) by a Grove
of stately Pillars.

It Is paved with Marble. Many Inscriptions are there placed and published by
orhers. One most remarkable is this. P. P. P. R. R. R. S. S. S. F. F. F.

The Venerable Bede being at that time most learned was consulted and desired
to resolve the signification of those Letters, which he thus explained. Pater
Patriae Perfectus
Regnum Romae Ruit
Secum Sublata Sapientia
Ferro, Flamma, Fame.


The High Altar is supported by four Porphyr Pillars exposeing to public view
the Image on the Crucifix, which spoke to St. Brigide while she prayed: as the
Inscription declares, and the Bull verifies. Here also are stupendiously
expressed in Mosaic work, the Imagea of Christ, of Saint Peter, Saint Paul,
and Saint Andrew, so lively that words seem to issue out of their mouths,
together with all the Instruments of the Passion and death of our Savior. This
Church was nobly restored and beautified by Clement the 8th. an excellent Pope:
In the Brazen gates, are figured diverse holy histories Greek and Latin; From
the inscriptions it is gathered, that these gates were placed there, by
Pantaleon, Consul in the time of Alexander the 4th. This was one of the five
Patriarchal Churches. In it are the Sepultures of some Popes, as of Giovanni
who dyed in anno 1472. and Pietro Leone and the memorials of Julius the third
Gregory the 13th. and Clement the 8th. who opened the Porta Santae, in the year
of Jubilee. This Church is at present governed by the Friars of the Order of St.
Benedict. Here is the Chapel of St. Paul in good part restored by Alexandro
Farnese, a Cardinal in anno 1582. In the Vestry are many Relics of Saints,
the Collumnes whereon St. Paul was decapitated, and a stone which. they usually
fastened to the Feet of the Martyrs for their greater torment. In the Chapel of
Porta Celi, are the relics of 2203 Persons martyred by Nero. whence at a
small distance is the Tree Fontane, or three Fountains, the place of Saint Paul's
Martyrdom (fully restored and beautifyed by Clement the 8th.) whose head being
cut off, took three leaps, and at each Leap, a spring arose and still runs with
clear waters.

The Seventh of the Principal Churches of ROME, called S. PIETRO in VATICANO.
FOR Beauty, sumptuousness, Artifice, and Worth; not only Rome but the whole
world yields this meritoriously a precedence to all other Churches, especially
in that part built in later times, to which Sixtus the 5th. added a noble
Cupolo, wherein are figured the Celestial Hierarchy in pieces of Mosaic, that
the beholders believe them painted. And Gregory the 13th. as glorious a Chapel
in honor of Saint Gregory Nazianzene, wherein he was buried. Without doubt it
is the most perfect model of decent Magnificence in the World, there being an
answerable uniformity within and without. And may justly be compared (if not
said to surpass) the Temple of Diana in Ephesus, formerly accounted one of the
seven wonders of the world: burnt by Herostratus who by that horrid Act sought
rather to perpetuate his name than to ly unremembred in his Grave. The Old
Church had 24 collumnes of so various colored Marble, as are not matchable,
which were taken from the adjacent Sepulcher of Adrian the Emperor, who was
most exquisite in all his works. Those other Pillars in the Chapel of the holy
Sacrament and those that support the Volto Santo, that is the Towel of
Veronica, with some others, were transported from Jerusalem into Italy by Titus
Vespasianus and taken out of the Temple and Palace of Solomon, after that the
Jews were wholly overcome and their said City destroyed. The top is all of
squares, Levati as they call it, like the Pantheon, in the Center of the Church
stands the great Altar, all of solid Brass, in such stupendous pillars that
each weighs 25000. pound and is of so incomparable workmanship that no
Cathedral but St. Peter's is fit to entertain it. Herein is the Sepulcher of the
Emperor Otho the second, buried in anno 1486. in porphirie: A greater porphyre
stone then this Italy affords nor, except that of Santa Maria Rotonda the
Sepulture of Theodorick King of the Ostrogothes. This was one of the five
Patriarchal Churches, and the old part was built by the Emperor Constantine
the great, who caused it be sustained by Pillars: But Pope Julius the second ^n
anno 1507 was the Founder of the new part, himself laying the first stone of
the foundation with his own hands in the presence of thirty five Cardinals,
Bramante, of Urbin, was the Inventor of the Model, which Michael Angelo,
Bonarota the Florentine, afterward added to and corrected.

Antonio Fiorentino, by order of Eugenius the 4th. made the gate of Brass, with
the figures of Christ, the blessed Virgin, of Saint Peter, and St Paul. In the
holy week every year they show here the Visage of Christ, called Volto Santo,
impressed on the Towel of Veronica. There is one Figure of the Virgin Mary
holding Christ dead in her lap the work of Michael Angelo, whose also is that
most excellent Picture of universal Judgment, placed in the Popes Chapel. On
the Eastern part of the Church hangs the Pinnace of St. Peter, in Mosaic work
by Giotto Fiorentino. In the Chorus stands the Tomb of Pope Sixtus the fourth,
all of Brass, and on the top lies his Figure represented sleeping, with Virtue
on both sides, and round it the Sciences, that is Theology, Philosophy, and
the liberal arts with his Inscription, The work of Antonius Palladius, in anno
1482. Herein also besides those of the first Martyrs Lyno, Cleto and others,
are the graves and Tombs of many Popes to wit, of Innocent the 8th. in Brass.
of Pius the 2d. a Siennois and Pius the 3 Son of a Sister of Pius the 2 Of
Marcellus the 2 who lived in the Pontificacy but 22. days. Julius the third,
all without Inscriptions. These following have all Epitaphs in verse: As
Nicolas the 5th. Eugenius the 4th. Urban the 6th. Adrian the 1st. Gregory the
4th. and 5th. Boniface the 8th. Paul the 3d. whose Brass Tomb stands in the new
part. Innocent the 4th. Urban the 7th. Gregory the 13th. and 14th. and also
Balbo the most learned in the Greek, and Cardinal dalla Porta.

Who desires more ample satisfaction in the particulars of the 7 principal
Churches of Rome, shall find it in the diligent writings of Onofrius Panuinus,
and Attilius Serranus, in the Latin tongue, and of Pompeio Ugonio in the
Italian. Let this compendious description, content the curious in this study
here, who for more light are referred to the Authors above named. Now lets pass
to the other Churches and memorable places.

A Catalogue of the Churches of ROMF, set down Alphabetically with the Epitaphs
most worthy noting therein extant.
SAnto Adriano in tribus Foris, was a Temple first dedicated to Saturn foro
Romano, then to Nerva the Emperor, and lastly to St. Adrian when Cardinal Gio
Bellaio, repaired it.

Santo Agapeto near San Lorenzo.

Santa Agata a Church of the Goths under t^^ Viminale. Here stand the Figures
of Diana and of Peace, to whom it is believed it was dedicated. Before the Gate are
figured certain Children with the pretexta on, which was a Gown edged about
with purple silk, that the Noble men's Children of Rome wore till of the age of
seven years, who sit on seats as if at School.

In it likewise is the Tomb of Giovanni Lascaro with two Greek Epitaphs.

Santa Agnese, in the Borgo de Parione, or the Vianomentana, a Church built
with stately stones, beautifyed with 26 marble Collumnes and a descent of 32
steps. Near it stood formerly a Monastery now fallen to the ground, first
deserted for the intemperate Air. In it was laid the body of St. Agnese anno
114^. Its Porticue was built by Cardinal Julius Nephew of Sixtus the 4th. N^r
this stands a Church dedicated by Alexander the 4th. S. Costanza Daughter of
Constantine the Emperor: Which was formerly dedicated to Bacchus, as is
collected from a Porphyr Tomb yet remaining there, upon which are carved
certain Children treading of grapes. Its form is round; It has 24 Marble
Pillars, and is politely wrought alla Mosaica.

Sant' Alberto nell'Esquillie.

Sant' Alessio nell'Aventino, formerly the Temple of Hercules a Conqueror. In
this Church is preserved the pair of Staier^, under which in his Fathers house.
that Saint lived unknown for some time ^n it likewise Vicenza Cardinal Gonzaga
lies buried.

Sant' Ambrosio, of Masina in Rome or the high street of Sant' Angelo, and
another of the same in Campo Martio.

Sant' Anastasia at the foot of Mount Palatine, in the Street Harenu la: This
was a Temple of Equestrian Neptune, whom they also styled Conscio, for that
they believed him a God knowing of secrets.

Santo Anastasio, in the street A^deatine, near to Tree Fontana the three
Fountains.

Santo Andrea della colonna, in the street Trevio de Ania near the Palace of
the Savelli. Dalla Tavenula between the hills Celio, and Esquilino Delle Fratte
dalle Barche, on the Banks of the Tyber. De gli Orsi, in the Harenula. In
Montucna, at the foot of the Capitolino. In Nazareno in the Harenula. In
Paliura in the Palatino. In Portogallo. In Statera, at the Foot of the
Capitolino. In Transtevere in the Vaticano, in Piazzo Siena, which has a rich
Chapel of the Rusellai. Santo Angelo nel Foro Bovare in the Fish market,
heretofore a Temple of Mercury in Dioclesians hott Baths; was dedicated by Pius
the 4th. to the blessed Virgin and the Angels, near it is a Cloister for the
Carthusian Friars supported by 100. Pillars. In it lies buried the said Pius
the 4th. Bocca, Scorbellone: Francesco Alciato: and Simonetto Cardinal S.
Angelo, of Mozarella nel Monte Giordano.

Santa Anna, in the Flaminian Circe, and under the Viminale.

Sant' Antonio in Portogallo-Di Pado^a, in the Valle Martia. Nel Esquilino,
where at the festival of Saint Anthony, they drive all their Beasts and Sheep
up near to the Altar, that they may afterward be protected against the danger
of Diseases and Wolves. Near to it stands the Hospital restored by Pius the
4th. a Millanese.

Santo Apollinare, formerly the Temple of Apollo, Julius the third joined to it
the College of the Germans. Near it stood the house of Mark Antony the
triumvir.

Li santi Apostoli XII. in Trivio, here reside the Friars Conventuals of Saint
Francis: The Inscription on a Marble stone assures us, it was built by
Constantine the Great, afterward ruined by the Heretics, and then restored by
Pelagius and Giovanni the Popes. Wherein are the Graves and Tombs of the great
Cardinal Niceno Bessarione, the Tusculan Bishop, and Constantinopolitan
Patriark. Of Cardinal Pietro Savonese. Of Bartolomeo, Cameriero Beneventano,
the Divine and Lawyer. Of Cornelius Mussus Bishop of Bittonto the Prince of
Preachers Li Santi Apostoli XII. in the Vatican.

Santo Augustino in Campo Martio a convent of the Austin Friars, Herein lies
the body of Santa Monica the Mother of Saint Austin a Father and Doctor of the
Church with these Verses. Hic Augustini sanctam venerare parentem,
Votaque fer tumulo quo jacet illa sacro.
Quo quondam grato, toti nunc Monica mundo
Succurrat, precibus prestet opemque suis.


This Saint Austin was Bishop of Hippo in Alexandria, a man of a most profound
wit, and learning, and of a most holy and religious life. And these Austine
Friars observe his institutes of life living in common, serving God day and
night, and are tied by the vows of poverty, Chastity and Obedience. The
Cardinals Burdegalense and Verallo ly buried in this Church.

Santa Bibiana in Monte Aventino. Here stood the Baths of Anthony, Licinius.

Santa Barbara in the high Street Pigna was formerly a Temple of Venus in the
Pompeyan Theater.

San Bart^lomeo of the Island in Transtevere, was heretofore a Temple of
Jupiter, or as some say of AEsculapius. Now is there a Convent of Franc^scans
called Zoccolanti, from their going on wooden pattons and an ancient
In^cription in stone to the God Semone Sanco, here also lies the body of Saint
Bartholomew.

San Basilio, in the Foro di Nerva.

San Benedetto, in the Piazza Catinara, and in the Piazza Madama.

San Bernardo near the Pillar, and Baths of Trajan the Emperor.

San Biagio, in the Campo Martio, della Tinta, on the Bank of Tiber. Here stood
the Temple of Neptune, wherein such as were delivered from Shipwreck, used to
hang up a Tablet with the story of their danger and manner of deliverance
painted and described in it: Dell* Anello in the Road Pigna della Fossa, as you
come from the Esquilino, delle Coltre in the Campitello.

Santa Bibiana, in the Esquilie.

San Bonifacio in Aventino, at present called Sant^ Alessio.

Santa Brigide in the Street Harenula.

Santa Cecilia in Transtevere for Nuns. In this Church is the body Campo
Martio, by Cardinal Paulo Emilio Sfondrato Nephew of Gregory the 14th.

San Cesario in the Road di Ripa, excellently repaired by Pope Clement the 8th.

La Chiesa de'Cartusiani, or Carthusians, which is called Santa Maria delli
Angeli.

Santa Catharina, in-the Flaminian Circ, now delli Funari della Rot^ and il
Borgo Novo.

San Celso, near the Bridge, Castello in Banchi.

San Crisogonio in Transtevere: wherein stands the Tomb and Epitaph of Girolamo
Alexandro a most learned Doctor, and of David Uviliano, or Evelyn an English
Orator.

Santo Clemente in Monte Celio: here lies the body of Pope Clement the Martyr,
conveyed to Rome from Chersona a City of Pontus: as as also of Cardinal
Vincenso Laureo.

Santa Costanza, in the Street Nomentana, This is conjectured to have been a
Temple of Bacchus, for a Monument yet appearing of Porphyr stone.

Santi Cosino and Damiano, in the Via sacra, so called for that the
South-sayers used to pass that way; This was formerly the Temple of Romulus and
Remus. In it are the Tombs of Crescentius, and Grudone Pisano, with the
Epitaphs in verse.

San Cosmo, under the Gianicolo. Anciently the Temple dedicated to Fortune:

Santa Elizabetta in Parione.

Santa Enfemia in Esquilie.

Santo Eustachio near the Rotonda, was formerly a Temple of the good --....

San Francesco at the Foot of Gianicolo, Herein is the sepulcher of Pandolfus
Count of Anguillarie, who when 100. years old became a Franciscan Friar.

San Gregorio, in Velabro.

San Gregorio, at the head of the Ponte fabritio, and in Monte Celio, Germans
and Flemings, but now of Friars. Here stood anciently the house of San Gregory
the first Pope, and here they yet show the Table, whereat he daily sed a great
number of poor Persons, as in his life wrote by Giovani Diacone is set forth
and here lies Cardinal Lomelino a Genovese Many Epitaphs of Florentines are
here set up, and of Edoardo Carno, and Roberto Veramo two English Knights both
Lawyers, who being driven out of their Country for defending the Catholic
Religion, came to Rome to finish their days in the peace of the Lord: As also
of Antonio Valle of Barcellona, And of one Statius a Poet, who wrote with
Virgil, as may be collected from this Epitaph. Statius hic Situs est, juvenem
quem Cipris Ademit
Praecocem* AEneae carmine quod premeret,
Statio, Statio F. Dulciss.
Christophora M. Pientiss. P.
Vixit. Ann. XXXIII.


San Girolamo, near the Corte Savella, here the Oratorians, a Religious Order,
instituted with great piety by Saint Philippus Nerius a Florentine Priest in
the last age, who from this Oratory of St. Hierome took their name, for that it
was the place frequented by them for their exercises of Catechizing and
preaching. whose number is greatly increased by his Disciples

San Giacomo in Circo Flaminio: This is an Hospital for Spaniards, diverse
Epitaphs of which Nation are there inscribed, with the memorials of Bartolomeo
Cuevio the Cardinal, and of Bernardino, Bishop of Cordona. In it is the
Pourtray of Pietro Ciocconio, a Priest of Toledo, who had most happy success to
his labor in amending the Books of holy and profane writers Degli incurabili.
Scossa cavallo

San Giovanni Battista in Monte Celio. San Giovanni Evangelista before the
Porta Latina, in Monte Celio, formerly a Temple of Diana, San Giovanni Colivita
in the Isola: supposed an ancient Temple of AEsculapius Nel Font in Monte
Celio; Nel Laterano, one of the seven principal Churches before spoken of. In
Dola, upon Monte CelioNell'Oglio before the Porta latina. Del Mercatello al
Campi doglio, De Malna in Transtavere. Della Pigna, in the high Street Pigna.

San Giovanni and Paulo nel Monto Celio, with two Lions before the Door. The
one holding a Boy between his Teeth, and the other a Man, in it is one
Sepulcher of porphyr stone. Here anciently was the Curia Hostilia.

San Gioseffo in the street Pigna.

San Giuliano in the Esquilino.

Sant'Iuo in the Campo Martio appertaining to the Biertoni.

San Lorenzo near a Fish Market, Nel Viminale. Nel Gianicolo*, anciently Juno
Lucina, here lies Cardinal Francesco Gonzaga. In Font nella Valle Esquilina.
In Miranda in the Foro Romano. In Palispirna on the hill Viminale, wherein is
inscribed an Epitaph of Cardinal Guglielmo Sirleto, the most quaint in the
Greek language, here stood the Palace of Decius the Emperor. In Damaso, in the
Pigna: where are exposed the Epitaphs of Annibal Caro, the most elegant in the
Tuscan language. Of Giacomo Fabia of Parma. Of Pietro Marsa. Of Giulio
Sadoleto, Girolamo Ferraro and other illustrious men. * To this Fabric were
brought the Marbles sculptures and other ornaments of the Arco Gordiano.

San Leonardo in Carine. In Olfeo. In Septi solio. In Esquilino, and S.
Leonardo Vecchio among the obscure shops, on the banks of the Tyber in the
Longara.

Santa Lucia, in the Palace: heretofore the Temple of Apollo Pal^tino Nelle
Botteghe obscure. In old time the Temple of Hercules, and of the Muses.

San Lodovico near Novanna, the Church of the French Nation adorned with the
Epitaphs of the most Noble Persons of France.

Santa Maria Egittiaca formerly the Temple of Fortuna virilis, wherein Bucca
Veritatis, a marble statue set up by the Romans, for the trial of Chastity,
with a wide mouth and great lips: A daughter of Volateranus Regulus to prove
her Virginity unpolluted (being accused for that crime) put her hand in its
mouth and withdrew it without hurt: another Damosel making the same trial,
being unchaste, had her right hand bit off by the Statue. Santa Maria del animam
Parione, a stately Church wherein the Germans, and Flemings reside and assist
the necessitous Pilgrims of those Nations. In it is an Image of the Virgin
Mary with these Verses. Partus, and integritas discordes tempore longo
Virginis in gremio Foedera pa^is habent.


On the left hand of the great Altar stands a Sepulcher of Adrian the 4th.
(made by Cardinal Eutcefora) who was the only person that could say he had
created another Pope in his own life time. On the right the costly Tomb of
Carlo Prince of Cleves, who dyed in the year of Iubilee 1575 the 13th. of
February with the universal sorrow of all good men, but chiefly of Gregory the
13th. Stephano Pighio, wrote his life with that learned Book entitled Ercole
Prodicio with the Epitaphs of Francesco Foresto, Giovanni Roseto and other
noble and excellent men.

Santa Maria in Araceli, on the Capitolino, formerly a Temple of Jupiter
Ferenius, now a Convent of the Zoccolanti, or Franciscans, In it are many
ancient Epitaphs: and an Altar supported by four lovely Pillars, It Is the Church
for the Senate and People of Rome, embellished with the ornaments of the Temple
of Quirinus: and is ascended unto by one hundred twenty four steps.

Santa Maria Aventina, on the hill Aventino formerly the Temple of the Dea
bona, or good Goddess. Here may be read the lamentation of a woman slain by her
Husband. Santa Maria de* Cacabary in Pigna Santa Maria in campo santo, in the
Valley Vaticano, wherein some Epitaphs are legible.

Santa Maria nel Campidoglio, anciently the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus Nella
Capell^ beyond the Tevere or Tyber. In Candelorio, in the street Saint Angelo,
della concettione, the Conception, in Monte Celio. Nel Velabro, formerly a
Temple. of Hercules. In Dominica, on Mount Celio, where were the Aqueducts of
Caracalla. Nel Esquilino, in circo Flaminio, in times past the Temple of Isis,
In corte under the Campidoglio Liberatione dell'inferno, sometime a Temple of
Jupiter Stator in foro Romano. Di Loreto Delle Febre in old time the Temple of
Mars, Della Consolatione and Della Gratie, where formerly stood the Temple of
Vesta between the Capitolinum and Palatinum, there the Vestal Virgins guarded
the sacred Fire, and the Palladium, which was a wooden Image of Pillars with
rouling Eyes, brought by AEneas from Troy (when fired) into Italy with his
other household Gods, and was by him snatched out of the fired Temple.

Santa Maria sopra Minerva so called for that this was a Temple of Minerva, at
present the Fathers Dominicans possess it, and a College for Theology founded
by the Bishop of Cutcha. In it are the Tombs and Epitaphs of Leo the 10th. and
Paul the 4th. with many others among which the Chief are of Pietro Bembo, of
Giovanni Morone who was thirteen several times Legatus a Latere for the Pope,
and President of the Council of Trent, and of Giovanni Torrecremata, who be
queathed a large Revenue for marriage Portions for Virgins, which are solemnized
yearly in the Popes presence on the Festival of the Anunciation, In it also are
the ashes of Egidio Foscari, Bishop of Modena, who in the Council of Trent was
styled the Greater Light: Of Sylvester Aldobrandino, Father of Clement the 8th.
of Giovanni Annio, the Historian and of many other eminent Fathers: As also the
body of Santa Catarina of Siena, and the Epitaph of Guglielmo Durando, Bishop
of Numata, who composed a Book entitled, Rationale Divinorum Officiorum, with
other volumes of the Law.

In the said Temple was erected the first Fryery of the sancto sacramento by
Thomaso Stella a Preacher: and Michael Angelo Buonarota was the inventor of the
Tabernacle for keeping the consecrated Eucharist. Before the Door of the Church
stand the Tombs of Tomaso di Vio, and Giovanni Badia Cardinals and of Paulo
Manutio the Elegant, who for all his Fame, ran the same Fate with Pompey the
Great, who living filled the world with his glory, and dead no Epitaph nor
memorial remains of him, but we find there this Epitaph of Raphael Stantio a
Painter of Urbin, though much less renowned than the preceding. Hic situs est
R^phael timuit qu^ sospite uinci
Rerum mag^ paren^, and m^riente, mori.
Patria Roma fuit, Gens Portia, nomen (...)
Mars puerum insti^it, Mors I^venem rapuit.


Santa Maria de'Miracoli in Monte Gordiano Di (...), in the street St.
E^stachio Di Mont ferrato the Church of the Catalo^ians, in Mo^ticelli, in the
Herenula Della Navicella, in Monte Celio, Nova, in the Foro Romano formerly a
Temple of the Sun and Moon, now enjoyed by the Monks of Mount Olivet.
Annonciata the College of the Jesuists. Della Pace, the dwelling of the Canon
Regulars, therein stand a Tomb of Marco Musuro a Learned Candiot with this
Epitaph. M^sure, o mansure parum, properata t^listi
Praemia, namque cito tradita, rapta cit^,
Antonius Amiternus Marco Musuro Cretensi, erectae
diligentiae Gramatico, and rarae felicitatis poetae, posuit.


Here are the Tombs of Capa ferro, and Mignanello Cardinals, and this Epitaph
of Julius Saturnus Patris eram quondam spes, and sola^en Iulus
Nunc Desideri^m mori^us and l^rimae


Santa Maria delle Paline, in the Viae Appia formerly a Temple of Saturn and
Opes where they show a saphyr brought from Heaven by the Angels, wherein the
Virgins Image was cut as they say by the life in Heaven.

Santa Maria del P^polo near the Por^a Flaminia, before which Pope Sixtus the
5th. erected an Obelisk. It Is a Convent of the Austine Friars the Popes give
license for the People to pay their devotions here while violent he^ts continue
instead of Saint Sebastian which stands a good distance without the Walls. In
it are many fair Chapels, and Tombs of many Cardinals particularly of Hermol^o
Barbaro Patriark of Aquileia with this Epitaph. Barbariem Hermolaos Latio qui
depulis omnem
Barbar^s hic situ^ est, vtr aque lingua gemit
Urbs Ve^etum vitam, m^rtem dedit inclyta Roma
Non potuit ^asci clarius, atque mori.


On the ground this sad complaint of one that dyed upon an inconsiderable hurt
may be read Hospes disce novum mortis genus; improba felis
Du^ trahitur, digitum mordet, and intereo.


Santa Maria di Portogallo at the end of the Suburbs. In Pust^la. In
publicolis, near the Palace of the Signoro Santa Croce. Al Presepe.

Santa Maria Rotonda, so called from its orbicular form. A Temple formerly
dedicated to all the Gods, and to their Mother, and built in a round figure, to
the end the Gods might not fall out for precedence of place, for that they
seigned their Gods would not give place to one another. Thermes refusing it to
Jupiter. Now this Church is consecrated to the blessed Virgin and all the
Saints. It Is a most noble Fabric, built by Vespatia^s Agrippa, who was three
times Consul, as by the Inscription appears. This by the most skillful Artizans
in Architecture, and chiefly by Lodovicus Domontiorius, in his book entitled:
Gallus Hospes in Urbe, is held for an Idea, Example and Pattern of true
Architecture: It Is of a cross figure as broad as high: the Roof was formerly
covered with Sylver plates, but Constantine the Nephew of Heraclius, took them
with the other ornaments of the City away, instead whereof Martin the 7th.
overlayed it with Lead: It has but one window, which is at the very top, and
admits as much light as is necessary: in ancient time it had 7 steps of Ascent
into it, now it has eleven of descent, a good argument to what height this
City is raised by its ruins. Its noble Porticue is sustained, by four great
pillars, with beams and Gates of Brass. The Great Altar is opposite to the
Door. On the wall appears the head of the Mother of God. The ascent to the Top
is by 100 steps. Before the Church stands a great Vessel of Numidian Marble,
square at top but bellyed like a Bee-hive. Near which were two Lions with
Egyptian Letters, and a round Vessel of the same Marble. In it is the
subsequent Epitaph of Tadeo Zaccaro, a Pointer, contemporary with Raphael
d*Urbino, the Prince of the Painters of later Ages, who we formerly said, lies
buried in Santa Maria sopra Minerva. Magna quod in magno timuit Raph^ele,
per-aeque
Thadaeo in magno pertimuit genitrix.


Santa Maria Scala Caeli, without the Porta Ostiense, where 10000: Persons were
Martyred: it is called Scala Caeli, because St. Bernard there praying for the
Souls of the dead, had an appearance of a Ladder from the Earth to heaven, upon
which he saw some Souls ascend into Paradise. Del Sole under Monte Tarpeio
della Strada near the Portico Corinthio, and the Campidoglio now denominated
Del nome di Giesu A noble Church built by Cardinal Alessandro Farnese, for the
Jesuits, wherein himself is interred. In Transtevere. Here in the time of
Angustus gushed out in a common Inn a spring or source of Oil, which continued
running for one whole day, presaging that a short time after Christ the source
and fountain of Mercy should be born, Here was a Church built in honor of the
Virgin Mary by St. Peter, which by succeeding High Bishops was adorned with
excellent Pictures, and enriched diverse times with gold and silver and
increased in bigness to what it now appears. In it are the Sepulchers of
Stanislao Bishop of Varma who was that Polack Cardinal Prefect of the
Tridentine Council and the scourge of the Heretics.

Of Cardinal Campeggio, and Altemps a man of great Dispatch. Transportina in
Borgo in old time the Temple of Adrian the Emperor, wherein St. Peter and St
Paul were scourged. In Via Lata the Church of the Fathers Servients, where
under ground many Trophies and Triumphal Images have been found. In it lies
buried Cardinal Vitellotio Vitelli: Here St. Luke wrote the Acts of the
Apostles, Acta Apostolorum: and this was the place where St. Paul prayed. Del
Trivio, which Church was restored by Belisarius great Captain for Justinian the
Emperor, as appears by an inscription on a stone, here lies Luigi Cornaro, and
others, it appertains to the Padri Croicchieri, the crutched Friars.

Santa Maria in Vinea in the descent from Monte Tarpeio. In Via delle Virgini,
amplifyed by Pietro Donato a Cardinal therein enterred, where also San Philippo
Nerio, accounted one of the Saints of Pope Gregory the 15 his Family, settled
his order of Oratories, which was a true School for well living.

Santa Maria Magdalena, in the stree Colonna, Between the Hill Santa Trinita,
and the Tyber. Nel Quirinale, where is a Monastery of Nuns governed by the
Predicatory, instituted by Maddalena Orsina.

San Mauro in the midst of the Jesuits College: Near this Church is an Obelisk
which though small, appears glorious through the Hierogliphicks carved on it,
here lies Pietro Giglio a great Scholar who dyed anno 1555 whose Tomb Georgio
Cardinal of Armignac caused to be built as to his familiar friend.

San Marcello nella Via Lata, was a Temple of Isis, in it are the Friars
Servients, in it are buried the Cardinals Mercurio, Dandino, and Bonuccio.

San Marco, wherein lies Francesco Pisani a Venetian Cardinal.

San Martino of the Carmelites in Monte Esquilino, where Cardinal Diomede
Caraffa is buried.

Santa Martina in the Foro Romano, anciently a Temple of Mars Ultor.

Santa Margarita at the Foot of the Esquilino.

San Matteo in Esquilino, possessed now by the Austin Friars, but formerly by
the crutched Friars, which Church is supposed to be the house of their first
Founder Saint Cletus the first Pope, for that it is seated in the Borgo Patritio,
where he was born: which having consecrated he gave to his Disciples and
Children for the service of God.

San Michael in Borgo.

Santi Nereo and Archielo near the Baths of Antonius, formerly a Temple Isis in
the Via Appia.

San Nicolo in Agone. In Archemoni. Acapole Cose. Degli Arcioni. In Carcere a
Ripa formerly the public prison. In Calcaria near which was the Portico
Corinthio.

Sant' Onofrio in Gianicolo, where lies Cardinal Madruccio, who dyed Lodovico
Madruzzi, Nephew of the first Cardinal Sega, a Bolonian, and Tasso the
excellent Poet.

San Pancratio in Gianicolo, wherein is a Pulpit of neat fair porphyr, Grottos
filled with the bodies of Martyrs: Herein lies Cardinal Dersonese, and near it
was slain Bourbon the enemy of God.

San Pantaleone in Sebucca formerly a Temple dedicated to the Goddess Tellus,
and to Pasquinus.

San'Paolo in Regola in the street Harenula.

San Pietro and Marcellino, heretofore the Temple of Quietas.

San Pietro in carcere. This was the Tulliane prison, whereof Salust makes
mention in Catalines conspiracy. Diodate in the Via Piamense, Montorio in the
Gianicolo: A fair Church and well adorned, wherein is the fair Chapel of
Bradamante, endowed by Ferdinand King of Spain, near it stands a Convent of
Observants of Saint Francis Order of this society died anno 1597 Friar Angelo a
learned Spaniard, who wrote a great Volume upon the Symbol or Creed of the
twelve Apostles. In it are several pieces of Raphael d'Urbino, and Sebastiano
Venetiano, two famous Painters, and several Tombs. San Pietro Domine quo vadis,
in the Via appia Rotonda, this Church was so called because Saint Peter, flying
persecution, Christ appeared to him, of whom Saint Peter demanded whither he
was going in these words Domine quo vadis? to whom Christ answered I am going
to Rome, that I may there be once more crucified: from which words St. Peter
took courage, and returned to Rome, where he was afterward crucified, and his
head set on high. S. Pietro in vincula; where the Chains wherewith Saint Peter
was bound in Jerusalem and in Rome, are sanctimoniously preserved, as also the
Bodies of the Maccabei and a part of the Cross of Sant Andrea, whose head is
kept i^ San Pietro in the Vatican, being sent by an Emperor of Constantinople
to the Pope, and the rest of his Body is in the Kingdom of Naples: This Church
has one stupendous Altar: and brazen Doors, wherein the passions of Saint
Peter are excellently represented: Under the Sepulcher of Pope Giulio the
second lies a most fair statue of Moses the Captain of the Hebrews, the
workmanship of Michael Angelo, of Florence. Many other memorable things are
showed in this Church. In the Convent is a Palm tree which alone in Rome
produces seasonable and ripe Fruit: Here lies buried the Cardinals Nicolo
Cusano, Sadoleto, and Rovero, the walls present some inscriptions of the old
Gentiles. Some other things will be related of this Church in the third days
Journey.

San Peregrina alla porta pertura, whence that Burge takes name.

Santa Prossede in the Esquilino, built by Pope Pasquale the 1st. wherein
stands the Pillar to which our Savior was bound when scourged, conveyed from
the Eastern parts by Cardinal Giovanni Colonna: and here Saint Peter dwelt. At
the Altar are six Pillars of Porphyr and two of black Marble with white spots.
In it are many bodies of Saints reposed, and in the midst is a hollow with a
grate over it, wherein Prascede squeazed the blood of the Martyrs, which he had
sucked up with spunges in diverse places: About 400. years ago the Monks of
Valle Umbrosa resided here.

Santa Prisca in Monte Aventino, anciently a Temple dedicated to Hercules.

Santa Prudentiana in the Viminale: here they show that stone upon which the
bloody Host appeared, while a Priest misdoubted the holy Sacrament at the
Altar. This is the most ancient Church of Rome and said to be the place where
Saint Peter celebrated Mass: here ly the bodies of 3000. Martyrs and a
venerable Vessel for their bloodThe penitentiary Dominicans inhabit there: and
the Monks of Saint Bernard. Cardinal Gaetano a noble Roman, who built a stately
Chapel in it, and Cardinal Radzivil Lima^o (a good patriot of the Catholic
Religion though born of Heretic parents) ly buried there.

Santi Quaranta Martini, commended by Saint Bassilia in a sermon.

Santi Quatro Coronati in Monte Celio.

Santi Quirico and Giulita in the Suburbs.

San Rocco nella Martia.

S. Rufina beyond the Tyber, and at Saint Giova^ Laterano.

Santa Sabina in Monte Aventino, the first Residence of the Popes, is Dominican
Friars: here they show the stone which the Devil in vain cast at Saint Dominick
with intention to kill him, before the Door of this Church stands the greatest
Urn of one stone in Rome. Here they keep the Relics of Pope Alexander of
Quentius and Theodulus the Martyrs: Of Sabina and Seroffia the Virgin all
Martyred under Adrian the Emperor anno Christi 133* and here laid up by
Eugenius the 4th. anno 822. who is likewise enterred here with an Epitaph in
heroic verse, as are the Cardinals Bartano and Tiano, Here grows yet a
Pomgranat tree planted by Saint Dominick with the assistance of San Giacinto,
which the Romans through devotion despoil of all Leaves and Fruit the first day
of Lent, the Pope and Prelates coveting of its Leaves which they wear. Here
Saint Dominick gave the first Rise to his Order, and vested San Giacinto in his
Religious Order and habit, where he had many Visions of Angels.

Santo Sabba Abbate in Aventino; where arises a stately great Sepulcher,
believed to be of Titus Vespasian.

San Salvadore del Campo in the Strada Giulia, Di Laurane in Monte Melie Di
Copelle in the Precinct Colonna del Lauro, near Monte Giordino, which belongs
to the noble Family Orsini, who with the Maltei ly there buried. Dal Portico
under the Rupe Tarpeia. In Massime, a Temple first dedicated to Jove, Minerva,
and Juno ly M. Pulvi^ius Statera. dedicated to Saturn in the Campi doglio,
Delle Stufe Della Pietra, a Temple of the Goddess Piety in old time. De
Pedemonte. Delle tree Imagini.

San Spirito in Vaticano beyond Tiber, where stands that rich Hospital so
worthy consideration where Cardinal Remnano Francesco is enterred.

San Sebastiano and Fabiano: of which is said in the description of the 7
principal Churches.

San Sergio and Bacco in the Campidoglio formerly a Temple of Concord.

San Simeone in the high street Ponte*

San Sisto in the Piscina inferna of old Temple of Virtue and Honor. Herein
Saint Dominick raised a defunct, named Napuleone from the dead* and wrote many
other miracles: Here the first Nuns congregated, from a general separation over
Rome: but they were translated into a more salubrious Air. It being extreme nau
seous.

San Staniflao, A Church of the Polanders.

San Stephano of the Hungari^s. Rotondo in Monte Celio, formerly a Temple of
Faunus, but now a College of the Germans, round which is drawd the Triumphs
of the holy Martyrs, Nel foro Boario. A temple of the Goddess Vesta, In Via
Giulia. In Silice, Dell Frullo near the Porticue of Anthony.

Santa Susanna, in Monte Quirinale: where stands a fair Brazen Cistern and
Vessel filled with holy water.

San Silvestro in Colonna. A Santiquaro. Nel Quirinale dedicated by Clement the
7th. anno 1524: wherein the Cardinals Rebiba, Antonio Caraffa, and Francesco
Cornaro ly buried. Beyond the Tyber near the Arch of Domitian.

San Tomasa in Monte Celio nel Rione Harenula, nella Via Iulia in Parione.

San Theodoro at the foot of Monte Palatino anciently the Temple of Romulus and
Remus or as others say of Pan and Bacchus.

Santa Trinita de monti, built by Lewis the 11th. King of France by the Council
of Saint Francis, appertains to the Minimes who are near all French. In it are
buried Rodolfo Pio: Crasso and Bellay Cardinals: Lueretia della Rovere Niece to
Giulius the second, and Marco Moreto a most eloquent Orator with this Epitaph.
Hic Marci caros cineres Roma inclyta servat
Quos patria optasset Gallia habere sinu.
Stat colle hortorum tumulus, stat proximus astris.
Quae propius puro contigit ille animo.
Tu sacros larices lacrimis asperge Viator.
Et dic, heu lingua hic fulmina fracta jacent:


Santa Trinita of the English. This is a College of English Catholics, whence
diverse have been transmitted into England, who were there martyred by the ( ut
aiunt,) Heretics. Herein lies Cardinal Allen who took a voluntary banishment
from his own Country: and employed the rest of his days in great Labor and
pains in defense of the Catholic Faith.

San Trisone near Sant Agostino.

San Valentino in the Circo Flaminio.

San Vitale in the Quirinale, lately repaired and now governed by the Jesuits.

San Vito nel Riouo del Ponte wherein lies Carlo Visconte a Cardinal.

The Officers of the Popes Palace.
THe Popes Court exceeding that of any other Christian Prince his Officers also
be many. Which is governed with such Order. That not only the meaner persons
but also the Cardinals (whose dignity is equal to that of Kings) travel not
forth the City without license first obtained.

The number of Cardinals is not praefixt, but left to the will of the Pope:
forty of them at least, being always obliged to reside in Rome: where also
many Arch Bishops and Bishops are constantly present.

In the Popes family are the persons under written.
AUditori di rota. AUditors of the Roll 12. Chierici di Camera. Clerks of the
Chamber 7. Auditor di Camera. Auditor of the Chamber 1. Comissario di Camera.
Comissary of the Chamber 1. Maestro del sacro Pallazzo. Controuler of the holy
Palace 1. Comissario Generale del santo Officio. The General Commissary of the
holy Office. 1. Reggente del Cancellaria. The Ruler of the Chancery: 1.
Protonotorii Apostolici. Apostolic Prothonotaries 7. Subdiaconi. Subdeacons.
6. Accoliti. Resolute Men 8. Secretarii Apostolici. Apostolic secretaries 8.
Corretto di Cancellaria. The Punisher for the Chancery 1. Summista. A Summist
1. De Consueti. Observers of the Rules 1. Abbreviatori minori. Less
Abbreviators 12. Custo di de Cancellaria. Keeper of the Chancery 1. Secretorio
delle Cedole. Secretary of the Docquets 1. Hostiario di Cancellaria. The Hostia
keeper of the Chancery 1. Scritttori Apostolici. Apostolic writers 101
Camierieri Apostolici. Apostolic Grooms of the Chamber 60. Scudieri Vivandieri
Apostolici. Querries of the stable or Vianders. 140. Cavalieri di St. Pietro.
Knights of St. Peter 400. Cavalieri di St. Paulo. Knights of St. Paul 22.
Scrittori di Brevi. Writers of Briefs 81. Procuratori di Penitentiaria.
Proctors of the Office Penitentiaria 24. Scrittori di Penitentiaria. Writers in
the office Penitentiaria 29. Correttori di Piombo. The stampers of the Leaden
Seal 104 Correttorio di Penitentiaria. The Stampers of the Office Penitentiaria
11. Solicitatori. Pursevants 100. Correttori del Archivio. Overseers of the
Arches or spiritual Court 10. Scrittori del Archivio. Writers in the Arches or
spiritual Court 10. Secretarii delle Bolle Salaciate. Secretary of the
Pensionary Bulls 8 Registratori del istesse Bolle. Registers of the said Bulls 4
Maestri delle Bolle Registrate. Masters of the registered Bulls 4 Auditore delle
contradette. Hearers of differences 14. Maestri delle Suppliche. Masters of
Requests 4. Chierici delle suppliche. Clerks of the Requests 6. Notari della
Camera Apostolica. Notaries of the Apostolic Chamber 9. Scrittori del Registro
delle supliche. Writers in the Registry of Requests. 20. Notari del Auditor
della Camera. Notaries for the Auditor of the Chamber 10. Notari di Rota.
Notaries of the Rouls 48. Notari del Vicario del Papa. Notaries of the Popes
Viccar 4. Notari del Governatore civil. Notaries of the civil Magistrate 11.
Notaro de maleficii. Notary of Offenses 1. Notaro di Cancellaria. Notary of the
Chancery 1. Presidenti di Ripa. Presidents of the Bench 141. Portionarii.
Partakers 612. Corsori. Apparitors 19. Servatori d'Arme. Keepers of the Arms
24. Verghe Rosse. Red Rodds 24. Catene nel Sacro Pallazzo. Chains in the sacred
Palace. 71. Port di ferro. Gates of Iron 26. Cavalli leggieri communemente.
Light horses commonly 100. or 200. Bombardieri. Gunners 300.

Switzers, or Germans for guarding the Gates of the Popes Palace, of whom 200.
or 300. always keep Sentinel.

Pope Gregory the 13th: in tenn years of his Enjoyment of the Pontifical Chair
instituted nineteen Seminaries or Colleges for all Nations in Rome, for the
benefit and propagation of the Catholic Faith and for reception, as well as
Instruction of such as abandon their own Countries by reason of persecutions.

To which are since added 7 more instituted by Clement the 8th. and others.

Of the Obelisks. Columns and Aqueducts of ROME.
THe Obelisks restored erected and transferred by Pope Sixtus the 5th. of
glorious memory with incredible expense, by the workmanship of the Inginier
Domenico Fontana, and consecrated to the most holy Cross are these.

The Obelisk of Tiberius Caesar standing now in the Piazza of St. Peter in
Vaticano: in the second year of his inauguration, anno Dom. 1586.

That of Augustus Caesar brought from Egypt, and translated from San Rocco to
Santa Maria Maggiore is not engraven nor carved at all.

That which was consecrate to the Sun transferred from Circo Massimo, (where it
lay on the ground) to San Giovanni in Laterano, is carved with Egyptian
characters, and was reared the third year of his Papacy; Augustus took it from
its place in Egypt and conveyed it upon the Nilo into Alexandria, where
imbarquing it, he sent it by sea for adornment of Rome, which he sought to
imbellish in all things possible: which his endeavor and cost caused him once
to vaunt, that he found Rome all of Brick, but left it of Marble

That dedicated to the Sun by Augustus in Circo Maximo, being drawn out of the
Ruins among which it was buried, was translated with infinite expense to the
porta Flaminia and raised before the Church S Maria del Popolo

Besides the abovenamed, diverse other Obelisks and Pyramides are yet extant in
Rome, but all of small value, except that which was newly erected in the Piazza
Novana by Innocent the X which is admirable*

We gather from the writers of Antiquity that formerly there were many more
Obelisks in Rome then at present appear. Pliny the time of Vespasian names many
of them. Ammianus Marcellinus the contemporary with Julian the Emperor sets
down more, but P. Victor commemorates to the number of 42. treating of the
less. Andrea Fulvius, Pietrus, Angelus, Burgeus Pigafetta, and Michael Mercato,
in the latin and vulgar tongue give thereof most ample accounts.

Augustus Caesar transmitted two Obelisks from Egypt to Rome, at the time he
overcame Marc Anthony and Cleopatra, and Publius Victor, reckons seven more
conveyed thither afterward. One whereof was placed in the Gardens of
Salustius, which took up all the space and the vale from the Church Santa
Susanna to the Porta Collina: This (they say) was consecrated to the Moon, and
carved with Egyptian Characters, What vast Vessels were built for conveighing
these Pliny and Ammianus discourse at large, and one they say had 300 mariners
in her. Now let us speak of those Obelisks that are marked with Egyptian
Characters: That of Saint Peter and Santa Maria maggiore being without such.

The Obelisk before Saint Giovanni Laterano, all over engraved with
Hieroglyphics was brought as asoresaid by Constantine the great out of Egypt
into Alexandria and erected in Constantinople, and thence by Constantius his
son in an immense Galley wherein were 300 Rowers at the Oar, to Rome and by him
placed in the Circo Maximo: which Sixtus the 5th. anno 1588 with incredible
expense removed to Saint Giovanni Laterano where the Popes used formerly to
inhabit. A second he removed from the Circo Massimo to Santa Maria Maggiore
formerly Consecrated to the Sun:

The third in the Vineyard of the great Duke of Tuscany, filled with
Hyerogliphicks: it is but small but it is thought stood in the Campo Martio, in the
time of Tarquine the proud.

The fourth less than the former was transferred from the Campidoglio, by
Ciriaco Mattei, and stands in the Vineyard of the Mattaei who had it of the
gift of the Senate and people of Rome: this has some small Images on the top
only; the others all over.

There is another lying in the Via Appia, near the Sepulcher of Cecilia Metella
broke in 3 several pieces: which (it is much admired) that Pope Sixtus the 5th.
did not erect as well as the ^est: nor is it to be believed but that he would
have done it, had not death interrupted this and his other designs. One other
smaller Obelisk stands near the Jesuits College.

It Is admirable that upon all those Hierogls* and Obelisks the sign of the Cross
is figured: which might happen, either for that the Egyptians through some
mystery honored the Cross, or for that they might have had some relation
touching it from their Ancestors, and yet without knowing the signification. At
the time when by the Emperor Theodosius his command all the Idols of Egypt
were destroyed, On the Breast of Serapis was found the sign of the Cross,
whereof the signification being enquired into, the Priests skilled in the
sacred mysteries of the Egyptians declared, that they understood by it the
Life to come after death here: which could not portend other, than the eternal
beatitude whereto our Savior by his death on the Cross opened the way. Thus
Socrates the writer of the Ecclesiastic Histories in his 5th. Book 27th. Chap.
recounts, as also do Russino, Georgio Cedreno, and Suida, in their writings. We
must observe that the punishment by the Cross in those days common to
Malefactors was taken away by Constantine the Emperor a true Christian,
through his Reverence of our Saviors death: who in lieu thereof constituted
the Gallows, as diverse Authors relate: Which Emperor also prohibited by a
severe Law, the conculcating any Cross upon the Earth Let thus much serve
touching the Obelisks of Rome, if the Reader be curious to search into those in
Constantinople and other places (the discourse whereof is not to our purpose)
let him peruse the treatises of Michael Mercato, Pietro Bellonio, and Pietro
Gillio, upon this subject.

In Rome also are 3 famous Collumnes: one Called Rostrata in the Campidoglio
erected by C. Duilio, after the Carthaginians were overcome in the Punick War.
Another of Trajan, which Sixtus the fifth dedicated to St, Peter: and that of
Anthony which the same Pope consecrated to Saint Paul in anno 1580.

The AQUEDUCTS.
TIBERIUS Caesar conveyed the Acqua Virgin into the City but the works
falling to decay Pope Nicholas the 5. in the year of Christ 1554. and the
seventh of his Papacy restored it to its first beauty as by the Inscription at
the Fontana di Trevi appears.

Sixtus the 5th. brought the Acqua Felice into the City, calling it Felice from
his own name before he was advanced to the Pontifical Chair: Other Popes have
likewise laid and restored other waters for the Citizens convenience and
delight.

A Guide or Direction for the most convenient view of the Antiquities of ROME.
WE will begin from the Vatican, chiefly in favor of those who come from
Tuscany to Rome, entering by the Porta Vaticata, near the Castle Saint Angelo.
Here ly the Meadows and fields of Quintius or as others say of Pincius at this
day called Prata a lovely and pleasant place, whither the youth usually resort
for Recreation.

The Porta Elia, called vulgarly di Castello leads to Adrians Mole, A vast Pile
which he raised for the burying place for himself and the Antonini, being large
and strong, but at present better accomodated than in his time, for that the
Popes have made it a Fortress for their own retreat and security, in time of
imminent danger of Enemies, to which a long Gallery under Ground leads from the
Palace of St. Peter, for their more convenient and safe passage. Heretofore One
Cresentinus made himself Lord of it by force of Arms and of the City also: but
at present the Popes possess it, and call it Castle St. Angelo, from the Marble
statue of an Angel with a sword in his hand set on the top of it, which
Alexander the 7th. augmented and fortified in ample manner as by the
Inscription on the Bridge may be understood. In it are kept the three millions
of Gold, which may not be employed on any use but defense of the Apostolic
state in point of Arms. The Marbles, Collumnes, and Statues formerly there,
were conveyed to the Vatican, and placed in the Church of Saint Peter, and
the Papal Palace, and nothing of Antiquity left behind but the structure, and
two heads, the one of Adrian the Emperor armed, the other of Pallas, with some
inscriptions on the walls, which notwithstanding, it is yet most worthy
observation. Here stands the Ponte or Bridge Elio, so called for that Elius
Adrianus the Emperor built it for his Sepulcher: but at present it is called
Ponte di Castello, on either side of it stand the statues of the Apostles Saint
Peter and Saint Paul, wrought with excelling Workmanship under Pope Clement the
7th. at the time that the Tyber grown beyond its usual limits, overflowed to
the great devastation of the City and this Bridge in anno 1530. Being upon this
Bridge, you may see opposite to you the Hospital of Santo Spirito, and the
Ruins of the triumphal Bridge, which was so denominated, for that over it were
lead the Pompes of Triumphs as the way to the Campidoglio.

All that part of the Vatican hill between the Bridge and the Palace is now
called Borgo, but was formerly named la selva because before the time of Pope
Alexander the second the Vatican Grove grew there, wherein was erected a
Pyramide for the Sepulcher of Scipio Affricanus, whereof some relics may yet
be seen in that part of the Temple called Paradiso; as the great Pyne Apple,
and Peacok of Brass guilt.

In the Borgo, almost all the Edifices are stately and noble, and in particular
these following: The Palace of the Cardinal of Cesis at the gate of Saint
Onofrio, whose first Court is full of Statues and inscriptions, the particulars
whereof are printed and published: in it is an Effigies of the Amazon Hippolito
infinitely applauded, being the workmanship of Michael Angelo, the Prince of
Sculptors, another of Apollo, a third of a Sabyn Woman, no whit inferior to
that of the Amazon, had it Arms proportionable.

In the garden stands a statue of Bacchus upon a Pedistol: A Vessel of Brass
with a Faunus, a Neptune, and an Apollo, holding a Harp in his hand: An Image
of Agrippa, the Daughter of Marcus Agrippa Another of Iulia the Daughter of
Augustus Caesar, a Pallas armed, and Herma defloured. On the right hand appears
a fountain with 22 Circles about it of Marble stone, on which stand the statues
of A faunus, Jupiter Hammon, Pompey the Great, Demosthenes, Spensippus the
Philosopher, who was thought to be the Son of a Sister of Plato. In prospective
from the Gate may be seen Rome triumphing for the overcoming of Dacia, sitting
on a Throne with a Murrion on her head and a Branch of Laurel in her hand, with
Dacia placed near it, in a mourning posture and Habit; round it are Trophies,
as Arms of the Barbarous, two conquered Kings in Numidian Marble, bigger than
ordinary men, two statues of two of the Parcae: and two Sphinxes of the same
Marble.

Contiguous with it stands a round Fabric called the Antiquario, from the many
Antiquities contained in it: On the Front is fixed a Visage of Jupiter, in
porphyr stone, and an effigies of Poppeia the wife of Otho the Emperor: above
which stand five statues, That is of Pallas, Cercs, Victoria, Copia, and Diana.
Within are seen the Statue of Somnus, or of Quies, or as others will have it of
AEsculapius with Poppy in his hands, and an Image of a Sabine Lady. In the gate
on the left hand appears a Visage of Jove, as bigg as a Giants, on the right
another of Hercules, and in the midst a third of Pallas. And under that of
Hercules, a Satyr, who blows a Shepherds pipe of seven Reeds: a neater piece
of work then which is scarce to be seen, which is attributed to Scopa. Under
that of Jove, a head of Pyrrhus King of the Epirotes with a Leda and a Cupid.
The Satyr, and the Leda are most complete statues. In it are the heads also of
Portia, Cato, Jupiter, Ganimed, Diana, Neptune, with a most ancient Egyptian
Image called the head of Astrate Mother of Osarides, or as others will of Open,
or Cibele the Mother of the Gods.

Near the gate stand two statues, one on the left hand of Aries Fissus of most
white Marble, with these words on the Basis, Secura Simplicitas. The other on
the right hand of Leone, with these words upon the basis, Innoxia Fortitudo.
Near which stands the Emperor, Heliogabulus, clothed at his full length, with
certain antique Ceremonies in the sacrifices engraven on the Basis: Upon
another Image of an Emperor triumphing drawn by four horses, stands a Simia an
Ape cut in AEthiopick Marble in the form the Egyptians used to worship it. In
the Hall is a head of Bacchus of red stone, with a Neptune over it, drawn in a
Chariot by four horses, and two statues of the Goddess Pomona.

The study of the Cardinal has its pavement wrought in figure with small
stones: and in it are many heads of illustrious Romans, as of Scipio,
Africanus, Marcus Cato, M Antonius the triumvir, Julius, Caesar, Septimius,
Severus, L Sy lla, C Nero, Iulia Mammea; M. Antonius Caracalla, Adrianus,
Macrinus, Cleopatra, Faustina, and Sabina, As also a Library furnished no less
with Books of Ancient than modern Authors, In the withdrawing Chambers are Gems
and precious stones, so well wrought that they best speak themselves, therein
also are Scipio Nasica, Brutus, Adrianus Imperator, a sleeping Cupid, and a
Child, with diverse other vain things so rare and curious, and rich, that did
Rome afford no other Palace than this, you will say when seen, you could not
better dispose your time and travel then to behold it; And that it alone
deserve the pains of a Journey thither.

The Popes Palace.
ON the Top of the Vatican Hill stands that proud Palace of the Popes, which
like a large City is capable of three Kings and all their followers: here the
Popes (induced thereto from the beauty of the site, and temperature of the
Air) for the most part make their dwelling, having deserted their former on the
Laterano. The first thing here to be viewed is the Chapel of Sixtus, which for
its grandeur and beauty may be paralleld to any other great and noble Church:
in it the Card i^als assemble themselves for election of the Pope, and call
themselves the Conclave, upon the high Altar whereof is that noble Picture
representing the Universal Judgment, painted by Michael Angelo, a Piece so
generally a pplauded, that it is held in valuable, for its exellency, and
unimitable by all succeding Artists, though diverse and those the best attempt
it daily: Near it is the Capella Paolina, painted by the same hand: whence the
way lies into the Gardens called Belvedere, The fair fight both for their
infinite beauty and the prospect of the most part of Rome, in it are many
foreign rare plants. Herein stands the statue of the Tyber foxes connexed with
a wolf which gave suck to Remus and Romulus; The Nyle upon a Sphinx with 17.
Children denoting the increases of that River with its effects upon Egypt,
with several monsters and strong creatures proper only to that River: which
statue was heretofore found near Saint Ste phens Church, and being thence
conveyed into those gardens, is there presented to public view for that
general approbation of excellency which is meritoriously given it.

On the walls of the said Belvedere are moreover 12 several deformed Creatures
set up, which are carved out of the politest Marble: And in certain Corners and
Nooks stands a shape of Antinoo, cut in the whitest Marble of fingular Artifice
and in this form by the command of Adrian the Emperor, who deputed divine
sacerdotal honors with Temples, whose memory alsothat he might perpetuate, he
built a City in Egypt calling it from his name Antinopoli, On the right hand
is the River Arno in the shape of a Man lying along, diffusing water from his
Tomb, with Cleopatra on his left hand leaning on her right hand. In the second
Armory stands Venus Ericina prepared to come out of a Bath. In the third is the
same Venus playing with Cupid and this Inscription. Veneri Foelici Sacrum
Salustia Helpis D. D.

Near it is a Bacchus armeless, and that Trunk of Hercules, pronounced by
Michael Angelo, to be the most complete statue of Rome, the name of Apollo as
sculptor is in scribed on it, as also two other Carasses the one of a Lady the
other of Mercury, and an Arch of Marble, wherein is figured the Chase of
Meleager found in the Vatican Vineyard, appertaining to his Sanctity.

In the fourth Armory in the Cants stands a statue of the Emperor Commodus in
the habit and shape of Hercules, holding a Child on his Arm, whose humor was
to be so figured and called as historians report. In the fifth Apollo Pitheo,
with a Serpent at his feet, and a Carcass having a piece of Cloth upon one Arm,
a Bow and Arrows in his hand, and all over naked. In the sixth is Laocoon with
his two Sons enveloped by two Dragons as Virgil writes the story, all of one
Marble stone: This Piece was esteemed by Michael Angelo the Miracle of
Sculpture: and before his time by Pliny who says that, it was wrought by
Agesanero Poliodoro, and Athenodoro the principal Sculptors of their times, and
preserved in the Palace of Titus Vespasianus and found in his seven Halls.
Some space from which lies Cleopatra ready to give up the Ghost, of so exact
workmanship and polite Marble, that underneath the Marble Garments which seem
to lie over the whole body, the Limbs and shape of the person, do perfectly
appear. In the same Palace and Gardens which are five, some in Terrace, others
low, beside the aforenamed not a few nor mean Vessels and statues present
themselves as grateful Objects to the Visitants thereof: As to pass by others
a Fountain made after a rustic manner, round which stand feigned Gods and Sea
Monsters, very well represented: Together with the Images of Pope Paulus the 2
and the Emperor Charles the 5th. drawn by the hand of Michael Angelo, and a
statue of one of the Curiatii, which is a fair one, and stands where the
Switzers keep their Guard.

In the Armory, are Arms and all accomplishments for 35000. men horse and foot,
and over the door of it is this Motto. Urbanus VIII. Literis arma, Armis
Literas.

In the Constantine Hall, to pass over the other things which are infinite, are
painted several picturs drawn by the principal Painters in all Ages, chiefly
the* Battle fought at the Ponte Milvio, and the victory obtained there by
Constantine, against Maxentius, the work of Raphael Stantio of Urbin.

In the Gallery Pope Gregory the 13th. for the benefit of the Popes to his
great cost, caused all the Provinces Regions and Chief Cities of the whole
World, to be artificially and exactly lymned annexing to each Province in a
sweet style its Encomion.

This Palace was begun by Nicholas the third, augmented by his successors,
finished by Julius the second and Leo the 10th. garnished and beautified with
Pictures and other Ornaments, by Sixtus the 5th, and Clement the 8th. so that
at this day it remains a stately Receptacle for his holiness, and a worthy
object for all Foreigners.

Of the Church of Saint Peter, on the VATICANO
THis has meritoriously its place among the seven Principal and the Library
Churches of Rome, and will therefore require breifer account here, It Is the most
famous and splendid of Rome. On that part which is ascended by steps, is a
Pillar erected, compassed about with Iron bars, and this inscription on it.
Haec est illa Columna, in qua Dominus noster Jesus Christus apodiatus, dum
pop^lo praedicabat, and Deo Patri in Templo preceseffundebat, adhaerendo
stabat, quae una cum aliis undecim hic circumstantibus de Salomonis templo in
triumphum hujus Basilicae hic locata fuit.

In this Temple is likewise preserved the head of Saint Andrew the Apostle, and
the spear which was run into the side of our Savior, when he hung upon the
Cross: It was sent as a grateful present to Pope Innocent the 8th. by the
Turkish Emperor: Here also is the Porta Sancta, which is never opened but in
the year of Iubile, and that finished is shut again. Which shall suffice to
avoid Repetition.

To the Church of Saint Peter is joined the little Church of Santa Petronilla,
formerl^ a Temple of Apollo, as that of Santa Maria della febre was of Mars. in
the Piazza of Saint Peter stands the Obelisk translated thither from the Circ
of Nero in the year 1586. at the Instance and cost o^ Sixtus the 5th. where it
lay in neglectfull obscu rity, in old times called the Obelisk of Caesar, and
under it were then laid the Ashes of Julius Caesar; Dominico Fontana was the
Engineer. Its height is 170 foot besides the Basis which is 37 foot more on
the bottom it is 12 foot broad and at top 8. It weighs without the Basis 956148.
pound the Instruments prepared for its removal and erecting weighed 1031824.
pound. The Removal of it we must needs conclude so admirable as to deserve a
place among the great wonders of the Ancients, if we despise it not (as is
usual) for that it was modern.

The Circ and Naumachia, the place for sea battails of Nero were near herunto,
where they made their sportive recreations in barques upon the water, and
cruelly cast those that confessed the name of Christ, to be devoured by wild
beasts.

The Borgo has five gates, to wit, L'Elia at the Castle Saint Angelo, That of
Saint Peter under the Popes Gardens, La Pertusa on the highest part of the
hill. La Vacina, at the Palace of the Cesis, and the Trionfale, now called of
Santo spirito, near which Bourbon received a shot which occasioned his death,
and the surrender of Rome to the Emperor Charles the 5th.

The Hospital of San Spirito, was first instituted by Innocent the 3d.
afterward aggrandized by Sixtus the 4th, In it they govern with no less honor
than love the foreign Infirm persons: so that many rich Men disdain not to
retire themselves thither for the government of the sick and infirm, and
thereto employ their skill and time though at their own charges, not having
their own proper houses in Rome.

Of the Hill Gianicolo, now called Montorio.
THe Hill Ianiculus is now called Montorio quasi mons aureus, or the goulden
Mount: near it lies the Circ of Julius Caesar, where appear some fragments of
the Sepulcher of Numa Pompilius, which yet demonstrate 'twas no great Fabric:
a certain assurance, that Ambition had not then in those times any great place
in Rome.

Montorio is so called for the sparkling of the sand there; Where stands a
Church of Saint Peter, and a round Fabric wrought excellently Dorick wise, the
design of Bramante. At the high Altar of the said Church is a Marble stone
whereon Christ was figured by Raphael of Urbin. On the right hand at the
entrance into the Church Christ is rarely painted upon the Wall being whipped, by
Bastiano the Venetian called del Piombo. Here stands the Tomb which Julius the
third caused to be built for himself then living, where for all that he had not
the happiness to lie (dead) but was buried in a mean place in the Vatican.

The Gate of Saint Pancratio, was formerly called Aureliana, or Settimiana, for
that it was repaired by Septimius Severus, who near it erected an Altar and
certain Baths: without this gate you see an Aqueduct not very high, through
which ran the waters of the Lake Alsetino, into the Baths of Severus, of
Filippus, and into the Naumachia, the place for Sea Fights of Augustus.

Where now stands the Temple of Santa Maria in Transtevere, was formerly a
Taberna Meritoria, or a Locanda as they now term it being a place for letting
out Chambers: There stood also a Temple of AEsculapius, for the deceased, to
whom (because they believed him a God always regarding and assisting to their
healths) the infirm had recourse, and sacrificed.

The Naumachia, was a place purposely set apart for the preparing all things
necessary for Naval fights. This place is at present called a Ripa, in Rome,
where the Vessels are steered by Ostia into the City; besides in ancient time
in the Naumachia, they often presented certain Warlike and Naval sports for the
Solace of the Princes and multitude.

The Ponte Aurelio, or Gianicolo conjoins the part Transteverina, or beyond the
Tyber to the City, but being broken in the civil War 'twas afterward called
Ponte Rotto: At last being r^edisied by Sixtus the 4th. to that magnificence it
now appears in, it took the name of Ponte Sixto. In the midst of the Naumachia
rise the relics of the Ponte Sublicio, upon which Horatius alone in the War
against the Tuscans sustained the assaults of the Enemies till such time as the
Romans could break down the said Bridge near the Gate, by which means the
Enemies were obstructed in their hoped for entrance into the City. AEmilius
Lepidus caused it a^terwards to be built of stone: From a top this Bridge the
Emperor Heliogabulus the Monster of Nature and Mankind having a stone hung
abont his Neck, was cast down into the Tyber.

Near hereunto ly the Fields Mutii, given to Mutius Scaevola, by the public,
for the noble Act he performed in the presence of Porsenna King of the Tuscans.

At the Port of Ripa, Leon the 4th. built two Towers to hinder the inroads of
the Sarazens, who often by Ostia run up the Tyber. Then Borgo was called Citta
Leonina; Alexander the 4th. named it Borgia, and added to it good increase of
all things.

L'Isola Tiberina, is believed to have rise and beginning in the time of
Tarquin the proud, it is not very b^oad but a quarter of a mile long and was
consecrated to AEsculapius: In it is at this day a Church dedicated to San
Bartolomeo, At the point of the Island you may see the form of that Ship,
wherein the Serpent Epidaurus was conveyed into the City, which form was
sometime since exposed to view by the inundation of the Tyber.

In the gardens of Cardinal Farneze^, beyond the Tyber are diverse Venuses of
the whitest Marble, and several Pyles, on which are figured Men, Lions, Women,
the nine Muses, Satyrs and other things, and a broken pillar with a Greek
inscription very memorable which was brought from Tivoli.

The Bridge Cescio or Esquilino conjoines the part beyond the Tyber to the
Island; it was built by Valentianus and Valens Emperors, and is now called Ponte
Saint Bartolomeo from that Church which stands in the Island contiguous with
it. In the same Island stands the Church of San Giovanni Battista, which
formerly was the Temple of Jupiter, and in the uppermost part of it yet appear
the ruins of a Temple of Faunus, which was reduced to that sad condition by
the Inundation of the River.

The Bridge Fabricio, called also Tarpeio, connexeth the Island with the City,
passing through the midst of Marcellus his Theater, it is at this time called
Ponte dai quatro capi, from certain statues the^e reared, each of which has
four faces and heads.

The Theater of Marcellus was built by Augustus Caesar, at the Bridge Fabricio,
in honor of Marcellus the Son of his Sister Octavia,) capacious for eighty
thousand persons) to which structure that she might add the more luster as in
remembrance of her said Son Marcellus, the said Octavia complea ted a most
admirable and well furnished Library of Books of all sorts and sciences. This
Theater the House of Saevelli at present possess: The said Augustus raised also
the Banqueting house called Octavio in honor of his said Sister Octavia, part
whereof yet is on foot, in the midst of the said Theater, where are some shops
of Goldsmiths now, but was formerly much more beautified by many rare statues,
as among others with a Satyr, the work of Prasitelle, the nine Muses of
Timarchide, and the Image of Juno, now placed in the Mansion of Julius the
third in the Via Flaminia; Caesar Germanicus illustrated the said Banqueting
House, with the addition of a stately Temple, dedicated to Speranza and Hope,
toward the Piaza Montanara, to which was conjoined the Temple of Aurora, much
renowned among the Ancients the very Footsteps whereof time and misfortune have
razed out.

The House of Savelli, (in the Theater of Marcellus,) possess a most rare
piece, being a Lion cut in Marble, with three Men Armed and prepared to fight
him, together with many other Marble Tablets: And a garden very delicious,
wherein are several Pyles, whereon the Labors of Hercules are engraven, and
diverse Statues of Men and pieces of Mercury.

San Nicolo in Carcere, formerly was the Prison for the common people, but for
that a Daughter expressed so much Piety to her Father there bound in chains as
to nourish him many days with the milk from her own breasts, Attilia Gabrione,
raised there a Temple dedicating it to Piety.

Santo Andrea in Mentuzza, was in old times a Temple consecrated to Juno Matura
by Cornelius the Consul, under the Campidoglio.

You may see the broken Bridge of Santa Maria Transteverina, or AEgittiaca, so
named from the Neighboring Church; which was formerly called Ponte Senatorio
and Palatino, for that the Senators passed over that Bridge in religious manner
to the Ianicolo, to consult the Books of the Sybills, and thence returned to
the Court of the Emperors.

The House of Pilat placed near the Ponte Senatorio fabulously by the Vulgar,
if we make a narrower inspection, and contemplate the most high ruin there
appearing, must needs have been the Sudatoria Laconica, or hot Baths. The Foro
Olitorio, is the Piazza Montonora, where Evander erected an Altar in honor of
Nicostrata Carmenta his mother.

The Church of Sancta Maria AEgittiaca, formerly the Temple of Fortuna Virilis,
remains almost entire and unblemished having a long row of high Pillars on both
sides. Some report it to have been consecrated to Pudicitia Matronalis, and
that therein was the Bucca Veritatis, which is esteemed a fabulous story, and
that ample round porphyr stone standing before the Greek Schools, which they
say was the Bucca veritatis, conld be applied to no other use then for a Chanel
or receipt of waters, as in diverse other stones of the like form up and down
the City used to the like occasions is most plainly apparent.

In the house of the Serlupi in the Fishstreet, they show a most complete
piece, being the head of the Emperor Vespasian as big as a Giants, cut in
white Marble.

In the next house appertaining to the Delfini, are the heads of Lucius Verus,
and Marcus Aurelius, of Bacchus, of a Child laughing, and of six others with
some Urns, and stones with remarkable inscriptions.

Of the place where the Asylum, or sanctuary for refuge stood, there is no
Certainty because some place it in this part, others in the Campidoglio,
wherefore no ampler account can be given of it, upon a certain foundation.

San Stephano Rotondo, which denomination it borrowed from the form of the
Fabric, stands by Santa Maria AEgittiaca, 'twas built by Numa Pompilius, and
consecrated to Vesta: it is sustained on every part by Corinthian Pillars, and
receaves the light from the top, as does the Pantheon.

La Rupe Tarpeia, lies on the utmost part of the Campidoglio, being a vast
proecipice, opposite to the Church Santa Maria Egittiaca, Manlius Capitolinus
being found guilty of an intention to Master Rome and become its Tyrant, was at
the command of the Senate praecipitated from this Rock. Some say, that Ovids
house stood among those ruins which are near the Church Santa Maria della
Consolatione, others that it was in Burgo Georgio, near the Porta Carmentale,
at the Foot of the Capitol, where also Valerius Amerinus dwelt, and Opis and
Saturnus had Temples.

The Temple of Vesta built by Romulus between the Capitolinum and the
Palatinum, stood where now is the Church dalle Gratie or dalle Consolatione,
wherein the Vestal Virgins kept the holy and perpetual Fire, and the Palladium,
with the Domestic household Gods brought by AEneas, from Troy into Italy, but
the said Temple being burning, the Palladium which was a wooden Image of Pallas
with rolling eyes was snatched out of the Fire and translated into Velia, where
now is Santa Andrea in Palata.

The Foro Boario, took its name either for that there they sold their Bulls, or
because Evander having received the Bulls of Gerion consecrated that place for
perpetual remembrance of that Victory, Adjacent to the Temple of Saint George,
in Velabro stands a fair Arch all of Marble, beautified with excellent figures
of Sacrifices, erected in former times by the Goldsmiths and Merchants in
honor of the Emperors, Septimius Severus, and Marcus Aurelius. And contiguous
with this Arch stood the Temple of Janus Quadrifrons: four squared and in every
front a large Gate, and 12. Nooks, wherein it is believed they set up twelve
statues, representing 12 Months. The Romans sacrificed to Janus as Prince or
President of the sacrifices, calling him also Vertumnus. Many Temples in Rome
were dedicated to this God, among which that chiefly flourished which Numa
built at the Porta Carmentale near the Theater of Marcellus which had two Gates
only, and they stood always open in time of war, and shut in times of Peace.
Historians report these Gates to be three times only locked up: The first by
Numa the Founder, the second by Titus Manlius the Consul. The third by Augustus
Caesar, when he had wholly overcome M. Antonius: Suetonius reports that it was a
fourth time shut by Nero, which is proved by certain Coins of the said Emperor
yet extant, with these words on the one side. Pace Populo Romano Ubique, Porta
Janum Clausit: Now this Temple is consecrated to Santa Catherina.

Il Velabro, where stands Santo Georgio in Velabro, was so denominated for this
cause: When the Tyber overflowed and covered the face of the Earth, they could
not pass into the Aventinum, from one bank to the other unless in Boats, for
their passage wherein they paid a certain piece of money, which in Latin
signifies a Booth, those boats being covered over.

Santa Maria in Cosmodin, is called Schola Graeca, perhaps for that in former
times it was enjoyed by Greeks. They fable, that here Saint Augustine taught, and
that here was another Bucca Veritatis. Annexed to this Church toward the Tyber
stood a Temple of Hercules Victor, the relics whereof show its form to have
been round, it was destroyed by Pope Sixtus the fourth. They report that Flies
never entered into this Temple, Hercules by Prayer to Myagrum the God of Flies,
having obtained this favor, for that being about to sacrifice to Jupiter, the
Flies molested the sacrifice: Nor Dogs, Because the same Hercules affixed his
Club to the Door of the Temple, which so terrified the Dogs (it having an
innate Virtue to fright Dogs) that they durst not approach the Gates: Neither
Women Servants or made Free could assist to the holy Exercises in this Temple,
And only freemen and the Sons of Freemen had admission thereunto.

The Great Altar erected by Hercules stood near the Schola Graeca, and by it
AEmilius built the Temple of Pudicitia Patritia, wherein when Virginia entered,
being herself noble but the Wife of a Plebeian, she was cast out by the other
Matrons, whereat being offended she raised another Temple in Borgo Longo, to
Pudicitia Plebeia, which caused a great Feud in the Patritian Matrons, but
neither of the one nor the other does any footsteps now remain.

Monte Aventino. has been ever counted infamous and inauspicious, for the
contest there happening between Romulus and Remus wherein the last was slain.
Ancus Martius the 4th. King of the Romans granted it to the Sabines for their
habitation, but others write that it began to be inhabited only in the days of
Claudius the Emperor: it is now called by its old name Mons Aventinus.

The Church of Santa Sabina, standing on the top of the Aventino anciently
dedicated to Diana, was built by Ancus Martius, or as others say by Servius
Tullius. Servius the sixth King of the Romans was Son of a Servant or slave,
wherefore he commanded that there every year on the 13th. of August a solemn
Feast should be kept for the Slaves, on which day of their solemnity their
Masters should not command them. Here Honorius the 4th. dwelt, and Pius the
fifth erected there some stately Fabrics, to which Girolamo Bernerio called
the Cardinal of Ascoli, added others with a Chapel. This Cardinal was of the
Order of the preaching Friars, and for that cause has been a loving Patron to
that Order.

The Church of Santa Maria dell'Aventino, was a Temple consecrated to Dea Bona,
not far from which stood the House of Julius Caesar: whence Calphurnia, the
wife of Caesar proceeded among the other Matrons to the said Temple to the
Nocturnal duties performed to the said Goddess, when Clodius inamoured of her,
habiting himself in the garment of a Woman, conveyed himself in amongst them,
all men being prohibited admission to those duties: Who being no less ignorant
of the place than of the Ceremonies, wandered too and fro in search of his
Friend Calphurnia, and by that means was discovered by a certain Maid. Upon the
Aventino, Hercules Victor had a Temple, which is now called the Church of Santi
Alexii.

The Hott Houses or Bathes which stood upon the AVENTINO.
THe Hot houses or Bathes of Decius the Emperor called Deciane, were near
Santa prisca, formerly a Temple of Hercules, whereof as of the ensuing great
ruins yet remain: Those called Variane stood near Saint Alexius. And those of
Trajan, with his Palace on the farthest part of the Aventino in the Vineyard of
Francisci Albertini, a Roman Citizen.

The Remoria, yet retains its ancient name. 'Twas held an inauspicious place
because in the blood of Remus was unhappily begun the City: who was there slain
by a wicked man with a Pickax at the command of Romulus, and interred in the
same place. the Via Remoria extends it self from the Circo Maximo over the top
of the Aventino just to that Fabric of Pope Paul the 3d. wherewith he
fortified the City.

Here stands the Sepulcher of Cacus, of whom they make mention in the Fables of
Hercules, which is a sharp broken stone in the midst of the Church Santa Maria
Aventina, where also was anciently a Temple of Hercules.

At this Praecipice, were the Furcae Gemoniae, to which Malefactors were
dragged with Iron hooks, and there inhumanely slain, hither the Emperor
Vitellius, with an Iron hook fixed under his Chin, and his Cloths torn of to
his Buttocks was dragged, and slain by the command of Vespasian, for having put
to death Sabinus, Vespasians Brother.

The Porta Trigemina though very ancient, remains yet almost entire at the Foot
of the Aventino near the Tyber in the Vineyard, to which the Baths of Trajan
are annexed.

This Gate was called Trigemina, from the three twin Brothers, called Horatii,
who marched out at that Gate, when they went to fight for the Liberty of their
Country, against the three Brothers Curatii Albani, which Albani being slain
with two of the twin Brothers Horatii, the third returned triumphant.

The Dioclesian Granaries of the Roman people were repaired and augmented by
Dioclesian the Emperor, from whom they took their name. They stood between the
Tyber and the Monte Testaceo, they consisted of 150 several apartments, and
their ruins appear like a (...) in the Vineyard of Julio Cesarino a Roman.

Monte Testaceo stands near them, which was raised by the pieces of Potters
Vessels, there cast by the Potters whose streets were there, which place was
assigned for that use that they might not throw them into the Tyber, for fear
of stopping the current and diverting the stream to their greater damage, nor
cast them into the Fields to obstruct the fertility thereof. Whence it grew to
the height of 160 foot and two miles in compass Some, (but foolishly,) call it
Monte diogni Terra, ridiculously fabling their conjectures, that this Mount was
raised by the Vessels of several Nations wherein they brought their Tributes to
Rome, which Vessels they say they were commanded to cast in that place in
perpetual remembrance of that their subjection. In old time the Circus
Olimpicus comprehended all that space which the Monte Testaceo, takes up now

The Pyramid of C. Cestius Septemvirs or the seventh of the Epicures or
gluttons, remains yet entire near the Porta Ostiense, within the City Walls,
being built with white Marble, in great square stones and although the
Inscription names only C. Cestius, yet it is believed to have been the common
burying place of all the Septemviri Epuloni whose charge was to see that the
Feasts, the Banquets, the solemnities, and sacrifices of the Gods were strictly
observed.

La Porta Ostiense, (now named di San Paulo) was built by Ancus Martins, and
called Ostiense, because through it lies the way to Ostia. Without which gate
stands the Church dedicated to Sancto Paulo a most splendid Church, one of the
seven principal of Rome, and much frequented by the people. Therein stand four
ranks of vast Marble Collumnes which support it. They are excellently wrought
in Dorick, Ionick, Attick, and Corinthian works, nor is there any Church in
Rome Replenisht with so many Pillars, nor garnished with so polite and
exquisite Marble stones, which were translated from the two Porta's Ostienses
The one of Nero, the other of Anto^inus. Somewhat beyond which stands another
Church, called the Tree Fontane, An ancient Temple before whose portal rise many
precious Pillars of Porphyr stone, which shine with various Colors: within are
showed three sources of Fountains, whose waters are esteemed holy and
salutiferous for many infirmities, they believe, these Fountains to spring
miraculously at and ever since the time that Saino Paul's head was cut off by
the command of Nero the Emperor in that place.

The Visitation of the aforenamed particulars, being exactly performed will be
sufficient for the first day.

The second days Journey in perusing the noted things of ROME.
Entering from Borgo into the City by the Bridge Castello, you meet a way which
divides it self in two, on the right hand toward the Tyber goes the Strada
Julia, in which the house of the Cevali stands worthy a view, and in the other
street near the Ba^chi, is the house of the Cardinal Sforza, replenisht with
Antiquities, noble Pictures, and a Library of Greek Manuscripts.

Alla Pace in the house of ^ancellotto Lancellotti, a Gentleman, are many rare
antiquities. At the end of the Parione are the ample houses Arianae, in whose
Angle is seated That Statue of Pasquin, the most famous of all that City yea of
all the World. This some suppose to be made for Hercules, others for Alexander
the great: but there is no certainty of either, though it appear the
workemankip of some rare Artist.

In former times they were wont to load this Image with Libels aagainst the
Princes, Cardinals and famous Men, and noble Matrons and sometimes against the
Pope: but now left off because of the severe prohibitions, since when though
they dare not fix them to the Pasquino, yet still they vent their reproofs and
scandals under some other specious pretense, publishing them some other way by
the name of Pasquinata. Antonio Tibaldeo a Ferrarian, being no less learned
than Venerable, reports this story of this statue: That there was in Rome a
certain Taylour well known in his trade and good at his occupation, called
Pasquino, whose shop stood in this street: this man was well customed by
Prelates, Courtezans and other people, who resorted to him for their Rayments,
This Tailor employed great number of Journeymen, who like vile persons spent
all the day their tongues freely speaking ill of this and that person not
sparing any, taking occasion from what they observed in those persons which
resorted to their shop; the constant custom of slandering in that shop made it
become ridiculous even to the persons offended, esteeming those rascals
unworthy of any credit, and so no other regard was had to it. Whence it came to
pass afterward, that if any person would defame another he did it under covert
of Master Pasquino, saying he had heard say so in his shop, which relation
caused all the Interessed persons in that reproach, not to make any more
account of it. This reverent gentleman Pasquino being dead, it happened that in
paving the street, this statue was found half buried and broken near his shop,
which because it was incomodious for the passage to leave it there, they erected
just at the shop of Master Pasquino* whence the back-biters (taking a good
occasion) reported that Master Pasquino, was returned again and not having
courage enough to own the abuses they put upon others, they used to fasten
their Scrolls to that statue: presuming, that as it was lawful for Mar co
pasquino to speak any thing, so by means of this statue they might scandalize
others with such things, as in the light and bare faced they durst not own.
This Custom continued long till at last it was prohibited with severe penalties.

Near hereto is the great Palace of the Chancery, built by the Travertini, in
a square form with the stones translated from the Amphitheater of Titus
Vespasianus, which was called Coliseum, which Theater the Popes would not
permit to be wholly destroyed, but left some part in its first Luster, that by
it might appear the splendor of the whole, as a testimony of the magnificence
of the Roman Empire. In it stands one great Image of Bacchus, wrought by
Michael Angelo Bonarota, at his first arrival at Rome, when he sought to
depress the Fame of Raphael Sanctius of Urbin, which he brought in feriour to
his own reputation by his Art and policy. Two other great statues one of Ceres,
and the other of Opes as is believed. And on the upper part are fixed certain
heads, as of Antonius Pius, Septimius Severus, Titus, Domitianus Augustus, and
Geta the Emperors, of a Sabin Woman. of Pyrrhus King of the Epirots of Cupid
and a Sword Player.

Thence not far distant stands the Piazza del Duca, wherein is the fairest
Palace in Rome, built with excessive cost by Pope Paul the 3d a Farnezian, It
abounds with so many antiquities that to speak distinctly of them, would fill
up a volume: we will therefore pass briefly over them, as now they remain, many
things having been changed in later times.

For the Architecture it is enough to say Michael Angelo Bonarota, had a chief
part therein, and for the Materials, better could not be had then were employed
in it, which were brought from the Amphitheatre: As to the statues,

Two of Hercules stand in the Court, famous for their workmanship and
antiquity, the lesser whereof is most commended; One of Jupiter Tonante, with
two immense sword players, the one having the Scabbard of his sword hanging at
his shoulder, and with his right foot kicks the Target, the murrion, and the
ground, the other holds behind him a boy dead in his hand: But that which
surpasses all statues is the Tauro Farnese, a Bull with five persons bigger
than the natural, cut to wonder, out of one stone by Apollonius and Tauriscus
of Rhodes, whence it was conveyed and placed in Antoninus his Bath where about
one hundred years since it was dugg up as entire as if made but yesterday, and
now stands in this Palace astonishing all that behold it.

In the ascent on the stayers, you see one statue of the Tyber, another of
Oceanus, and at the top of two barbarous prisoners in their old habits.

In the Rooms above, who delights in Pictures and Sculpture will meet enough to
occupy his whole fancy. As the Pictures of Francesco Salviati, and Tadeo
Zucchero, both which are much applauded, drawn as if they were taking the fresh
air: And in a Gallery which is as noble as well painted by the Brothers Carazzi
Bolonia, painters of great Fame, you will find many ancient heads of signal
persons as of Lysia, Euripides, Solon, Socrates, Diogenes, Genone, Possidonio,
and Seneca, with the noble statues of Ganimede, Antinoo, of Bacchus, some fair
Vessels, and the statues of Meleager, which deserves a name by it self for its
great price, being esteemed worth five thousand Crowns then which no statue in
Rome is more entire. No People under the Sun give so great prices for statues
as the Romans: all which are so studious of those kind of Ornaments, that in
acquiring them, they emulously strive which shall exceed in cost or curiosity.
In one Chamber they show the Duke Alexander of glorious memory, having under
his feet the River Scalda or Scelda, with Flanders kneeling before him, and
behind Victory crowning him, all which statues are cut out of one Marble stone,
bigger than the Life. There also are three dogs cast rarely in Brass. The
Bibliotheque of this Palace, the Meddals and carved Toys, are most famous
things, but the Pictures of Raphael, and Titian are incomparable, nor are the
Limnings less admirable*

Opposite to the Farnesi live the heirs of Monsignior d'Acquigno, in whose
house are diverse inscriptions, an Adonis, a Venus of four thousand Crowns
price, a Diana begirt with a Quiver of Arrows a Bow in her hand like a
huntress, and a statue of Bon Evento holding a looking glass in the right
hand, and in the left a Garland of Ears of Corn an absolute Piece, wrought by
Praxitelis.

Adjacent to the Campo di Fiore, stands the Palace of the Cardinal Capo di
Ferro, much less than the Farnesian Palace, but in splendour and Architecture
no whit inferior. In the Frontispiece is painted the spring time: The
President of the spring is Venus, (which was drawn to the similitude of the
Body of Livia Columna, a most beautiful Princess) and whatever is there
represented is amorous: The Complexion of the men is sanguine, and all are
marked with the Element of Air. So in the other fronts, are expressed the
complexions Choler, Melancholy, and Phlegm, the Elements Fire, Water, and
Earth, the seasons Summer, Autumn, and Winter, and the Praesiding Gods, Mars,
Saturn, and Janus, which are most absolutely performed, and were the work of
Michael Angelo, with whom this Cardinal contracted a most intimate Friendship;
and being no less liberal than Jngenious obtained of him, what ever so rare an
Artist could possibly invent, among the rest a secret conclave wherein many
things are expressed with the highest Art and perfection.

The house of the Orsini, in the Campo di Fiore, which was raised out of the
ruins of the Pompeyan Theater, is embellisht with many good statues in the
Courts.

The Temple of Saint Angelo in Pescaria, was formerly of Juno Regina, which
being burnt, was restored by Septimius Severus and Marcus Aurelius the
Emperors, as the old Title there to be read verifies: near which are some of
the Pillars taken from the Portico of Septimius Severus dedicated to Mercury.

At the Tower Citrangole, stands the house of the heirs of Gentile Delfino,
which Gentleman had more meddals than any other Person in Rome, and his Garden
filled with inscriptions: In them stands a Statue of Canopo placed in the form
of a Water Pott, before whose breast they have preposed a Tablet filled with
Hierogliphick letters, by which it is believed the secret Mysteries of the
Sacrifices are delivered: In Parione at the house of the Maximi may be seen a
Colossus, which vulgarly is thought to be the statue of Pyrrhus King of the
Epirots armed, bought a long time since by the Maximi of Angelo for two
thousand Crowns as also a Marble head of Julius Caesar, with many other things
worthy consideration.

In the house of the Leni alla Ciambella, are many noble statues lately brought
thither from the Porta di S. Bastiano, to wit an Adonis, a Venus, a Satyr, and
many excellent heads, where in an old Pile was found an entire purple Garment
with some rings and other notable things. Near which stands the house of
Cardinal Paravicino, a Signor of noble Qualities, who much delights in
Pictures, whereof and those good too he has not a few. Contiguous with which
stands the house of the Vallei, wherein was erected a square Marble stone, with
a Solar Horoscope, and the Zodiac signs, where the days and hours of every
Month were denoted, and whatever the Ancients were wont to observe as well in
the sacrifices of the Gods, as in the Country affairs, as fully as our
Calenders now express them: but this with diverse other Rarities, by the
instability of its Patrons, were amoved, and such as they left remaining (for
what reason we guess not) obscured. On the Ascent of the Campidoglio dwells il
Signor Lelio Pasqualino, a Canon of Santa Maria Maggiore, a Gentleman of polite
learning, and exquisite manners, where the studious of Antiquities are freely
admitted to glutt themselves with the most curious things in Rome, as select
Meddals, rare carved works, Implements, and Habiliments of Antiquity in great
number. In sum in his house are a Treasure of those things, and he has
observed in this kind more than a man can possibly behold in one day: if he be
resolved to publish his observations for the pnblick good of the Ingeniosi, it is
certain that a pure and naked index of the Antiquities which he has collected,
would alone advance the studious of good Letters no less in sacred then Profane
Learning.

On the left hand of the Campidoglio, raises it self a Temple and the Monastery
of the Franciscans called Araceli, to which they ascend by 124 marble steps
distinguished into five degrees: The Temple is supported by two ranks of Marble
Pillars on both sides, then which the world affords not a more sumptuous, the
Vatican set apart: This Temple in old time was dedicated to Jovi Feretrio by
Romulus after the Sabyn war, because in that place Jupiter gave assistance to
the King then oppressed with the violence of his Enemies. On the left hand upon
the third Pillar is engraven these words A Cubiculo Augustorum, and in other
places of the Church, are two statues of Constantine and Maximinian, and at the
two horses of Castori set at the top of the steps, is represented a fair
prospective from the entrance to the inward part.

In the Piazza of the Campidoglio, stands a great statue of Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus, or as others think of Lucius Verus, of Septimius, of Metellus on
horseback, it was transferred hither from San Gio Laterano, by order of Pope Paul
the third a Farnesian.

Near the Palace rise great statues of Rivers, to wit of the Nyle, with a
Sphinx under it, of the Tygre, with a Tiger near, both having their heads
bedecked with flowers brought from the Rivers, and another great statue, by
some thought to represent the Rhene a River of Germany, by others to be an
Image of Jupiter Panarius, because the Romans freed themselves from the siege
of the French by casting bread into their Tents: This Statue is called
Marforio, and by means of it they use to answer to the slanders of Pasquino.

Upon a collateral stayer. Case stands a Column called Milliaria upon which
are engraven two inscriptions the one of Vespasian the other of Nero Emperors.

In the Pallazzo dei Conservatori are many things worth a view, among others
alyonholding a horse with his teeth, whose miraculous workmanship Mic. Angelo
was wont to cry up to the skies. Near it appears a most ancient Tomb at the
ascent upon the steps, and a Pillar pointed with Iron with its inscription,
(according to the manner of those ancient times) of C. Duilio, in honor of
whom (having overthrown the Carthaginians) this was erected: Hereof many
Authors make mention. Beyond which are certain tablets engraven, with the
Triumph of Aurelius, and a sacrifice made by him, and at the entrance of the
Gate are carved in Marble the Measures or scannings of the Greek and Roman
Foot: by which you behold an old statue believed falsely of Marius in a gown. In
the hall of the Conservatori stands a Hercules in brass guilt, with his Club in
the right hand, and one of the Hesperian apples in the left, this was found in
the Foro Boario in the ruins of the Ara Maxima, A Satyr of Marble with the
legs of a Goat bound to a Tree: a Statue of Brass upon a Marble Pillar of Juno
sitting picking a thorn out of her foot. With another figure of brass of a
wolf, giving suck to Romulus and Remus. This was formerly kept in the
Cornicio, near the Ruminale, whence it was first, translated to S Giovanni
Laterano, and thence to the Campidoglio: Both these Figures having a general
applause from all beholders.

Being entered into the Hall of the said Palace, you behold the lofty seats (so
famous through the world) of the Magistrates and the Roman Triumphs: These were
translated hither from the Court where they were found by Commission of Paul
the 3d. that they might be viwed and considered: Upon the subject of those
seats now somewhat decayed and broken through Age, Cardinal Michele Silvio
composed certain smooth verses there to be read, Where also you find an
honorable memorial in marble of the deeds of the most illustrious Alexander
Farnese, Son of Ottavio Duke of Parma, whose statue stands in the same place,
as also that of M Antonio Colonna, who together with Giovanni d'Austria,
obtained a glorious victory on the Sea against the Turks in the Cursolari:
Together with some great statues of Popes, in a sitting posture as twere giving
Benediction to the People as of Leo the 10th. Gregory the 13th. Sixtus the 5th.
all well deservers of the Christian Republique; and other things giving delight
to the Spectator.

In the passage from the Campidoglio, to the Rupe Tarpeia in view of the Piazza
Montanara, stood the Temple of Jovis Optimi Maximi, which was the largest
Temple of Rome, built by Tarquinius Priscus, and adorned and enriched by
Tarquinius Superbus, with the expense of forty thousand pound of Silver.

The Descent from the Campidoglio or, Capitol.
FRom the Campidoglio or Capitol, you go down into the Foro Romano, which is
the space of ground from the Arch of Septimius to the Church of Santa Maria
Nuova. At the foot of the Campidoglio, you find the Triumphal Arch of L.
Septimius Severus entire, saving that some part is under ground, the Earth
being raised by vast ruins of structures: it has Inscriptions on both sides,
with the Warlike Expeditions made by that Emperor by Sea and Land. Here
Camillus built a Temple and dedicated it to the Goddess Concordia, when he had
reconciled the Common people to the Senate, whose also was that of Juno Moneta,
ascended by one hundred steps: 'Twas called Junone Moneta, because it
praemonished, and advised Romans, with an intelligible voice, that the Galli
Senones, were coming upon them. Those eight Collumnes there now being, on whose
Capitols are inscribed these words Senatus Populusque Romanus incendio
consumptum, reflituit; are the Relics of the said Temple of Concordia,
wherein the Senate frequently assembled, and made their oraisons.

On the left part of the descent from the Campidoglio, lies the place called
Sancto Pietro in Carcere, consecrated by his holiness San Silvestro to San
Pietro, because he was there taken bound and imprisoned, where a Feast was wont
heretofore to be solemnized the first day of August in remembrance of the
Chains wherewith Saint Peter was bound which was translated afterward to San
Pietro in Vincula, in Monte Esquilie, the Prisons were first built there by
Ancus Martius, to which Servius Tullius annexed the Vaults or Sellers under
ground called Tulliani Carceres, wherein (as Salust writes) those were
strangled who had given in their names to Catalines conspiracy.

The Church of Santa Martina (in whose angle the Colossus of Marforii lies) was
formerly consecrate to Mars Ultor the Revenger. Augustus built and dedicated it
after the Philippensian War in Pharsalia: some say, That in this Church was
the secret place where the Acts of the Senate were kept. In it is a Title made
in the times of Theodosius and Honorius the Emperors.

Next unto it is the Church of Santo Adriano, anciently the Temple of Saturn,
built or rather restored by Manutio Planco, being first dedicated by Minutio
and Sempronio the Consuls: This was the Exchequer of Rome, wherein the public
Treasury was preserved as we read that in the time of Scipio Emilianus it had
in it eleaven thousand pound weight of pure gold, and ninety two thousand pound
weight of silver, beside an infinite quantity of coined moneys. Here also the
Tabulae Elephantinae were laid up, wherein the numbers of the 35 tribes of
Rome, were recorded: as also the Military Ensigns, the Decrees of the Senate,
the public Acts, with the spoils of the Provinces and conquered Nations.

It Is supposed that Santa Maria Liberatrice, was a Temple dedicated to Venus
Generatrix, It stands at the Foot of the Palatine, those three hollow Pillars
some believe to be those before the foot of the Ponte aureo of Caligula, which
was supported by 80 Pillars, made with incredible cost, over which they passed
from the Palace to the Capitol.

The Pillar at Santa Maria Liberatrice, is one of those upon which was placed
the golden Statue by Domitian, near which stood the Statue of the River Rhene,
now called Marforio and is in the Campidoglio, Erected by Domitian for that
that Emperor triumphed over the Germans.

Near it was the Temple of Concord, with that of Julius Caesar on its right
hand, and that of Paulus AEmilius on its left hand, whose structure cost nine
hundred thousand Crowns.

Those high walls which are beheld at the Foot of the Palatine are part of the
Rostri Nuovi, which were so called for that there they settled the Rostra or
stemm of their Galleys: here now is the Vineyard of Cardinal Farnese. There
Cicero frequently made his Orations there the Fathers assembled and made Laws,
and there the head and hand of Cicero (which wrote his Philippick Orations)
were fixed to a Spear by command of Antonius the Triumvir, whose dishonorable
deeds are therein declaimed against. The Rostri Vecchie, were in the Corte
Hostilia, near the place of the Council which touched the Church Santa Maria
Nuova, which place is called Comitia as much as to say a place to retire
themselves together in: for here the senate and People of Rome assembled to
treat of the affairs of the the Commonwealth: and there is built now the holy
house of Sancta Maria de inferno.

The Temple of San Lorenzo in Miranda, stands in the ruins of the Temple of
Faustina and of Antonio, where we find this Inscription Divo Antonino, and
Divae Faustinae S. C. As also twelve fair Pillars, near which stood the Arch of
Fabius, and the covering of the Palace* which was called Libone.

The Piazza of Julius Caesar, extended from the Temple Faustina to that of
Santa Maria but at the Piazza of Augustus the Church of Santo Adriano, in
Trefori, is conjoined with it, And in that of Augustus, were certain Porticues
and in them statues of illustrious Men set up by Augustus who lived in the
house of Livia, in the Via Sacra. The Temple of Santi Cosmo and Damiano, was
anciently dedicated to Castor and Pollux which some allege without foundation
to be the Temple of Romulus and Remus.

The Temple of Peace, begun by Clandius and finished by Vespasian, was most
magnificent and stately, of whose most high structure some relics yet remain
not far from the Church of Santa Maria Nova, and one Pillar yet entire, the
highest and biggest of all Rome In the gardens of Santa Maria Nova, appear yet
two high round courses of two ancient Temples of the Sun and Moon, which some
will have to be of Isis and Serapis. There Tatius built a Temple to Vulcan, and
in that quarter AEsculapius also had a Temple, and Concordia, built by Fulvius
in anno 303. after the erecting of the Capitol: Out of which Temple of
Concordia, it is thought Vespasian afterward raised that of Peace, translating
to it moreover many ornaments from the Temple of Solomon, after he had
destroyed Jerusalem.

Not far distant from the Via sacra, stands the Marble Arch of Titus Vespasian,
wherein are carved the pomp of the Triumph, and the spoils brought from
Jerusalem at the overthrow of the Jews, as the Ark of the Covenant the
Candlestick for the seven Lights, The Table whereon they set the bread of the
Proposition or shewbread The Table of the ten Commandments delivered by God to
Moses, and the sacred Vessels all of pure gold, used in the sacrifices by the
Hebrews, besides which the Triumphal Chariot of the Emperor is carved thereon
with this Inscription. Senatus Populusque Romanus Divo Tito,
Divi Vespatiani F. Vespasiano Augusto.


The Foro or Court di Nerva is also called Transitorio, or the passage because
through it they passed into the Foro Romano, and in that of Augusto, where
stands the Arco di Noe, so called corruptly by the Vulgar stood the noble
Picture di Nerva, where in Fret work are these words. Imperator Nerva Caesar
Augustus Pont. Tib. Pont. II. ^mp. II* Procoris. The Fragments of this Arch are
yet extant between the Church Saint Basilio, and the Tower for the Militia.
Near it rises a certain square structure called by the vulgar Studiolo di
Virgilio, and they ridiculously fable, That the Poet was hung out of it by a
certain whore for a spectacle to the People one whole day. Which to revenge
Virgil (Who studied the Magic Art) effected that the Fire in the whole City
was extinguished, and all the people forced to give fire to their Candles and
Lights at the flames which were raised for shaming of the Strumpets. This fable
is painted every where but without an Author: Nor is it likely any such thing
could happen to that great Vir gil, who for his continency was called Parthe
nius. If any thing in this Fable be true I suppose it was writ of some other
Virgil a Magician by whom the Neapolitanes speak also many things to have been
performed: among others that by the Magic Art he hollowed the Mountain
Posylipum and made it penetrable, the Sepulcher of Virgil is erected near this
famous Cavern.

Near the Temple of Peace is that of the Santi Cosmo and Damiano, which was the
Court of Romulus, where the Senate congregated when they had any important
affair to consult about: It was wholly burnt, when they burned the body of
Publius Claudius, slain by T. Annione Milone, with the Basilica Portia near it,
which Marco Portio Catone the Censor reared a top of the house of Mevio. There
was also another Court in Monte Celio, where now stands the Church consecrated
to Santo Gregori.

MONTE PALATINO.
THis Hill was inhabited many years before the building of Rome and there when
at its greatest splendor, did the Emperors and other, great Personages for a
long time reside, but now it is overwhelmed with Ruins, and so great a
Devastation, that it is the most uninhabited Place of Rome: besides its Desert
uncouthness and Thorns, affording nothing of good more than a little Church of
Saint Nicholo, some Cottages, and a Vineyard of Cardinal Farnese. Thereon of
old stood these stately Temples following to wit, one dedicate to Vittoria
built by C. Posthumous the AEdile, Another to Apollo, which being destroyed, was
afterward restored by Augustus Caesar, to greaer beauty, with the addition of
that Porticue, whose relics yet remain more entire than any other in Rome, a
third to the Penati brought thither by AEneas, and honored with much reverence:

Others to the Gods Lari, to Faith, to Jove Victorius, to Heliogabalus, to Orco
and many other Gods, of whose Temples not any imaginable Vestigia are now
extant: And those magnificent Palaces of the Coesars, Tarquinius Priscus the
King, of Cicero who bought his Palace of Crassus for 50 thousand Crowns: of
Marcus Flaccus which stood near that which was bought by Cicero, whereof Q.
Catullus made a great Lodge.

That part of the Palatino which lies toward the Arch of T. Vespasian, is
called Germano, from the Twyn Brothers Romulus and Remus, there brought up by
Faustulus the Shepherd whose habitation was in that place: the space from
thence to the Arch of Constantine the Great was called Vela, for that there the
Shepherds dwelt, whose custom was to fleece or pluck the Wool from off the
sheep (whence they were called in Latin Vellera, Fleeces of Wool) before the
way of shearing was invented.

Toward Santa Maria Nova, Scaurus had a noble Palace with an Open gallery
supported with Pillars forty foot high without the bases or capitol.

The great Palace Gregostaci, was so denominated, for that there they usually
entertained the Ambassadors of diverse Nations: Here Quintus Flaminius dedicated
a statue to Concordia, when he had reconciled the People to the Senate, or
rather the Senate to the People. The Church Sant' Andrea, in Pallaria, is the
old Temple, wherein the Palladium and Penati, which AEneas brought with him
from Troy into Italy were at first placed, but afterward transported into the
Temple of Vesta, and the charge of them committed to the Vestal Virgins. Near
it stood the house of Valerius Publicola, which for some suspicion raised among
the People, they levelled with the ground in one night.

On that part of the Palatine toward Monte Celio, stood a Temple of Cibele
called also Dindimene and Open, The Image of which Goddess was translated from
Ida a Place in Phrygia to Rome, and reverenced with great devotion. On that
part respecting the Aventino, was the house wherein Augustus Caesar was born,
whose ruins yet arise to a vast altitude: to which was adjoined a Temple of
Apollo, upon whose top was fixed a golden Chariot of the Sun, of which some
fragments are yet in being, as also a Library, called Palatina: Wherein stood a
statue of Apollo, as Master of the Chorus among the Muses raised 50...... the
noble work of Scopa, It may be conjectured that the Baths of Palatini lay in
the Vinyard of Thomaso Faedra, a Roman Gentleman toward the Arco Massimo,
approaching which were the Curia of the Salii, and Auguri, with other Fabrics,
into these Baths by an Aqueduct, rann a stream of the Aqua Claudia.

At the foot of Mount Palatine, to wit at the Pillars of the Gallery of
Caligula, is a round Fabric, being the Church S. Theodosius, which was at
first built and consecrated to Jupiter stator, by Romulus, about the time of
the Sabyn war, when the Romans turned tail, and running away, were by the
entreaties of Romulus persuaded to face their Enemies, and receive Victory,
some say that this was not the Temple of Jupiter Stator, but that it was the
ruins of the old Court which stood near the Temple of Concordia.

Leaving the Temple of Janus Quadrifrons, and the Foro Boario, in the descent
to the Circo Maximo, you meet a hollow place into which out of certain Pipes
run copious waters, where the Women wash their Linen; it is said that here were
the Fountains of the Nymph Junturna in Velabro, now called Fonti S. Georgii.
The Vault which appears contiguous with a great Arched common Shore, was built
by Tarquin, for reception of the Channels and Filth of the City, with a
commodious conveyance thence into the Tyber. Which Arch was so ample, that a
Cart and Horses might conveniently pass through it. We read that the Censors
sometime sold the Filth of this Vault and sink for the fatning the Fields
about, to certain person for 600000. Crowns, which when it was told the Emperor,
he answered. Odor Lucri bonus ex re qualibet.

Now it is called Chiavica, Close by which lies the Lago Curtio, a Lake so
denominated from Curtius who threw himself and horse armed praecipitously into
that Vorago, or opening of the Earth, that he might avert the pestilential Air
exhaling out of it, which infested Rome with a great contagion. There also grew
the Grove of Numa Pompilius, wherein he spoke and treated with the Nimphe
AEgeria, from whom he learned the Ceremonies of the Sacrifices, and where it was
unlawful for any one to spit. In this place the Ashes of the Galli Senones
were laid up, now it is called Dolioli, from the Dolia or earthen Vessels,
wherein they put the Ashes of the slain, to be buried.

The GIRCO MASSIMO,
OF all the Ornaments of the Circo Maximo scarce any thing is to be seen, more
than the entire circumscription of the place whereby its amplitude is
discerned: It lies between the Palatino, and the Aventino, and is about half a
mile long and three Acres broad which some say was capable of 260 thousand men,
others restrain it to one hundred and fifty thousand. Here Romulus first set
forth the Consaulian Games to the God Conso, after the rape of the Sabyn Women.
Tarquinius Priscus designed and Tarquinius Superbus built the place, for the
celebration of the Circensian games, and other Solaces for the People, which
Augustus adorned, Gaius amplified, Trajan repaired and augmented the Fabric,
and Heliogabalus paved it. At present it is all about in Gardens, but some steps
and roofs of little cells remain, which are supposed to have been the Offices of
the Actors in the Games, or of such as uttered beer and other necessaries, to
the People resorting to the shows. Others think them to have been the stews
wherein the Whores dwelt, exposing their bodies to sale for gain. Neptune had
a Temple conjoined with this Circ, whereof some ruins are yet to be seen
incrusted with Fish shells. Where the Church of S. Anastatia stands, were
erected two Obelisks, the one of which being 132 foot long without the bases,
was translated by Sixtus the 5th. to the Vatican, the other was 88. foot high.
Augustus transported both out of Egypt, for adorning the Circ: wherein also
was the Naumachia for exercising Sea Fights: a place now consisting of boggs
and Reeds: where also part of those waters flowed which by an Aqueduct were
conveyed into the Circ, called Aquae Claudiae.

On the left hand rises the Moles, or vast Fabric of Septimius Severus called
Settizonio, from its seven floors, than which no structure in Rome was higher.
The Emperor raised it to that altitude, that it might be Obuious to such as
sailed out of Africa into Italy: whoseing it, should adore his Ashes laid up
at the very top of it, because himself was an African by birth. Of which
immense Edifice three Rafters now only continue, which through long antiqnity
seeming to nod, and threaten destruction, Sixtus the 5th. caused to be levelled
with the foundation to the great dissatisfaction of the Roman people. One part
of the Title Legible was this. Trib. Pont. VI. Cons. fortunatissimus
nobilissimus.

The VIA APPIA.
THe Via Appia takes its beginning at the Arch Triumphal of Constantine, and
leading by the Settizonio of Severus, conductes one to the Baths of Antoninus,
whence it passed by the Porta Capena, to the ruins of Alba Longa, and thence to
Brindesi. Blind Appius the Senator gave name to it, paving it with most hard
stone to Capua, thence Caesar prolonged it, but Trajan repaired, enlarged and
completed it, its relics are yet to be discerned, at Rome, Piperno and Monte
Cincello. but that part of the Via Appia, which leads from the Baths of
Antoninus to the Porta Capena, is called the Via Nava, all which was paved by
Antoninus Caracalla, when he built his Baths, then which (except Dioclesians)
none in Rome, are more perfect. In these Baths stand Pillars of Serpentine
stone; and great Bathing places cut out of Marble: they were placed near the
Church San Sisto in the Aventino, and to them was adjoined a Temple of Isis,
where now is the Church de i Santo Nereo and Archiole: along the Via Appia rose
many Temples of Gods, whereof no fragments are now extant.

The Porta Capena, was so named from Capena, a City near Alba Longa, the way
whereunto lay through this gate, which was also called Camaena from the Temple
of Camaenae, that is to say the Muses which was but a little eloigned from it:
It was also called Triumphal because through it, the Scipioes entered the City
triumphing, and likewise Charles the 5th. the Emperor, entered by the same into
Rome, ( Paul the third then reigning,) when he came from his Victory over the
Africans, At this day it is called Porta S. Sebastiani, from the Church
consecrated to the same Saint, which is two miles distant from the gate near
the C^metery, of Calixtus. On each side of this way ly magnificent Sepulchers,
in great number, yet almost entire, as also the footsteps of Many Temples,
though not exactly discernable.

Here also remains a certain round Fabric, judged to be the Sepulcher of the
Ceteghi, for in the titles may be read on both sides the name of the Family of
Cetega, and not far from the City is f^en the River Almone, which running into
Rome, commixes with the Tyber under the Aventino.

That high round Mole on the right hand proves it self to have been the
Sepulcher of the Scipio's by the inscriptions upon it. On the left hand as you
leave the Via Appia you meet the Church Domine quo vadis, the history whereof
is related before. The adjacent Fabric is supposed to be the Sepulcher of the
Lucilli, here, as under diverse others are certain Vaults dug, and they
divided in several for the comodious disposal of the Vessels and Urns
containing the Ashes of the Defunct. The Brick wall is thought to be part of
the Temple of Faunus and Sylvanus.

On the right hand of the Church Saint Sebastiano, stands an entire Temple but
dispoiled of its ornaments, formerly dedicated to Apollo, into which the
Shepherds to preserve their Flooks, from the heats of the day, and incomodities
of the nights do often drive them.

About forty paces farther in the adjacent sields, amongst thorns and brambles,
in an obscure place, is a subterranean Cavern. whose entrance through the heaps
of stones is difficultly found, but when entered, you behold Vaults built with
good Art, on each side of which are long repositories, wherein the bodies of
deceased Christians, whom it was not lawful to bury solemnly or openly were
reposed. In these Cavernes were the primitive Christians wont to conceal
themselves, to fly the Emperors raging persecutions, now called Stanze de
Christiani.

In the Temple of Saint Sebastiano, they descend by certain steps into the
Caves under ground, which are called Catecombe. Wherein in old time the
Christians for fear of Tyrants usually lay ^id: in these it is reported that
forty Popes suffered Martyrdom, and with them one hundred seventy four
thousand Christians, as by the Inscription over the ingress clearly appears.
The place is adored with the highest devotion, and its profundity and Darkness
creates no small fear. It Is not possible to find the way in without Torches and
Lights, nor safe to go too and fro in the several divisions (which are like a
Labyrinth) without a good guide, It Is called Caemiterio, di Calisto, Among the
Relics in this Church they show the Prints or Footsteps of the Feet of Christ
upon a stone, which they say were there left by Christ at his ascension into
Heaven in the presence of his Disciples. Many other things are writ hereof by
Onosrius, and others.

On the side of this Church is found a vast round Temple supported by one
hundred Marble Pillars consecrated to Mars Gradivus by Sylla while he was
AEdile, in it Audience was given to the Ambassadors of Enemies, by the Senate,
to prevent their ingress into the City, least they should make advantages of
their admission as Espials; they report the greater part of this Temple at the
prayers of the Pope Saint Stephen, to have fallen down, when by the command of
Galienus, he was there compelled to sacrifice to Mars: Near hereto they
preserved the Stone Manale, which when the Romans would obtain Rain they
solemnly brought in procession into the City

Beyond that upon the Via Appia, rises the Walls of a square Castle very
entire: which some believe to have been Sinvessa, others Pametia, but the most
to be credited averr it to be the Stanza or abiding place of the Praetorian
Soldiers, within these walls is a spacious Concave.

Here on all sides ly huge Sepulchers, some built in a square, others in a
^ound, a third sort in a Pyramid form, either with brick or Marble, whose
inscriptions demonstrate, that they were erected for the Metelli, Among which a
great structure in a round form seems the most conspicuous, being raised with
squared white marble stones to the bigness of a Tower, hollow within and open
at top, so that standing below one may see the skies: Its walls are about 24.
foot thick, in whose circuit are interwoven the heads of Bulls and Oxen cleared
of the skin and flesh, as in their sacrifices they used them, between the
garlands of Leaves and Flowers. The heads amount to the number of 200.
Sacrificed to the God Capode Boi, and the Antiquaries will have, that at the
famous Sepulcher of Cecilia Metella a double Hecatombe was performed. At the
Foot of the neighboring Hill, if you pronounce a whole heroic verse, an
admirable Echo returns it whole, and articulately for the most part, and
confused otherwhiles eight times answered: In no place is heard so rare an
Echo, which is said to be excited by artifice, that at the Funeral of this
Caecilia Metella, the ejaculations of the weepers and the funeral houlings
might immensely be multiplied, while that double Hecatombe was celebrating, and
the Funest duties performed in honor of that Matron.

In the next depressed place, ly the mighty ruins of the Circo Hipodromo, The
structure hereof is attributed to Bassiano Caracalla raised in the Place where
Tiberius the Emperor, built the Stables for the Praetorian bands: here the
Soldiers exercised themselves in running, riding, and driving Chariots.

In the midst of the Area, lie certain signs of the places whence the horses
rushed out to their courses, as also of Bases, Statues, Altars, and meets or
bounds for the Courses; round it are many pictures, in the midst lies an
Obelisk of speckled stone called Granito, flat upon the ground broken in three
pieces, carved all over with Hieroglyphics, branches with Leaves and animals.
It Is supposed that Sixtus the 5th. would have reared this as he did others had
not death shortened his days.

Above the Circ rises an entire Temple four squared, with Pillars, and
Corridores before it: Which as is supposed was dedicated to the Dio Ridicolo,
upon this occasion: Hannibal having slain 40 thousand Romans at the battle of
Cannae, marched with his victorious Army to the siege of Rome, and pitched his
Camp in that very place: where a diffused Laughter being heard over his Camp it
caused a prodigious fear, and that made him raise the Siege and retreat to the
Terra di Lavoro: which had he obstinatly continued some time longer, (having
created such a consternation in the Citizens) he had undoubtedly taken Rome
with small difficulty: but as Livy says an Affrican told Hannibal, He knew how
to obtain but not how to make use of Victory. Thus was Rome delivered from
Hannibal: and the Romans in commemoration of so great a benefit received from
the God of Laughter, consecrated that Temple to the Dio Ridicoloso.

Hence you must return by three miles journey back to Rome, and arrived at the
walls enter by the Porta Latina, near whereto is the Church S. Giovanni where
it is said the same Saint was cast into boiling oil by the command of Domitian,
for which a feast is always solemnized in May, thence follow the street to the
Porta Gabiosa, so called, for that intending for the City Gaba, you must march
out of it, where the Via Roma connexeth with the Prenestina: as sometimes the
Via Appia unites with the Latina.

MONTE CELIO.
Leaving the Wall on the right hand of the Porta Gabiosa, you ascend Monte
Celio, which runs along by the wall to the Porta Maggiore. This Hill was
anciently called Querquetulano, from the multitude of Oaks growing thereon,
before the Tuscans inhabited it: to whom license was given to dwell in the
Bourg Tosco, because they marched under their Captain Cloche Vibenna, to the
assistance of the Romans against their Enemies. On this Hill at this day rests
no Antique thing of moment, more than the infinite ruins of Fabrics. One part
of it is na med Celiolo, where stands a Church of Santo Giovanni Evangelista,
called ante Portam Latinam, which was anciently a Temple sacred to Diana. On
the top of the Celio, is a round Church dedicated to S. Stefano, by Pope
Simplicio, from being a Temple of Faunus, whose antiquity threatening
destruction, Nicholas the fifth repaired it, and Gregory the thirteenth
beautifyed it with Pictures of Martyrs and Saints.

Curia Hostilia stood where now is Santi Giovanni and Paulo toward the
Settizonio of Severus, built by Tullius Hostilius, different from that in the
Foro Romano, Here the Senate assembled for state affairs.

The Church of S. Maria in Domenica is seated toward the Aventino, and was
restored by Leo the 10th. here anciently stood the Dwellings of the Albani, and
near them the Aqueduct for the Aqua Claudia, in the Arch whereof are engraven
these words P. Corn R. F. Dolabella, Cos. C. Junius C. P. Silanus Flamen
Martial. Ex S. C. Faciundum curaverunt. Idemque Probaverunt.

By the same Aqueduct stands a great Fabric as a conservatory of the Waters.

The Castra Peregrina stood in old time where the Church of Santi quatro
Coronati, was built by Pope Honorius, and restored by Paschal the second. In
those Castles they used to rendezvous and accommodate the People for Sea
affairs, which Augustus used to keep in the ordinary Fleet at Niseno. Between
the Porta Gabiusa, and Celimontana abound great ruins of the Palace of
Constantine the great (called now S. Giovanni) by which may be comprehended the
magnificent state and splendour of that Emperor.

San Giovanni in Laterano keeps its ancient name built by Constantine the Great
at the instance of Pope Sylvester formerly the Seat of the Roman Pontifices at
first called Romae Episcopi Bishops of Rome, but afterward (induced thereunto
by the pleasantness of the Vatican Hills) they translated their habitation
thither, building a renowned Palace near St. Peter's Church.

Near the said Church stands Il Battisterio di Constantino: of an orbicular
form sustained by 8. porphyr Pillars: Report says that Constantine the Great
laboring under a Leaprosie, at the persuasions of his Phisicians resolved to
bath himself in the blood of Infants, and for that intent erected this
sumptuous structure: but being admonished in a dream to bath himself in holy
water in the name of Jesus Christ the true God, whom Helena his Mother
worshipped, the Emperor obeyed the Celestial admonition, and was baptized in
that porphyr Font now in the said Temple: For the truth hereof the Reader is
desired to consult his own thought: It not being likely, that so magnificent a
structure should be built and intended for perpetrating that notorious crime,
which should rather be kept close and tacitly concealed, than published with
such vain ostentation; besides that Historians say he was baptized by the
Nichomedian Bishop, when he arrived in Asia, B^isardo thinks that the said
Battisteri^ was rather the Bath to the Lateran Palace and the Form of the
Fabric induces him and others to the same belief: But however it was it is most
certain that Constantine the great, having professed the Christian Religion, was
baptized in this Church and the same Babtistary it is showed to this day, and all
converts to the Christian Religion, are there still baptized. On the right hand
of it are certain holy chapels, and therein preserved many precious Marbles
and some Pillars conveyed hither from Jerusalem.

At the entrance of the Church San Giovanni Laterano, stand many sumptuous
Tombs of Popes, and Altars wrought excellently with Marble, upon the high Altar
is the last supper of Christ engraven in silver of great value, set up by
Clement the seventh, who also raised, the great rich Organ, and that stately
Vestry for the use of the Church.

Before the Chorus were four hollow brazen Pillars of Corinthian work, which
it is said were brought from Jerusalem full of the holy Earth where our Savior
was enterred, others say that Sylla fetched them from Athens, and others that
Augustus caused them to be cast in Rome of the Beaks of the Galleys taken in
the Actiack battle and in memorial applied to the Temple of Jupiter
Capitolino. Furthermore others say that Vespasian translated them with the
other spoils from Jerusalem. Of late, Clement the 8th. caused them to be guilt
over, and placed them on the high Altar, with a brass Scutcheon guilt and
affixed to them, wherein his Arms are engraven.

Before Sixtus the 5th. reedified from the foundations the Lateranian Palace,
there was a great hall, where the Pope with the Ecclesiastical Synod of
Cardinals and Archbishops rendered themselves when they were to manage any
substantial business. Those three great marble Collumnes were shipped from the
Palace in Jerusalem, here the Later ane^sial counsels were solemnized with the
assistance of the whole Clergy.

The Scala Sancta, contained 28 stairs which stood in Pilats House the which
Christ ascended when he was whipped, are transferred by the Pope into another
place where Christians frequent them and for devotion creep up them upon their
knees kissing them.

Here were two porphyr chairs, whereof the Enemies of the Catholic Faith
recount certain shameful Fables which have been sufficiently confuted by
Cardinal Bellarmine, in his first Tome of the controversies of the Roman
Bishop, as also the story of Pope Joan whom the story says to be John the 7th:
who succeeded Leo the 4th. confuted by the said Cardinal and Onofrius, and
lately by Florimondo Romondo in French,

The Pillar of white Marble placed in the wall, and divided in two is thought
to be broken miraculously at the death of Christ, when the Veyl of the Temple
rent.

Sancta Sanctorum is a Chapel held in great veneration, the ingress therein is
forbidden to women: In it are kept the Ark of the Covenant, the rod of Aaron,
the Table whereon Christ's last supper was celebrated: of the sacred Manna, the
Navil string and praepuce of Christ, a Vyal of Christ's blood, some thorns of
his Crown, one whole Nail wherewith he was fastened to the Cross. The Snaffle
of Constantine the great his Horse, which was made of the two nayls which
pierced his feet, the fourth was placed in the Emperors golden Diadem. In the
same place are likewise showed many Relics which are regarded by the Romans
with huge Devotion: here is to be observed that the old pictures of the Greeks,
and Gregory, Bishop of Turona show, that Christ was fastened to the Cross, with
two nails in his feetand a little table under.

Somewhat distant from S. Giovanni, stands a Gate of the City called now by the
same name, but anciently Celimontana from Mount Celio Hence the Via Campagna
takes its beginning leading to the Campagna called Terra di Lavoro from its
sterility: Forth the City it joines with the Latina.

On the back part of Monte Celio, lies the Church Santa Croce di Jerusalem, one
of the seven chief, formerly sacrate to Venus and Cupid, In it is kept a part
of the Lords Cross, and the title of the Cross writ in three languages, one of
the thirty pence, which Judas the Traitor received for betraying Christ, a
Thorn of the Crown, with other sacred Relics.

Here under the Earth Helena the mother of Constantine built a Chapel, wherein
Women are permitted entrance only upon the 20th. of March, to the Monastery of
this Temple is adjoined an Amphitheatre, somewhat less but more ancient than
the Coliseo, which was edificated by Statilius Taurus, in the reign of
Augustus: but it was for the most part destroyed by Pope Paul the 3d. for
reparation of the Monastery. On one side of Santa Croce appear yet some ruins
of the Basilica Sessariana, near the Walls.

The Arches which enter the City by Porta Nevia, and pass over the top of the
Celio, to the Aventino, were the Arches for the Aqueduct of the Claudian water:
and were the highest and longest of Rome, Claudius conveyed this water from
forty miles off into the City; Some of this water run into the Palace, some
into the Campidoglio, but the greatest part to the Aventino: The said Porta
Nevia, was also called Nevia, and Santa Croce and was built in an Arch
Triumphal, which demonstrates the Majesty and grandeur of the work.

Near the Aqueduct for the Aqua Claudia toward Monte Celio, stands the
Hospital S. Giovanni being both wealthy and comodious for receipt of infirm and
sick Persons, abounding in all sorts of Phisical ingredients, Physicians,
Apothecaries, Surgeons, attendants, and whatever else can conduce to the good of
the Patients: This convenience has in all ages induced many Princes and other
Persons of quality and riche^, when their Maladies require, to make this
Hospital their abode, though they lie there at their own expense. In the Court
of it are Sepultures of diverse sorts. Baths with sculptures of Satyrs and
different Actions: The battle of the Amazones: The Chase of Meleager and other
fair objects.

The Temple of S. Clement Pargetted with various colored Marble, has diverse
old inscriptions, many figures of the sacred in struments used in the divine
services by the Popes as also in the Sacrifices by the Priests of the Gentiles
and the Southsayers.

In the return you meet that stupendous and admirable Mole the Amphitheatre,
called vulgarly Coliseo from the Colossean statue of 120 foot high, which Nero
erected. The altitude of this Amphitheatre was such, and the structure so
compact, that Rome afforded nothing more stately. 'Twas eleaven years continued
labor for thirty thousand Slaves, and capable of eighty seven thousand men,
who might conveniently dispose theselves in the surrounding Seats for be
holding the Plays there yearly exhibited.

The house of Nero occupying all that space between the Hills Palatino and
Celio, reached to the Esquilie, so ample that it had more the face and
semblance of a City, than of a single house, within were comprehended Fields,
Lakes, Woods, and a Gallery of a mile long, with three ranks of Pillars, many
of its Chambers were guilt and adorned with gems: and the Temple dedicated to
Fortuna Seia, had in it an Image of the same Goddess of transparent Marble.

On the left hand stands the Arch Triumphal of Constantine the Great, as yet
whole and perfect with all his victories and statues carved on it. This Arch
was erected in honor of that Emperor by the Romans after he had overcome at
Ponte Milvio, Maxentius, who had tyrannically oppressed Rome and Italy. At
present they manage horses in the Coliseo. And near it rises a proud Fabric in
form of a Pyramid, which was called La Meta Sudante, for that thence issued
Streams of water, whereof such as had disposed themselves in the Amphitheatre
to see the sports, had given them to satisfy their thirsts when desired by
any. Thus ends the second days Journey.

The third days Journey of ROME.
LEaving the Castle Saint Angelo on the right hand of the Torre Sanguina,
passing through the street Orso, where it divides you find the house of Bildo
Ferratino in the frontispiece whereof stands a statue of Galba the Emperor with
other figures.

In the Palace of the Duke of Altemps, they show many monuments of Antiquity,
Epitaphs, Inscriptions, and Relics which wonderfully delight the eyes of
skillful Artists, and ingenious Men, among others the statue of Seneca, the
Philosopher and the Vestry and Chapel of the Duke, clear demonstrations of the
piety and religion of the Patrones. Near it stands the house of Cardinal
Gaetano containing some rare Antique statues.

Toward Navova is the Church of S. Apollinare formerly the Temple of Apollo,
and behind it the Church of Saint Augustine, where the Tomb of Santa Monica
his Mother is showed with her Relics.

That spacious Court before the Palace of the Duchess of Parma, corruptly
called Piazza Navona, was formerly the Circo Agonale, wherein they exhibited the
Agonalian fights and games instituted by Numa Pompilius in honor of Janus.
Nero augmented this Circ, and so did Alexander the Son of Manca, who erected
also near it a Palace and the famous Alexandrian Hot baths. Hereabouts also
Nero and Adrian had their Baths. but the continued edifices there have lost the
very foundations of the old structures.

In the house of the Bishops of Saula, is showed the Head of M. Tul lius
Cicero, in that of Alexander Ru^ino, the Image of Julius Caesar Armed, like a
Colossus, with his thighs neatly harnessed after the oldfashion, and oposite to
it, another of the same height, and vests of Octavius Caesar. Then which
statues, Rome scarce affords any thing of better workmanship.

Those round and high Arches which rise in that place called the Ciambella, are
relics of the Bathes of M. Agrippa: near which Nero built others, whose
Fragments show themselves behind S. Eustachio.

M. Agrippa Built the Pantheon near his Bathes in honor of all the Gods, a
Temple to be admired for the Architecture and wealth, the most ancient, entire,
and splendid of any at this day extant in Rome He built it orbicular, that
Preeminence of Place might create no quarrels among the Gods. Others say he
dedicated it to Open, and Cibele, as mother of the Gods, and Mistress of the
Earth. Afterward the Popes consecrated it to the Blessed Virgin and all the
Saints. It has no windows, being in lieu thereof supplied with light from a
great Open space at top, the rain water driving there through is received into
a large brass Vessel at the bottom, which in old time was covered with plates
of silver but Constantine the Nephew of Heraclius took away that with the other
ornaments of the City; anciently it was ascended to by 7 steps, but now who
enters it must descend 18. steps, whereby appears how vast are the heaps of
ruins. An inscription of very long Letters testify that Severus, and M.
Antonius repaired the Pantheon: then threatening a ruin. Herein lies Raphael of
Urbin, the Prince of Painters* And before it stands a large Vessel of Porphyr
admirable for the grandeur and curiosity of workmanship, one like to which is
extant in Santa Maria Maggiore under the Crucifix.

Near it Santa Maria della Minerva, so called from its first dedication to
Minerva presents it self; where the Dominican Friars inhabit: which has
nothing of antiquity more than the Walls and some old Inscriptions. Here lies
the Cardinals, Pietro Bembo, and Tomaso Gaetano, learned men of their time: and
Santa Caterina of Siena.

A great arch now old, rude, and divested of all its ornaments, stood near it,
called Camiliano, which they think to be built by Camillus, but falsely, for
those kind of works were first set a foot in the reigns of the Emperors:
sometime since, this Arch was by license of Pope Clement the 8th. pulled down
by Cardinal Salviano, who with those stones amplified his own adjacent Palace,
near this Arch lay a foot of a Colossus very great, which is supposed to be
transferred to the Campidoglio, where it is now obvious.

In the house of Paulus de Castro, is seen the head of Socrates, with his whole
breast, and many other things which will recreate the spectator: In the Palace
of S. Marca in the Via Lata, there, is such another Vessel of Marble as is at
San Salvatore del Lauro, taken out of the Baths of Agrippa and a statue of
Fauna or as others say of the good Goddess.

All those things wherewith of old the Court of Nerva was garnished, are either
by age decayed, or translated to some other place it is called also Foro
Transitorio, because over it they walked to go to the Foro Augusto and Romano,
for which reason that Church is called S. Adriano in trefori. here stood
likewise the Palace of the said Emperor whose ruins were removed elsewhere.

Here also lies the Foro Trajano, between the Campidoglio, the Quirinale, and
the Foro Augusto, this was environed with a magnificent gallery sustained with
noble pillars, whereof Apolliodorus was Architector and adorned with statues,
Images, and a triumphal Marble Arch, of all which naught remains, except two of
the Pillars at Santa Maria di Loreto. And one Collumne spread over within with
Cockle shells, which demonstrates the splendour and Majesty of the Emperors; it is
128 foot high besides the bases, which is 12. foot more: it is raised by 24
stones only, but they so vast, that it appears the work of Giants, every one of
those stones has eight stayers by which they get up inwardly to the top, which
are enlightened by 44 Casements. Round it are carved the noble Acts of Caesar
Trajano in the Dacian War. No part of the world can boast a work more
admirable, or more magnificent. 'Twas erected in honor of that good Emperor,
who was not so fortunate as to see it finished, for being detained in the
Parthick war, upon his return a flux of blood seized him in the City of Soria,
in Sele^cia, whereof he dyed his body was brought to Rome, and his bones
enclosed in a Pile, placed on the top of the Column.

In this Foro di Trajano, stand the Churches of Saint Silvester, S. Biasio,
Sant Martino, placed there by S. Marco the first Pope. Boniface the 8th.
erected there 3 Towers, called now, Le Militie, chiefly that in the midst,
where Trajan used to quarter his Soldiers.

Above it lies the the Vineyard of Cardinal Pietro Aldobrandino, meriting a
view, wherein besides the Fountains and Sources of waters which form many
streams, you may see some old noble Marbles among others Harpocrate a Child,
wrought by an exquisite hand, and an old painted picture, found some years
since retaining the beauty of its colors: a wonder to believe, since it is so
ancient, and so long lay hid in a grotto near S. Maria Maggiore.

IL MONTE ESQUILINO.
AT the Foro di Nerva begins the Suburb, which extended to the Tiburtina
dividing the Esquilie; the Vale between the Esquilie, and the Viminale they
name Vico Patricio, because many Patritii that is to say Nobles dwelt in that
part.

L'Esquilie, was so called because in the time of Romulus the Sentinels were
placed there, this hill is severed from the Celio, by the Via Lavicana from the
Viminale by the Vico Patritio. The Via Tiburtina, as abovesaid (crosses it in
the midst which way ascends from the Suburb to the Porta Nevia, but before it
comes to the trophies of Marius it is cut in two, the right hand way leads
toward San Giovanni Laterano, conjoyning with the Lavicana, the left goes to
the Porta di San Lorenzo by the name of Prenestina.

In the Via Tiburtina, is the Arch of Galienus the Emperor called San Vito from
the neighboring Temple. Here was the Macello Lanieno, the Market for all
eating things.

The Temple of Isis, now of Santa Maria Maggiore, consists of exquisite
structure, adorned with gold and rare Marbles and sustained by Ionick Pillars.
Here Santo Hieronimo, lies enterred and here they show an Image of the Virgin,
painted (as is credited) by St. Luke the Evangelist, Near it stands the Church
of S. Lucia, and that of S. Pudentiana here of old stood a wood sacred to Juno
reverenced with great but blind zeal.

In the Church of S. Prassede, are many inscriptions, and the Pillar (to which
our Lord being bound) was whipped, this they say was brought from Jerusalem. In
San Pietro in Vincula are many admi rabble things, among others the Tombs of
Julius the second whereon Moses is engraven by Buonorota; a work excelling most
of the Ancient, of Cardinal Sadoleto, and Cardinal di Tucino.

Thence you go to the Church de quaranta Martiri, from whence by the Via
Labicano to S. Clement the Esquilie extended it self, and was there called
Carine.

Near Saint Pietro in Vincula, are some subterranean edifices, the remains of
Vespasians Baths, called the Set Sale, being designed for keeping the waters
requisite to the Baths, in them was found that sta tue of Laocoon now
translated to the Vatican, which gives such admiration to all aspicients. The
Church of S. Maria n^ Monti, was built by Pope Symachus, in the decays of
Adrians Baths: the place being thence denominated at this day Adrianello.

At the Church d'Santi Ginliano and Eusebio, elates it self a huge Fabric of
brick work, wherein were the receptacles of the Aqua Martia: on the upper part
whereof are figured the Trophies of Marius that is a heap of spoils and Arms
bound to the body of a Tree placed there in honor of Marius for his expedition
against the Cimbrians which things being afterward torn down by Sylla in the
civil war, were restored again by C, Caesar to their former luster, and yet
remain in the Campidoglio. Behind the Trophies in that Vineyard appear great
ruins of the Emperor Gordianus his Baths near which the said Emperor raised a
stupendous Palace which had two hundred Pillars in a double Rank. But hereof
no more but high walls appear. All its Ornaments and Pillars, being thence
translated for beautifying other Palaces.

From these Baths the way on the right hand called Labicana goes to Porta
Maggiore, or Sant^ Croce, anciently Nevia. Between this Gate and that of San
Lorenzo, near the walls rise vast ruins of the Temple dedicated to the name of
^aius, and Lucius the Nephews of Augustus and built by him, one arched roof yet
may be seen called Gallucio as of Caio and L^cio.

Near it was the Palace of Licino, where now S. Sabina stands, there placed by
Pope Simplex, contiguous with which Palace was the place called Orso Pileato,
from a Bears figure there.

By the gate Esquili^a, San Lorenzo or Tibuntina, by all which names it is
frequently called: stands the Church San Lorenzo, built by Constantine the
great in honor of that Martyr replenished with antiquities, but especially the
instruments used in the sacrifices are carved on inembossed work, by this Gate
also enters the Aqueduct by which the Aqua Martia is conveyed into the City,
first raised by Q. Martius, afterward consumed by Age restored by M. Agrippa.

This water was brought from 35. miles off the City, and ran into Dioclesians
Baths, and the adjacent places, it was very healthful, and therefore chiefly
accomodated for the drink of the People.

On the other side of this Gate entered the Acque Tepola and Julia: the one was
conveyed six miles the other eleaven from without the City. To these joined
the Aniene which ran from Tivoli 20. miles distance. Over the Aniene stands the
Ponte Mammea, so named from Mammea the Mother of Alexander Severus the Emperor,
by whom it was repaired, from this Gate the Via Prenestina reached to Praenest^,
and the Labicana to Labi.

That part of the Esquilie near San Lorenzo in Fon^, was named Virbo Clivio,
which was the Grove Fugatale where Servius Tullius dwelt and there lies the
Vico Ciprio, called also Scelerato, for that Tullius was there slain by his Son
in Law, over whose dead body his own Daughter commanded her Coachman to drive
her Chariot. This Vico, or Town extended to Busta Gallica, where the Galli
Senoni or the French were slain, burnt and buried by Camillus: now this place s
denominated Porto Gallo, where the Church Saint Andrea: is built On the top of
this Vico Scelerato Cossius had his Palace afterward dedicated to the Goddess
Tellura now to Saint Pantaleo^* near Santa Agna at the foot of the Viminale
stood a Temple of Silv^, whose decays yet appear.

IL COLLE VIMINALE.
THe hill Viminale is next to the Esquilino, and runs along by the Walls: it was
so named from a famous Temple dedicated to Jupiter Viminale: whence also the
contiguous Gate took the name Viminale and Nomentana, from the way leading to
Nomento, which is now called S. Agnese from the Church of that name near it,
which was formerly dedicated to Bacchus, therein is an old porphyr Arch the
greatest now extant in Rome, whereon are engraven Boys gathering Grapes: which
some call the Sepulcher of Bacchus, but erroneously.

In the Via Nomentana a little farther is the Ponte Nomentano built by Narsetes
the Eunuch under Justinian the Emperor, as the inscription testifies. Nero the
Emperor, between the Porta Suburbana, and Salaria, had Suburbano a singular
edifice, which he gave to a Freed Man who fearinga public punishment by a
poynard thrust into his breast and the help of Sporo another freed Man slew
himself: some ruins of this Fabric yet remain.

Porta Querquetulana is now a Church near which appear square walls the Remains
of the Castle deputed for the Soldiers stations appointed for the Emperors
guards.

On the Viminale, are seen the Baths of Dioclesian, of an admired Vastness and
sumptuosity, which though much decayed, are yet the most entire in Rome, It Is
said that forty thousand Christians were in a servile manner turmoyled for
fourteen years in the structure hereof. Dioclesian and Maximinian began them,
but Constantine and Massiminian, completed them now called All Term, where
appears a certain place made for receipt of the waters employed in those Baths,
called Bacco di term; Dioclesian adjoined a Palace to them, whose ruins
manifestly show themselves. And here was that celebrious Library called Ulpa,
where the Elephantine books were disposed.

On the right hand of these Baths, are the Gardens formerly appertaining to
Cardinal Bellay, but now to the Monks of the order of Saint Bernard, to whose
industry the ingenious owe the Invention and designs made by wind. And on
their left hand, stands the Church of Santa Susanna, in old time the Temple of
Quirinus. In this place they believe Romulus (being praeascended into Heaven)
appeared to Proculus Julius then returning from Alba, for which cause the
Senate consecrated a Temple and attributed to him divine honors. Here also (
ut aiunt) Romulus frequently descended and communicated diverse things to Alba.

The foundations of the Olympiade Bathsyet continue near S. Lorenzo in Pane and
Perna, vulgarly named Pamiperna where Decius the Emperors Palace stood.

The Church S. Prudentia, was built by Pius the fourth, at the request of Santa
Prascede his Sister, where likewise appear the walls of the Baths Novati. And
the ruins of the Baths of Agrippina the Mother of Nero, are yet extant by the
Church S Vitalis.

In San Lorenzo in Proserpina shows it self a great Marble Stone reverenced
with great adoration and religion, whereon ( ut aiunt) the roasted body of San
Lorenzo, was repo^ed after his death: here lies buried Cardinal Cirketo the
delight of the Learned of our times.

Beyond the Church S. Susanna by the Via Quirinale lay heretofore the gardens
of Rodolfo, Cardinal Carpente, then which, no part of Ita ly nay Naples it self
(where are the most excelling) afforded more delicious. In it were 134 statues
engraven with diverse artificial figures and other admirable curiosities so well
disposed, that no Fancy could reach that Paradise, nor ocular view scarce
apprehend its glory, to say no more this garden was an Emblem of that Cardinal
its Patron the son of Alberto Pio Prince of Carpi, for as that exceeded most,
so his knowledge in antiquities and Learning was admired by all, he wrote
learnedly against Erasmus.

IL COLLE QURINALE or MONTE CAVALLO.
THis hill was so demonstrated from the Name Quiri or Curi, a Family of the
Sabines who marching among others under Statius their Captain, to reside at
Rome, inhabited this hill, now called Monte Cavalli, from the artificial horses
there yet visible. It Is divided from the Viminale by that way which conducts to
the Porta S. Agnese. Upon Monte Cavallo where were the Vineyards of the
Cardinal of Este now stands a Palace of the Popes admirable for the Grottoes,
walks, Arbors, and artificial Fountains. The chief was the work of Pope Clement
the 8th. whereon is wrote the history of Moses in Mosaique work. Here stand
some old statues of the Muses, and here you may hear one of those Organes,
called of old Hydraulici, because they sounded by force of the Waters. You
ascend this Fountain by some steps, upon the ballostres whereof stand certain
Vessels which spout out water very high, which in their fall present diverse
figures before it lies ample fish ponds with a Circle of Plain trees which.
afford a thick and lovely shade, in fine such is the the Variety of Marbles,
the excellency and fairness of the statues the diversity of the Inscriptions,
the beauty of the walks, the pleasantness of the Fountains, and the shade of
the Groves in these pontifical Vineyards, That the studious may find here fit
objects for their Observations The Curious for their admiration, and the Lovers
of Solitude for their deportment and retreats. Hence a little distant lies the
Vineyard of Octavio Cardinal Bandini, well kept and worthy a view. And at the
four fountains the Palace of the Mattei, which has some fair statues as well
ancient as modern.

Round about which lie several other Vineyards and Gardens, as of the Teatini,
of the Colonna's and of Patriarca Biondo, near which is the Church Saint
Andrea, repaired by the Jesuits, where the B. Stanislao Kostka, a Polach, lies
buried who there acomplished his days.

Upon this Mount stand two Collossus or statues as twere of Giants holding two
wild horses by a Bridle cut in Marble, upon whose pilaster we read, that they
were the work of Phidia, and Prasitelle, from which horsestis called Monte
Cavallo. And the report goes that Tiridates King of the Armenians, presented
them to Nero, who (that he might entertain that stranger King worthily and
according to the Roman splendour) caused Pompeyes Theater (where he exhibited
the Games for that Kings Solace and recreation) in three days to be laid all
over with silver Plates: Which magnificence the King did not so much admire
(knowing well that in Rome were heaped up the riches of the world) as the
diligence and ingenuity of the workmen, that in so short a time could perfect
so noble ingenious a work, which in him created astonishment.

Here the Benedictine Friars had a comodious habitation: which some time since
they surrendered to the Apostolic Chamber, opposite whereto is a Pontifical
Palace, built by Sixtus the 5th. for their cool retreat in hot weather; whence
somewhat, in the Vigna of the Colonnesi, raises it self the Frontispiece of
Neros Palace, vulgarly called Frontone di Nerone, Hence Nero beheld the Fire
which was by his own incendiaries kindled in the City of Rome which afterward
he imputed to the Christians, that by this Calumny he might draw them into
hatred with the Senate and People of Rome, and by a public edict commanded,
that as many as were apprehended, confessing Christ for God should be burnt and
excarnified in Neros gardens which Persecution continued three days.

On the other part of the Quirinale, are many Arches, Cells, and caves of
different workmanship under ground, the Relics of the Emperor Constantines
Baths of hot waters. And thence looking toward the Suburbs, you behold an old
Temple in the gardens of the Bartolini, made ov all and wrought with diverse
shapes of Fishes and other Ornaments which was dedicated to Neptune.

Near hereto is the place vnlgarly called Bagnanapoli, that is Bagni di Paulo,
because they were made by Paulus AEmilius: The Monastery of the Nuns of Saint
Benedict built by Pope Pius the 5th. and the Palace of the Conti, rise out of
the ruins of those Baths, whereof to this day some small fragments are extant.
The Tower de Conti, was raised by Innocent the 3d. and that of the Militie by
Boniface the 8th.

On this part of the Quirinale, stood the house of the Cornelii, called now
Vico di Cornelii, and S. Salvatore de Cornelii, a Temple sacred of old to
Saturn and Bacchus.

From the Church S. Salvatore, to the Porta disan Agnese, reaches the Street
called Alta Semita, on the right hand whereof near San Vitale, stood the house
of Pomponius Atticus, with a wood. Hereby also was the Suburra Piana, and at
the foot of the Viminale a Temple of Silvanus.

Upon the top of the Quirinale, stood a Temple consecrated to Apollo, and
Clara, two small Temples of Jupiter and Juno, and the old Capitol; of these
structures scarce any relics appear, here now is the Monastery of the Nuns of
Saint Domenick, and the Church of Santa Maria Magdalena.

Near San Susanna, stood the Court and house of Salust, which place is now
corruptly called Callostrico: his fair gardens took up all that space between
the Porta Salaria and la Pinciana, in the midst whereof stood a small Obelisk
carved with Hyeroglyphicks, dedicated to Luna, since amoved.

In the descent from the Quirinale, toward the Foro of Nerva a high Tower
presents it self, which is vulgarly called Torre Mezza, which it is believed was
one part of the house of Maecenas, adjoining whereunto were his delicious
Gardens, whereto Augustus Caesar frequently withdrew himself from his more
weighty affairs to recreate himself with his Friend, and to revive his toyled
Spirits. Others believe it to be a part of the Temple dedicated by Marcus
Aurelius to the Sun.

The Fourth days Journey of ROME.
FRom the Bourg taking the way over Ponte Elio, you up against the streams of
the Tyber meet the Church San Biasio, at Ripetta, which is supposed to have
been the Temple of Neptune, amplified by Adrian the Emperor: here such as had
escaped any remarkable shipwreck, hung up Tablets containing the particulars of
their deliverance and their vows for it to the God of the Sea.

In the Valle Martia, by the Church of San Rocco stands the Mauseolo, of
Augustus being a Sepulcher erected by Octavius for himself and she successors
of the Caesarian Family, out of the ruins and with the Materials of that
Amphitheatre (which he destroyed) that Julius Caesar built there; its Circuit is
yet entire divided into a figure four square lozanged. In this Mauseolo, stands
a Matrona holding a Cornucopia with Fruit, and an AEsculapius as bigg as a
Giant with a Serpent.

In this Mauseolo, were also heretofore two Obelisks of Granito, 42 foot high.

The Circ of Julius Caesar, extended from this Mauseolo to the foot of the
neighboring Mountain, Augustus had a Palace opposite to it* with a stately
Gallery, and had here consecrated a Grove to the Gods of Hell, reaching from
the Church Santa Maria del Popolo to S. Trinita.

Some say that Marcellus his Sepulcher was contiguous with this Mauseolo, and
show its very Track: which Boisardo, believes rather to belong to the Mauseolo,
and not a distinct Edifice.

Augustus also had made a place called Naumachia for Naval Diversions in the
lower part of the Valle Martia, (looking toward the Hill Santa Trinita which
Domitian restored being decayed through antiquity, and called it after his own
name, placing near it a Temple to the Family Flavia: where now Saint Silvestro
stands.

The Valle Martia* was so denominated, because it was the lowest Gate of the
Campo Martio, and extended from the Tyber to the hills Santa Trinita, and from
the Piazza of Domitian in the Via Flaminia to the Porta Flaminia.

The Via Flaminia took its name from Flaminius the Consul, who paved it after
the conquest of the Genovesi now it is called the Corso: for that at some time of
the year, boys and certain animals run here striving who shall arrive first at
the end of the course. This way goes from the Porta Flaminia (called heretofore
Flumentana from its vicinity to the Tyber but at this day Porta del popolo) to
Pesaro, and to Rimini. Near this way lie many gardens filled with inscriptions
chiefly those of Cardinal Lovisio, Justiniano, Gallo, Altemps and others.

By this Way Pope Julius the third accomodated a Vineyard with such ornaments,
as for cost and magnificence surpassed all others in Rome, and as an
Inscription attests, conducted to the publik way a Fountain for the benefit of
all persons, wherein it is scarce to be judged which ought most to be applauded,
the ingenuity of the Artitificers, or the sumptuousness and splendor of the
Roman Chief Bishops.

Beyond this lies Ponte Molli. where the Tyrant Maxentius was overcome by
Constantine the Great: which Tyrant that he might not be carried alive in the
Triumphs of Constantine cast himself headlong off the Bridge into the Tyber.
Afterward in honor of Constantine was erected the Triumphal Arch between the
Coliseo and the Settizonio of Severus.

Returned into the City by the Porta Flaminia you find the Arch of Domitian,
called di Portogallo, because in that quarter the Ambassador of Portugal resi
ded. It Is also called Tripoli, a rude and incompact structure, having nothing of
moment in it more than the statue of Domitian, which some too will not have to
be his, but the statue and Arch of Claudius the Emperor.

The Church of Saint Lorenzo, in Lucina, was sacred to Juno Lu cina, and yet
retains its old name, here of old, breeding women and such as lay in Childbed,
after the birth used to pay their vows, because by the good will of the
Goddess, not only themselves were preserved in that great peril, but the Life
of their tender Infants.

In the street de Condotti, in the house of the Bosii, some notable and old
inscriptions are extant. In the Palace of the Spanish Ambassador a fair and
Copious Fountain. In that of Dionigio Octaviano Sada, (who translated the old
Dialogues of D. Antonio Augustino, into Italian,) a good number of rare things
in this kind. In that of the Ruzzelai, a Gallery filled with old statues of
rare artifice, and in the Court, a very large brazen horse. And in that of the
Cardinal Desa, now building, we assure our selves of rare Architecture and
great Curiosities.

The Campo Martio heretofore without the City, fills that plain between the
Quirinale, the Ponte di Sisto, and the Tevere or Tyber, here the youth
exercised themselves in Military discipline, and here they hold their Council
for creating of Magistrates.

Between Santa Maria del Popolo, and the Porta Flaminia, is seen an Obelisk,
filled with Hieroglyphics, and AEgiptian Letters: which Pliny writes, to be
one hundred and ten foot long, and to contain on it the interpretation of the
Egyptian Philosophy. Augustus Caesar caused it to be transferred from
Hieropoli to Rome, with two others, which he placed in the Circus Maximus. On
the Pedestal is this Inscription. Caesar. Divi. F. Aug. Pont. Max. Imp. X. J.
Cos. XI. Trib. Pot. XIV. AEgypto in Potestatem. P. R. redact a Soli Donum dedit.

The house of Antonino Paleozo, affords an excellent statue of a horse and some
heads, as of Drusus, of Julia the Daughter of Augustus, of Goleria, of Faustina
Giovene, the wife of Marcus Aurelius, of Adrian, of Brutus, Domitian, Galba,
Sabina, Hercules, Bacchus, Sylvanus, and Mercury: And likewise the Triumph of
Tiberius Caesar, cut lively in one Marble stone. And that of Giacomo
Giacovazzo, not a few excellent statues in Marble and Brass, and other
Curiosities.

Antoninus Pius, in that part of the Campo Martio, called Piazza di Sciarra,
erected a hollow Column with winding stairs, and 56. Casements to give Light
within to them: being 175 foot high, some say it is raised with 28 stones only,
but in this it is not so clearly discernable as in that of Trajano, for that the
stayers being broke it is not ascendable. On the superficies of it are wrought
the Acts of Antoninus with excellent sculpture of figures, from this, that
place is denominated Piazza Colonna.

Those eleaven high Pillars, which are seen erected at the Church of Saint
Stephano, in Truglio, are the relics of that open Gallery which Antoninus
Pius built conjoined, to his Palace in his Court: as far distant from this
Church as the Rotonda.

Between the Collumne of Antoninus and the Fountain of Acque Virgin, were the
Septa of the Campo Martio, so called for that they were enclosed with several
thick Plancks, in which the Roman People assembled when they gave their
suffrages for Election of the Magistrates. They were also called Ovili for
their similitude to a Sheepfold here the Roman Tribes assembled in Council.

That Hill, between San Lorenzo in Colonna, and the abovenamed Column, called
Monte Acitorio: took its name from the Latin words Mons Citatorum, where every
Tribe Se'paratim, rendered themselves after they had given their suffrages in the
Septa. On the same Hill stood a public Palace, for receipt of Ambassadors
from Enemies who were not licen ced to enter the City nor dwell in Graecostasi,
which lay between the Counsel and the Rostri, in the Piazza Romana, Cardinal
Santa Severina so much spoken of by the Heretics, a man of great prudence, and
an example for posterity, erected his Palace on this Hill.

Not far from hence is the Fountain of Aque Virgin, conveyed by a loud
depressed Aqueduct over the Porta Collina, the Hill Santa Trinita, and through
the Campo Martio now called Fontana di Trevi, we read in the inscription that
Nieolo the 5th. restored it. And this alone of all the waters (which with so
great costs, and such sumptuous Aqueducts, the ancient Princes brought into
Rome) remains standing for the public Benefit.

From the Serraglio, or Septa of the Roman people began the Strada coperta,
wherein stood heretofore a Temple of Neptune and the Amphitheatre of Claudius
now wholly destroyed.

At the Acque Virgin was a Temple dedicated to Giuturna Sister of Tur no King
of the Rutoli, accounted one of the Napee or Nymphs keepin gamong flowers, and
the Country goddess, who as the Heathens believed assisted to the fertility of
the Earth.

In the house of Angelio Colorio da Giesi, now appertaining to the Rufali, are
seen many statues, and inscriptions, and one Arch of the stone Tivoli, joining
to the Acque Virgin, having this Inscription. T. Claudius Drus. F. Caesar
Augustus. In the Fountain under the statue of a Nymph now removed are found
these verses. Hujus Nympha loci sacri custodia Fonti
Dormio* dum blandae sentio murmur aquae
Parce meum quisquis tangis cava marmora somnum
Rumpere, sive bibes, sive lavare jaces.


Pompeio Naro possesses two statues which were found in his Vineyard, the one
of Hercules the other of Venus.

IL COLLE de gli HORTICELLI, now di SANTA TRINITA.
THis Hill extends from San Silvestro to the Porta Pinciana or Collina along by
the Walls of the City, but some draw it out to the Porta Flaminia. The Gate and
Hill took their name from Pincius the Senator, whose magnificent Palace stood
here, and the footsteps of it are yet visible; at the walls of the City upon
this Hill was the Sepulcher of the Domitian Family: here likewise Nero was
buried. On the top of this hill remains an Arch or roof which formerly was part
of the Temple of the Sun, near whereto lies an obelisk of Thasian stone with
this inscription. Soli Sacrum.

The Church Santa Trinita, now occupied by the Minime Friars, was built by
Lewis the XIth. King of France, wherein are some Tombs of Cardinals, as of
Antonio Moreto, and Cardinal di Capri.

At the Porta Collina near Santa Susanna, Salustius (as aforesaid) had most
pleasant gardens, and a splendid dwelling, whose ruins yet appear in the Vale
leading to Salara: Here stood an Obelisk (now translated elsewhere) sacred to
the Moon, engraven with Egyptian Hyeroglyphicks. The place is yet vulgarly
called Salostrico.

The Campo Scelerato, or the Via Scelerata (where the deflowred Vestal Virgins
were buried alive) completed all that space, from the Porta Collina under the
house and gardens of Salustius to the Porta Salaria.

Without the Porta Salaria, called also Quirinale Collina and Agonale lie the
ruins of the Temple of Venus Erycina, whose Feast was celebrated with solemn
ceremonies by chaste Matrons, in the month of August, to the Image of Venus Ver
ecordia, which Goddess was supposed to render the Husbands placable and
benevolent to their wives: in this Temple they likewise celebrated the
Agonalian games, whence it was named Agonale.

Three miles without the City over the Aniene, stands an entire Bridge, which a
long inscription shows to have been built by Narsetes, it is said that Hannibal
being on this Bridge vexed with a vehement rain, raised the siege of Rome,
removed his Camp and departed.

A little below which, the Tyber commixeth with the River Aniene, and here
Torquatus overcame that French Giant; from whose neck he took that golden neck
chain, which (because in Latin called Torques) gave him the surname of
Torquatus. It Is worth observation, That the Water drawn out of the Tyber, above
the City toward the Sea, maintains it self wholesome, and clean for many
years, which comes to pass from the mixture of the River Aniene with the Tyber,
The water of the Aniene being thick and polluted with Nitre, which preserves it
and occasions that it cannot putrify without difficulty: and the inhabitants
along the Tybers banks above where the Aniene commixeth with the Tyber, mingle
the waters of the one with the other, that they may last sweet a long time:
although they have been necessitated to take them up singly and separately. In
the gravel of the Aniene, they find several little stones in diverse forms after
the similitude of Comfits, some round some long, some little and some great, so
that one would believe they found Almonds, Fennel, Anniseed, Coriander, and
Cinnamon Comfits. Of which small stones they usually gather a good heap on the
bankside, to cosen the spectators with, and they are therefore called Confetti
di Tivoli.

Titus Celius the Patrician recounts, that in former times a body of a man who
was slain and cast into the Aniene, was found stuck fast to the root of a Tree
under water, which it happened, in process of time, (being without
putrefaction) was converted into stone, without loosing its shape: which stony
body so found he says he saw with his proper eyes.

At the Porta Salaria are showed the Relics of an antique Temple, consecrated
to Honor, and of the house Suburbano of Nero, wherein by the assistance of
Sporo the Libertine, the Emperor Nero thrust a dagger under his nipple, and
therewith slew himself, that he might not fall into the hands of the Senate,
then requiring him to punishment.

Within the City near the Vale between the hills Santa Trinita, and Quirinale
stands the Church San Nicolo de Archemontis, so named for that the Foro or
Piazza, of Archemorio was in that place.

Under the Vineyard of the late Cardinal Dapi are certain Chambers and obscure
vaults continued in a long Order: which some will have to have been a Tavern,
others had rather assign them to the use of the strumpets for their occupation
in the time of the Floralian games: which were celebrated in the Circo Florae.

At the Church de'dodeci Apostoli, you find a Lion in Marble, an incomparable
piece, and in the house of Colonna, a Marble statue of Melisse a Lady, as the
inscription declares.

Many other Palaces and houses of the Cardinals, Nobles, and wealthy Citizens
of Rome, are plentifully fraught with other Antiquities and excellent
Collections of Gold, Silver, and Brass coins embossed works in diverse Metals
of ingenious Artists. Onyexes, Corneols, or Sardonian Gemmes, Cornelians,
Amethists, Topazes, Berryls, Carbuncles, Jacinths, Saphirs, and Christals
engraven and cut with the heads of Gods, Emperors, illustrious and noble Men,
diverse Creatures, Herbs, and Trees, containing also diverse emblemes, which
were heretofore commonly exposed to the view of strangers by their Patrones:
but of later years the malignity of this depraved Age has so ill gratified
those persons for their Kindness, by many injuries received from such their
free admission, that now unless recommended by some friend to some particular
person in Rome, or contracting a Friendship through long familiarity: it is not
easy for a stranger to obtain an inspection of those precious Curiosities.

Of the Coemiteries and of the Burying places of ROME, collected out of
HONOFRIO PANUINO.
THE Cemeterio Ostriano, three miles without the City in the Via Salaria, is
thought to be the most ancient of Rome, for that Saint Peter the Apostle in
that place administered the Sacrament of Baptism.

The Protonotario of the Roman Church in his third Chapter of the Acts of Pope
Liberio, speaks of it in this manner. A little distant from the Cemetrio di
Novella, three miles without the City lay in the Via Salaria, the Cemiterio
Ostriano, where the Apostle Saint Peter Baptized.

The Cemiterio Vaticano was placed on the Via Trionfale near the Temple of
Apollo, and the Circ of Nero, in the Gardens of Nero where now the Church of
Saint Peter stands: which besides the Tombs of Christians had in it also a Font
for holy Baptism, which for the most part was not in others.

Seven miles distant from Rome was the Cemiterio called ad Nimphas, in Severus
his possession on the Via Nomentana, where the holy Martyrs bodies were
enterred. As Pope Alexanders, etc.

Two miles without the City was the Cemeterio vecchio, amplified by the B.
Calistus the Pope, from whom also it took a name. Herein were certain
subterranean places called Catacombe, and in them a deep Pit, wherein the
bodies of the Apostles Peter and Paul were laid.

Near to the Cemiterio, di San Calisto, was that of San Sotero, and in the same
quarter lay that of San Zeferino the Pope contiguous with the Cat ecombe and
that of San Calisto.

The Cemeterio of Calepo dio Prete, was two miles forth the Porta Gianicolese
in the Via Aurelia, near San Pancratio.

That of Pretestato Prete in the Via Appia, where Pope Urban was buried.

That of Santo Partiano Papa near to Santi Abdon and Sennen.

That of Ciriaco in the possession of Veriani near the Church San Lorenzo
without the Wall.

That of Lucina in the Via Aurelia, forth the Gate San Pancratio.

That of Aproniano in the Via Latina not far from the City, where Santa Eugenia
was buried.

That of San Felice the Pope, a mile without Rome on the Via Aurelia, adjoined
to that of Calepodio.

That of Priscilla, called also Marcello, from the Pope Marcellus in the Via
Vecchia, three miles forth the City, was dedicated by the said Pope Marcellus.

That of San Timoteo in the Via Ostiense is comprehended now in the Church of
San Paulo.

That of Novella three miles off Rome in the Via Salaria.

That of Balbina between the Via Appia, and Ardeatina, near the Church of San
Marco the Pope, was named also San Marco from the said Popes name.

That of San Giulio the Pope in the Via Flaminia near the Church San Valentino
without the Cities Walls. This also may be seen in the Vineyard of the
Heremitanes of St. Augustino.

That of San Giulio the Pope in the Via Aurelia*

That of San Giulio the Pope in the Via Portuense.

That of San Damaso, between the Via Ardeatina, and the Appia.

That of Sant Anastatio the Pope within the City in the Esquiline praecincts in
the Bourg Orso, near Santa Bibiana. The Orso was near the Porta Taurina, in the
Via Tiburtina by the Palace of Licinus.

That of S. Hermete, or Domitilla, appointed by Pope Pelagius in the Via
Ardeatina.

That of San Nicomede, in the Via Ardeatina seven miles off Rome.

That of San Agnese in the Via Nomentana.

That of S Felicita in the Via Salaria.

That of the Giordani, where Alessandro was buried.

That of Santi Nereo and Archielo in the Via Ardeatina, two miles forth the
City.

That of S. Felice and Adauto in the Via Ostiense two miles without Rome.

That of Santi Tibuctio and Valeriano in the Labicana, three miles without Rome.

That of Santi Pietro and Marcellino in the Via Labicana, near the Church Santa
Helena.

That of Santi Marco and Marcelliano in the Via Ardeatina.

That of S. Gianuario restored by Pope Gregory the 3d.

That of Santa Petronilla, adorned by Pope Gregorio.

That of Santa Agata a Girolo in the Via Aurelia.

That of Orso at Portenza.

The Cemeterio Cardino in the Via Latina.

That tra'due Lauri at S. Helena.

That of S. Ciriaco in the Via Ostiense.

But we must observe, that Astolfo King of the Longobardi tearing up out of the
earth about Rome the bodies of many Saints, destroyed also their Cemeterii or
burying places. and that the Popes Paolo and Paschale, reposed within the City,
in the Churches of S Stefano, S. Silvestro, and S, Prascede, many bodies of
Saints then lying in those Cemeterii which were ruinated and laid wast. And
that the Christians were buried in the Cemeterii within Tombs and Sepulchers
of Marble, or of brick, and of those Sepulchers some were hereditary, others
bestowed in gift, and that at last places were assigned particularly for the
Sepulture of Christians to wit Churchyards, etc.

The Roman fixed stations, granted by several Popes to diverse Churches of
Saints, with great privileges and Indulgencies.
THe first Sunday of the Advent is celebrated at Santa Maria Maggiore.

The second at S. Croce di Jerusalem.

The third at S. Pietro.

The Wednesday of that season at St. Maria Maggiore.

The Friday at the Dodeci Apostoli.

The Saturday at S. Pietro.

The Vigils of the Nativity at S. Maria Maggiore.

In the first Mass of the Nativity at Santa Maria Maggiore al Presepio.

In the second Mass at S. Anastasia.

In the the third at S. Maria Maggiore.

On St. Stephens day at S. Stefano nel Monte Celio.

On St. John the Apostles day at S. Maria Maggiore.

The Feast of the Innocents at S. Paolo.

The day of the Circumcision of our Lord at Santa Maria beyond the Tyber.

The day of the Epiphany or Twelfe day after Christmas at S. Pietro.

The Septuagessima Sunday at S. Lorenzo without the Walls.

The Sexagessima Sunday at S. Paolo.

The Quinquagessima at Santo Pietro.

The first day of the Quadragessima or Lent at Santa Sabina.

The second at S. Gregorio.

The third at San Giovanni and Paolo.

The Saturday at S. Trisone.

The first Sunday of Lent at S. Giovanni Laterano.

The Monday at San Pietro in Vincola.

The Tuesday at Santa Anastasia.

The Wednesday at Santa Maria Maggiore.

The Thursday of Lent at S. Lorenzo in Panisperna.

The Friday at the Santi Dodeci Apostoli.

The Satturdey at Santo Pietro.

The second Sunday of Lent at S. Maria in Domenica.

The Monday at San Clemente.

The Tuesday at Santa Sabina

The Wednesday at Santa Cecilia.

The Thursday at Santa Maria in Transtevere.

The Friday at San Vitale.

The Satturday at the Santi Marcellino and Pietro.

The third Sunday of Lent at S. Lorenzo without the Walls.

The Monday at San Marco.

The Tuesday at Santa Potentiana.

The Wednesday at San Sisto.

The Thursday at the Santi Cosmo and Damiano.

The Fridry at S, Lorenzo in Lucina.

The Saturday at Santi Susanna.

The Fourth Sunday of Lent at Santa Croce in Jerusalem.

The Monday at the Santi quatro Coronati.

The Tuesday at San Lorenzo in Damaso.

The Wednesday at San Paolo.

The Thursday at the Santi Silvestro and Martino.

The Friday at Santo Eusebio.

The Satturday at San Nicolo in Carcere.

The fifth Sunday in Lent called the Passion Sunday at San Pietro.

The Monday at San Grisogono.

The Tuesday at San Quirico.

The Wednesday at Santo Marcello,

The Thursday at Santo Apollinare.

The Friday at S. Stephano in Monte Celio.

The Satturday at San Giovanni before the Porta Latina.

The Palm Sunday at San Giovanni Laterano.

The Monday at San Prascede.

The Tuesday at Santa Prisca.

The Wednesday at Santa Prisca.

The holy Thursday at San Giovanni Laterano.

The good Friday called Parasceve at Santa Croce in Jerusalem.

The Satturday at San Giovanni Laterano.

Easter day or the Sunday of the Resurrection of our Lord at Santa Maria
Maggiore.

The Monday at San Pietro.

The Tuesday at San Paolo.

The Wednesday at San Lorenzo without the Walls.

The thursday at the Santi Dodeci Apostoli.

The Friday at Santa Maria Rotonda.

The Saturday before the Octave called Sabato in Albis, at San Giovanni
Laterano.

The Sunday of the Octave from Easter day called Domenica in Albis at San
Pancratio

The Feast of the Ascension at San Pietro.

The Vigil of the Pentecost at San Giovanni Laterano.

The Pentecost Sunday at San Pietro.

The Monday at San Pietro in Vincola.

The Tuesday at Santa Anastasia.

The Wednesday at Santa Maria Maggiore.

The Thursday at San Lorenzo without the Walls.

The Friday at the Santi Dodeci Apostoli.

And the Saturday of this week of Penticost at San Pietro.

The Wednesday of the Feasts in September at Santa Maria Maggiore.

The Friday at the Dodeci Apostoli.

The Satturday at San Pietro.

Besides which there are other stations for every Feast of those Saints
Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, or Virgins to whom any Church is dedicated in
Rome, and for the most part those Churches on the days of their Feasts are
visited with a multitude of People, his S. himself often celebrating Mass or
at least being then present, atended by a great number of Cardinals and
Prelates.

Of the Vatican Library of the Pope.
THe Vatican Library of the Pope is every day frequented by learned Men, and
meritoriously for that it is filled with the most ancient books in all the
Professions, as well Greek, Latin, and Hebrew as other Languages writtten with
the pen in Parchment And it is certainly to be admired, that those Popes under so
many disgraces, negociations, Foreign and civil Wars and sackings of Rome,
should still apply their chiefest study and pain in heaping together Books, and
preserving those collections.

Sixtus the 5th in our time beautified and aggrandized it wonderfully adjoining
to it a noble Fabric, and causing most excellent pictures to be drawn about
it: Which Guglielmo Bianco a French Man praises in a singular Poem: and Friar
Angelo Rocca by way of History treates of it diffusely. As also Onofrio Panuino
of the same Order.

Many great Scholars have only desired favor from the Pope as to publish an
Index of the Greek and Latin Books extant in that Library, that by this means
recourse might be had to Rome from all parts both for the enlightening and
correcting Authors, who have been altogether unseen, or are else printed full of
errors. This the noble City Augusta permitted, and by that public Index set
forth in vited all to go thither for comparing the uncorrected for their
amendment. How many books have Francis the first and Henry the second Kings of
France sent forth to light. How many benefits have the Republique of Scholars
had from the Grand Duke of Tuscanies Bibliotheque: and how much more advantage
would all the world receive from such an Index of the Pontifical Library, which
is of splendidly royal.

Other Libraries there are also in Rome, as that of the Capitol. That which
appertained to the Cardinal Sirleto now to Cardinal Colonna, valeued at 20000.
Crowns: That of the Family of Sforza, and that of the Farnesi, abounding with
Greek Authors.

We pass by many Libraries of private persons no less replenished with rare
Books as that of Fulvio Orsino. That of Aldo Manutio (who passed to a better
life at green years) consisting of 80* thousand Books. We must observe though*
that Fulvio Orsino in the year 1600. added his to the Library of the Pope. And
that Ascanio Colonna (never enough to be praised) bought that of Sirleto for 14
thousand Crowns deputing to it intelligent Keepers with honest stipends, that
it may rather daily increase, then at all diminish.

The great Duke of Florence his noble Library is known to have good numbers of
Greek Books, and that of Urbino, of Mathematical Writers. That of the Malatesti
is in Cesena in the Minorites Convent. In Bologna that of the preaching
Fathers. In Venice that of the Republique. In Padoua is that of Gio Vicenzo
Pinello famous enough: but lets return to the Libraria Vaticana.

It Is certainly concluded that the Gentiles usually preserved their Books in
the public Libraries as well as private, and it is no less evident that the
Catholic Church from Christ's time to ours had always in diverse places sacred
Libraries to advantage students: wherefore St. Augustine in the Narration which
he makes, De persecutione Arrianorum in Ecclesia Alexandrina says, that in the
Christian Churches there were Libraries, and that with the greatest care they
preserved their Books: and accuses the impiety of the Arrians amongst other
things for their taking away and burning the Books of the Church. Saint Jerome
likewise makes mention of the same Libraries. when writing to Pamachius by his
Books against Jovinianus he says that he kept in the Churches Libraries
Eusebius also in his 119 Book at the 11 Chapter writes, that the Church had
holy Books in the Oratories, and that in Dioclesians days, (to the end the
name of Christian might be wholly extinguished) the Oratories were overthrowen,
and the books burnt nor does there want conjectures hereof from the holy
Scripture for that Saint Paul writing to Timothy, commands him to transport
with himself his Books to Rome, chiefly those in parchment: and in the first to
the Corinthians, he testifies that in the Corinthian Churches, they used to
read the Prophetic books. Eusebius in his 5 book of the Ecclesiastical history
at the 10th. Chapter says, that the Apostle Saint Eartholomew going to prea ch
the gospel to the Indians, left there the Gospel of Saint Matthew writ by his
own hand: Which very copy, Origene afterward found in the Indies, and from
thence carried it (as Saint Jerome averrs) to Alexandria, when he also brought
from the East the Canonical books of the old Testament. Lastly the Hebrews
diligently conserved their sacred books, and on every Sabbath read the Books of
Moses in their Synagogues wherefore it is reasonable enough to believe, that the
Christians have always observed their rule, of diligently copying and
preserving the prophetic books those of the Apostles and those of the
Evangelists: But the places where these books were laid up, were not always
called by the same name, but sometimes Archiviunt a Treasury of Rolls, scrinium
a Coffer where evidences were kept, Bibliotheca or Libraria a Bibliotheque or
Library as in se veral Authors appears.

Then indubitably they used to lay up in places deputed to that purpose the
Memorials of greatest importance, the Books of the Bible of the old and new
Testament, and the Books of the holy Fathers; many whereof written by their own
Authors through this means have reached our times, and will continue to future
Ages if God soplease,

And because the collecting and conserving those books, required a great
expense as well in writers, as Inquisitors, and conservators, therefore the
richest Christians commonly contributed every one some proportion and part, as
a common stock for the Church to have the same effected.

And in particular we have great obligation to the Emperor Constantine the
Great, who (as Eusebius recounts in his third Book of his life) without regard
to the vast expense, made it his business to collect and secure the sacred
Books, which in the times of the persecutions the Gentiles had wholly dispersed.

After which the gathering, keeping, and choosing Books, was particularly the
charge of the Bishops and Priests, for which end they were wont to maintain
Notaries, Stationers, and Women exercised and skilled in writing, as may be
gathered from the life of Ambrosius and of Origene. Among all other Collectors
of Books Pantenius the Master of the Alexandrian School is esteemed the most
diligent: likewise Pamfilo the Priest and Martyr (as Eusebius relates)
instituted and governed with great industry a fair Library, placing there the
Books of Origene and such other good Books as he could get written by the hand:
of which Caesarean Library St. Jerome against Rufinus takes notice. Furthermore
Alexander the Bishop of Jerusalem got together a good quantity of Books, as of
Betillus, Hippolitus, Caius and other Ecclesiastical writers, and with them
composed a worthy Library, as Eusebius testifies, who also confesses himself
to have been assisted by the said Alexander in his own Ecclesiastical History.

And not to omit the diligence of some of later times in the like work, lets
remember, that Pope Clement the first, successor to St. Peter, who wrote many
Epistles profitable to the Roman Church, deputed seven Scriveners in the
seven praecincts of Rome, who were maintained out of the Churches Revenne for
no other thing then diligently to search out and write the Acts of the martyrs.
And Anicetus the Pope made it his business to find out a secure place for the
laying up the lives of the Martyrs wrote by those Scriveners. Pope Fabianus
ordained seven Deacons, for supervisors to those Notaries, to take the better
care in executing the charge of collecting and true recital of the Martirs
lives: Of which Scriveners the Actions of the Roman Council under Silvester,
give good testimony Pope Julius successor to Marcus who followed Sil.
determined that the said Notaries abovenamed should diligently gather together,
whatever appertained to the amplifying, and fortifiing of the holy Catholic
Faith, and that all the things by them writ should be revised by the
Primicerio, or chief, created to that purpose, who afterward was to place and
keep in the Church what he had approved.

Pope Hilary was the first (known) that built a Library, who erected two near,
the Founts of the Laterano, wherein (for that in those times there were but few
Books, and they at great price because wholly written by the hand) he caused
the writings of the Roman Church, the decretal Epistles of Popes, the Actions
of the Counsels, the recantations and opinions of the Heretics, and the Books
of the holy Fathers, to be laid up and preserved for the public use of the
Christians.

But to return to our purpose of the Vatican Library: we must know that beside
the abovenamed Libraries, the Popes used so great diligence in collecting
books, as they put together one greater than the two former in the Popes Palace
on the Laterano, which remained there about one thousand years, till Clement
the 5th. translating the Apostolic Sea into France, with it carried the said
Library in the Laterano to Avignon in France, which continued there about 120
years, till the difference was appeased between the Catholics* Pope Martin the
5th. caused the said Library to be reconveyed to Rome, placing it in the
Vatican, where his S. had then chosen and settled his Residence: where they were
disposed confusedly without any order, and a good part lost. Whereto Sixtus the
4th. having regard, and it appearing to him insupportable, that so great a
quantity of books should go to ruin through ill government, he built a place
on purpose for them adorning it by all possible means, placing them
methodically, and adding such other Books as he could come by, and ordered the
Officers deputed to that end, to govern them with diligence, endowing it with a
hundred Crowns a year in perpetuity, being the donative which the College of
writers of the Pontifical Letters was used to make the Popes yearly, and this
was bestowed on the Library Keepers for their diligence and pains. This then is
the Vatican Library, filled with the most choice Books that could be had a
great part written in parchment with the pen: others printed: and their number
exceeds six thousand books.

Anciently the President of this Library was called Librario, then Cancellario,
whose office was to collect with diligence not only the Books, but also to copy
the Bulls, the Popes decrees, the Acts and Constitutions of the Synods, and to
keep every thing exactly, because it appeared convenient, that the Cancellario
or as he is now called the Secretary of the Pope, should have the managing and
preserving of the Books, the Library being in those days as twere the Office
of the Secretary or Chancery: but in our times the Offices of the Chancery and
of the Library are divided.

They used to elect Men of the greatest knowledge and of good life for
Presidents of the Library as Anastasius in the Life of Pope Gregory the second
relates, which Gregory he says was first President there who being sent to
Constantinople by Pope Constantine to the Emperor Justinian the second, and
being questioned by him he answered learnedly: and the Bibliothecary in the
life of the said Gregory the second says that he was from a boy brought up in
the Lateranian palace, and being made Deacon by Pope Sergius took upon him the
charge of the Library. at last Sixtus the 4th. on the 10 day of July 1475.
being the sixth of his Papacy, created a perpetual Keeper to the Vatican
Library investing him in that Office by his Bull.

Bartolomeo Platina of Cremona the Apostolic writer, and familiar of Sixtus
the fourth was the first president to the Vatican Library, for which service he
had 10 Crowns per Month for his maintenance, besides provision for his own
Table with 3 servants and one horse, and the ordinary Vails, which the popes
usually allowed to their Familiants, as Wood, Salt, Oil, Vinegar, Candles,
Brooms, and other the like things.

Bartolomeo Manfredo a Bolonian Doctor of the Canons was by Sixtus the 4th.
annno. 1481: in the 11th of his Popedom elected to that Charge in lieu of the
deceased Platina. This Manfredo was a Familiar acquaintance of the Popes, and
wonderfully learned. And to add splendour to this Office the Pope ordained that
the Presidents of the Library for the future should be the first Squires of the
Roman Popes for ever, and should receive the accustomed honors and profits:
first giving security to the Apostolic Chamber of ten thousand Ducats, and
taking an Oath to keep faithfully and diligently the Library. After Manfredo
these following were successively created.

Christophoro Persona a Roman Prior of Santa Balbina in anno 1484.

Giovanni Gionisii a Venetian in anno 1487.

A Spaniard who was Arch* deacon of Barcellona in anno 1492. Possibly this was
that Girolamo Paolo Cathalano Canon of Barcellona Doctor of both Laws, who was
Chamberlain of Alexander the sixth, whose books set forth and communicated the
Practice of the Roman Chancery, printed anno 1493. being the second of the
third Alexander.

Giovanni Fonsalia a Spaniard Bishop of Iteran, in anno 1493.

Volaterano Arch Bishop of Ragusa anno 1505.

Tomaso Ingeranni, or Fedra Volaterano anno 1510.

Filippo Beroaldo a Bolonian 1516.

Zenobio Azziaiolo a Florentine of the preaching order 1518.

Girolamo Alexandro dell Mota Arch Bishop Brundusian Cardinal 1537.

Augustino Stenco Eugubino Bishop of Chiama.

Marcello Cervino of Monte Pulciano Priest, Cardinal of the holy cross in
Jerusalem, was created by Paul the third. He would not accept the stipend, nor
the four sportule or Fees usually given to the Presidents of the Library but
distributed those emoluments to the two Latin Correctors, and to him whose
charge was to find out and place the Books.

Roberto de Nobili of Monte Pulciano Dean Cardinal, with the Title of Santa
Maria in Dominica was created by Paul the fourth anno 1555.

Alfonso Caraffa Dean Cardinal of Santa Maria in Dominica, created by Paul the
fourth Anno 1558.

Marc Antonio Amulio Priest Cardinal a Venetian Anno 1565.

Guglielmo Sirleto Priest Cardinal of Calabria the 20th day of May Anno 1582.

Antonio Caraffa. Priest Cardinal, with the Title of San Giovanni and Paulo a
Neapolitan Anno 1585.

Guglielmo Alano Priest Cardinal an English man, created by Clement the 8th.
Anno 1591.

Marc Antonio Colonna Bishop Cardinal, created by the same Clement Anno 1594.

Antonio Saulio Priest Cardinal created by the same Clement Anno 1597.

And because it was imposible for one single person to give sufficient attendance
to the government of so many Books the same Sixtus the fourth gave to the
President of the Library, two other perpetual Keepers, persons of good Faith,
and diligence to assist in that charge, allowing to each 3 crowns salary per
Month, and his Diet, and the other abovenamed perqui^its, as also for one
servant. The first of which were Giovanni Caldelli a Clerk of Lions, and Pietro
Demetrio of Luca, who was Reader in the Popes common Hall, created the 10th
year of Sixtus his papacy; the first the 29th. of, April the second the first
of May. Demetrio being dead, Julius the second, the sixth of July in the eighth
year of his Pontificacy created Lorenzo Parmenio priest of the Chamber. This
pope the 23d of August in the first year of of his Popedom granted a Load of
Charcoals weekly to the said Keepers, but now for the whole year is allowed but
24 Load only: In the year 1535. Fausto Sabeo a Brescian Poet and Nicolo
Magiorano Hidronteno succeeded these, the latter of whom being created Bishop
of Mancpoli him succeeded Guglielmo Sirleto, and him his Brother Girolamo
Sirleto, Federigo Ronaldo Valnease being created prothonotary followed Sabeo,
and Marin Ronaldo Brother of the said Federigo succeeded to Girolamo Sirleto.

Furthermore the same Sixtus (that nothing might be wanting to the completing
the splendour of the pontifical Library) created three with the denomination of
exquisite writers, the one in Greek a second in Latin, a third in Hebrew, with
their Diet, and four crowns a month, but Paulus the fourth doubled the greek
Salary and added two other Greek writers, and one Latin, to the one of which
Greek writers and to the Latin he assigned five Crowns by the Month, and two
Sportule, which is a certain Fee paid to the Pope or Saint Peter, by every
person that got the better in any suite in Law, but to the other Greek he
assigned two Sportule and four Crowns only. He likewise ordained one Binder
with provision of four Crowns.

Lastly Marcello Corvino. President of the Library instituted two Correctors
and Revisors of the Latin Books, between whom he divided the benefits accruing
to the Presidents denying to retain them to himself as aforetold, and gave two
sportule to each, being the four due to himself as president, assigning a
Salary of five Crowns to the one and four to the other and the tenth Crown
which remained to him of the ten crown by the Month assigned to the
presidents he deputed that for him whom Paul the 4th had instituted for
sweeper, to whom the regalies were not granted. The first Latin Correctors were
Gabriel Faerno of Cremona Nicolo Maggiorano, to whom Pius the 4th. added a
Greek Corrector, giving to each of them ten Crowns of gold by the Month.

Of the Ceremony in kissing the feet of the Roman Bishop.
CHAP. XI. Taken out of GIOSEFFO STEPHANO Bishop of ORIOLANO.
Wherein is showed, that for good reasons the Pope wears a Cross upon his Shoe
or Slipper, and the Christian People kiss his Feet.

AMong the many things the Popes had given them to bear and carry for ensigns
of Glory and dignity by the Emperor Constantine the Great, with which for long
time together they have gone adorned, ware a pair of Slippers made of the
whitest linen cloth for the Ornament of their Feet. (which Slippers we may
name Pumpes for their being so apted to the Feet) whereof we read an especial
memorial in the Acts of San Silvestre, for that the Emperor Constantine
commanded that the Popes of Rome should cloth their Feet with the purest
Linen, in imitation of the high Priests and ancient Prophets, who we read in
the fifth Book of Herodian were thus vested. And it is most certain, that the
Sandals or slippers of the Roman Bishop are always bedecked with some singular
Ornament, differing from those which ordinary Bishops wear at the celebration
of their Mass, otherwise how could the blessed Antidius near Segeberto in Anno
418 distinguish the Pope by the slippers he had on, nor could that have
happened, if those of the Pope had not had a peculiar Mark differing from those
of the Bishops. San Bernardo in his forty second Epistle declares that the
slippers are a part of those Ensigns which the Popes are obliged to wear at
the solemnizing of Mass.

The same thing also is averred by Innocenzo III. in his first Book de Divinis
Officiis, in the 24th Chapter. Ivo Cornatense, in the 76th. Epistle, and in his
speech de significatione Indumentorum. Rabano in his first Book the 22d.
Chapter Durando in his third Book the 28th. Chapter and many others.

And although the Roman High Priests anciently used this sort of Shooing with
the whitest Linen, we must nevertheless, confess, that now the Custom is
changed, and in lieu thereof are worn a certain red sort of shooing, with a
cross wrought on them the occasion of which mutation may be attributed partly
to the reverence of the People, and partly to the consideration of the Popes
Person.

Wherein will be manifested the humility of the Pope, who knowing all Persons
prone to the kissing of his Feet, desired to have the sign of the Cross fixed
thereon, to the end that so much honor might be paid to the most holy sign of
the Cross rather than to his own proper person: And that his Holiness would
also reduce into the minds of the faithful which kiss his feet, the passion
and death of our Savior. With great Judgment then, most honest intention and
good end, have they introduced this wearing the sign of the Cross upon the
popes Sandals, since that the kissing of the cross is an Act of the Reverence
born to it, used in the most holy Church anciently, whose custom it was in that
manner to reverence not only the holy Cross, but also the holy Images of
Christ and of the Saints, the Visage and heads of which Images the faithful of
old accustomed to approach, in token of respect and honor, as Niceforus in his
seaventeenth Book the 25th. Chapter recounts, and Zonara in the third tome of
the Life of Theodofilo.

The sublime Ensign of the Romans made in manner of the Cross of the Savior,
which was wont to be born before Constantine the Emperor, and was adored by the
Senate and the Soldiery, is called Laboria, perchance for that in Latin it
signifies Labor, to wit for that that blessed Ensign put the Soldiers in
good heart and remembrance, when they were near toyled with fighting, or for
that they bore up that Ensign when they marched, or else for that they mustred
the Soldiers under that Banner to signify to them the pains they must take
under it, as Paolo Diacono, relates in the 11th. of his History, and Nicolo
Prinio in the consults of the Burgari, at the 7th. Chap and 23. Paolino Nolano
demonstrates very clearly in the 42d. Epistle, the Custom, which was, that the
princes and great Lords kissed the Cross, submitting to it all the Banners of
their glory, and worldly Majesty.

Nor have they born this Reverence to the Cross alone, but also to all the
Instruments of the Passion of our Lord, as Sant Ambrosius in a discourse he
makes of the death of Theodosius, averreth, touching one of the Nayls which was
pierced through the Feet of our Savior. To come then to the other Head,
wherefore we judge it convenient the change of the white slippers or sandals,
for slippers or sandals with the Cross wrought on them; we say that herein the
Popes have endeavored to demonstrate expressly the Image of the Apostolic
charge because they havinng received a charge to teach to all the world, and to
preach the Gospel, have likewise adorned their feet with the sign of peace and
of the Gospel* that so they may walk perfect through the World in virtue of the
sign of the cross. Isaiah the Prophet says thus, Beautiful are the Feet of
those who preach Peace, and publish good tidings, as if that forseeing this
Usage, he should wonder, how the heads of the Christian People should find out
so convenient an ornament to put upon their Feet, so that the Nations beholding
them should not only remain full of gladness for the good news which they had
heard from them; but should also perceive a certain content for having seen
them all beautiful, all adorned, and signalized to the very feet with the
figure of the holy Cross. Because it is usual to weigh in qualified persons, all
their Actions, all their words, all their Vestments and habits to their very
feet; and so the Bridegroom praising his Spouse in the Canticles, sets down as
a great concern, that having fair shoes she walked graciously. Tertullian in
his Book of the habits of women, puts a difference between Culto Neatness, and
Ornamento, Ornament, saying that neatness consists in the quality of the Vests
as of Gold, Silver, and the like habiliments, but that Ornament consists in the
disposition of the parts of that body which wears it. Then the Roman Bishops,
who rconcile and make Peace by way of their Letters and Ministers to all
Nations to the great astonishment of all, have obtained and pursued the one and
the other of the aforenamed parts, that is to say Neatness and Ornament.

Furthermore the sign of the Cross is made on the forehead and Breasts of the
faithful, to the end that as Augustine says upon the 30th Psalm, they may not
fear to confess the faith, and having overcome the Devil, they may carry the
Banner of their Victory in their forehead, therefore also is the same sign
worn upon the feet of the Pope, that he by that sign may be directed in that
good way through which he is to lead all the People of God, thereby to show
unto the Pope, that to him was given this holy privilege to be our guide by
means of the Cross: wherein (says Saint Austin in the 10th Sermon de Sanctis
Tom 10) are contained all the Mysteries and all the Sacraments, he fortifies
(as we may say) his feet with the Cross, to the end that he showing the way and
we walking in it, none may wander from good thoughts. It may also be said that
the Pope bears a Cross upon his feet, that in all persecutions and dangers all
his people may recur securely to his Feet, where remedy may be had to overcome
the difficulties, and doctrine to oppress heresies if need require, as it is
written in Deutronomy at the 33d. Chapter, Qui appropinquat pedibus accepit de
doctrina ejus. Weighing all which considerations, with their foundation in the
passion of Christ, very rationally have the Popes placed this sign upon their
feet, to evidence these mysterious significations. Which is so ancient and
firm, that in the old Images we see no Pope drawn or carved who has not also
the cross upon his Feet: from which considerations it appears manifestly, that
the perverse and wicked Heretics of our times are in a great error, for
expressing their dislike of the Popes wearing a Cross upon his feet, saying
that it is an undervaluation and want of due reverence paid to the Cross.

For answer whereunto by their favor: Is it not true (that as Cirillus in 3.
Tomo contra Julianum says) the old usage was to paint Crosses on the entrances
into houses, and that (as Nazianzenus in his oration against the same says) on
the garments of the Soldiers were signed Crosses come from heaven, and that
the Church to succor dying persons with spiritual help, used to mark their feet
with the sign of the Cross, and that it was usual to mark the bodies of beasts
with the Cross, as says Sainctus Severus de Morbibus bono: and San
Chrysostom, in his demonstration Quod Deus sit homo. Did they not mark the
houses, the public places, the Vests, the Armories, and finally diverse other
usual things with the Cross, as Leoncio Cipriottio against the Jews declares,
to the end that in every place and in every action, we may rub up our drowsy
memories with the passion of Christ our Lord: And shall we afterward say, that
it expresses little reverence to the Cross in placing it upon the feet of
Christ's Vicar, by which we not only are minded of the passion of our Savior
when we behold it, but intend that thereby is signified, that we ought not
alone to submit to the Cross, and tread down all worldly passions, which to the
purpose are expressed in Scripture with the name of feet, but also for the Love
of the passion of Christ to esteem at naught what ever happens under the Moon.
The which cannot be so well signified, by placing the Cross in any other places
but on the Feet of the Pope, to kiss which all the faithful strivingly run
together.

GIOVANNI STEPHANO to the purpose of the Exaltation of the Pope speaks after
this manner.
The Reason wherefore they carry his Holiness upon Men's Shoulders

It Is not from the purpose to say somewhat of the Lifting up of the Pope, since
that all old Authors when they speak of the Creation of any King or Emperor,
say that he was elevated and it may be that Claudianus speaks to this sense.
Sed mox cum solita miles te voce levasset.

Nor was this the custom of the Barbarous Nations only, but even of the Romans
themselves who having chosen any One for their Emperor, lifted him on high, and
carried him upon their Shoulders: so says Ammianus Marcellinus in his 22 book
speaking of Julianus made Emperor by the Soldiers of France; so sets forth
Cornelius Tacitus in his 20 book and the same likewise speaks Cassiodorus of
the Goths in his 20th Book Variacum Epist. 31. This custom Adon of Vienna
manifests in the sons of Clotharus: Julianus Capitolinus speaking of the
Giordani: and Herodian in his seventh book treating of the same. In which time,
they did not only exalt the Roman Princes as aforesaid, and Princes of other
Nations, but likewise the praefects of the City whom to honor the more they
usually drew up and down the streets in a Caroach with an officer going before,
who proclaimed, that the prefect came; and this is clearly demonstrated by
Siniachus in his first book and Cassiodorus in his 6th. from 24. But the Roman
Bishops who from God have chief authority over the eternal way, for
demonstration of their dignity, were wont to be conveyed through the City in
a certain Chariot, honestly, or meanly clothed, as Ammianus Marcellinus, in his
27th book avers in his conceit of Damascus and Urcisinus to this point in that
time when Pretestatus put on the Pretesta (which was a Robe the chief
Magistrate of Rome wore when they sat in Majesty) being then designed Consul:
he preposed the Bishopric of the Christians to the Consulship of the Roman
people, and was wont to say to San Damascus the Pope (as San Girolamus also
relates in his Epistle to Pammacchius) make me Bishop of Rome, and I will soon
make my self a Christian, from which words we may comprehend, that even in
those days the Pontifical dignity moved the minds of the principal and
greatest persons being that the Consulacy was a dignity to which all others
gave place, as in more Epistles Cassiodorus shows in the 10th. book and
Protestatus so he might have been high Bishop of the Christians would not only
have deserted his old false Religion, but also Consulship.

That it was the manner of the ancient Priests to pass in Coaches for greater
reputation, Tacitus in his 12th book clearly proves, who speaking of Agrippina,
says, That she (to agrandize her reputation this way) was drawn to the
Campidoglio in a Caroach a thing then only permitted to the Priests and holy
Druides for their dignity. This custom was likewise used by the Virgins (as may
be collected from the first book of Artimedorus, his Positions) and chiefly of
the Vestals, who were carried in Litters, attended by many servants with great
Pomp, as Saint Ambrose relates in his first Epistle to Valentinian.

But the Romon Bishops, besides the Chariot and Coach wherein they publicly
passed through the City, had also a supportable Chair wherein being sat it was
carried upon the shoulders of Men deputed to that service, and who lived upon
that profession which is manifest enough, not only from that place of Duoaio,
where he says, that in the fifth Synod, was placed the Chair or Throne of the
Apostolic confession, but also more clearly from the most ancient Roman Order
written before Gelasius the Popes time, wherein we find expressions to this
sense viz.

When the Pope is entered into the Church, he does not instantly advance to the
Altar, but first goes into the Vestry sustained by Deacons, who received and
assisted him, while he descended from his Chair and to that effect the said
Order several times relates the Ceremony of placing the Pope in the Chair, when
he was to take any Journey and to sustain him by the Arms in descent from the
Chair, being arrived at the place where he resolved to stay.

In which words is also to be observed, that the said Order calls this
Pontifical Chair in Latin Sellare, which properly signifies a Majestic Throne
made for dignity, it being a Chair wrought with Art and proportionable thereto.

As to the Popes being born up by hands, it is easily manifested, that he was so
supported not only at his descent from the Chair, but also upon several other
occasions when not at all in the Chair, which is proved by the examples of many
Popes: As Stephen the second (says Palatina, and Francesco Giovanetto in the
90th. Chapter was carried upon shoulders in the Church of Constantine, and then
in the Laterano and Adrian the second was so born up in the Laterano by the
Clergy and by the chief of the Nobility the Comunalty then contending with the
Clergy and Nobility for that honorable Office, as appears in the descriptions
the 63d. Chapter, which begins. Cum Adrianus Secundus, etc. And Gregory the
ninth was so sustained in the Laterano, laded with Gemmes and Gold.

At which custom none ought to wonder, since so long before prophesied by
Esaiah in the 49th Chapter be these words. Et efferent filios tuos in Uluis and
filias super humeros portabunt, in our English Translation it is thus rendered.

And they shall bring thy Sons in their Arms, and thy Daughters shall be
carried upon their shoulders.

The occasion for which custom proceeds from the great reverence wherewith the
Princes of the World ought to observe the Presidents of the Church, which
Princes ought not to omit any convenient honor due to the Church, and so
consequently to the head thereof. It stands with good reason too, that the Pope
should be born up on high, to the end that on the one side he may the better
see and bestow his Benediction on the People committed to him, and that the
People may on the other side behold their Head, acknowledging him for Gods
Vicar, and thence fortify themselves in the confession of the Catholic Faith.

The same PIGHIO speaks of the Coronation of the Pope in this sense.
ALL Princes for demonstration of the Majesty of Empire have worn a golden
Crown. David who reigned before Homer and before all the ancient writers at
this day extant, had such a Crown as is proved in the 12th. Chapter of the
second Book of Kings, the which he took to himself from one of the Cities of
the Am^onites by him overcome in war, which who desires may read in the words
of the cited Text. Ciassare King of the Medes (as says Zonara, in the first
Tome) sent a certain beautiful Daughter of his own to Cyrus with a golden
Crown upon her head, and with the whole province of Media for Dowry. The Romans
triumphing carried a Crown of Gold, as Golliote relates, which might seem
improperly and erroneously declared, in respect all historians write that the
Emperors Triumphing were crowned with Laurel, if Tertullian did not remove this
doubt in his Tract entitled De Corona Militis, and Pliny in his 21st. Book the
third Chapter says, that the Radiant Crowns were composed with Leaves of Gold
and silver. Zonara in the second Tome describing the Pomp of a Triumph says:
that while triumphing they carried two Crowns, one was placed on the head of
the Emperor, which was of Laurel, the other which was of Gold and interwoven
with precious stones, was born up over the head of the Emperor by the hands of
a public Minister, who stood upon the same Chariot whereof Juvenal speaks in
the tenth Satyr, saying. Tantum orbem, quanto cervix non sufficit ulla,
Quippe tenet sudans, hanc publicus, and sibi Consul
Ne placeat, curru servus Portatur eodem.


And Valerius Paterculus, says that this Crown of Gold, was of the color of a
Rainbow, to demonstrate the sign of a certain Divinity, speaking of Augustus
Caesar Octavins in his second Book. As also of the same make clear mention,
calling it Radiante, and Lucide, Suetoninus, in the life of Augustus the 44th
Chapter. Pliny in his Panegyric, the unknown Author in the Panegyric
dedicated to Maximilianus and Latinus Peccatus in Panegyric, whose words would
take up too much room to set down here.

Moreover Ammianus Marcellinus in the 17th. book treating of the sharp pointed
Pyramids, says that they were wont to place Crowns on the heads of statues:
which he again confirms in the 24th Book, from which testimonies Lazius
collects in his 9th Book of Commentaries of the Roman Republique, that our
Predecessors derived the custom of placing on the heads of the Images of
Saints in the Churches, Crowns figured in the form of the rays of the Sun,
chiefly for that those images being adorned with such Crowns, seemed to have,
I know not what kind of splendor and Divinity: which reason, though it be not,
altogether from the purpose, yet it is not altogether to be, maintained: for that
we rather think, that this usage and custom had its original from that
splendor which has been often seen miraculously, to shine on the heads of the
Saints: Being that (as Abdias in the 5th. Book, and Eusebius in the second of
his Histories relate) the Apostles were often overshadowed with such a Light,
as human eye could not behold them, as of old fell out to Moses, whose Face
(when he had had that near conference with God) did shine so bright, that Aaron
and the children of Israel, were afraid to come near him, as is recorded in the
34th Chapter of Exodus.

To return then to our subject. The Persian Kings had a Crown to be worn on
their heads which Zonara sets down in greek by its proper name, which can
neither be commodiously expressed either in Latin or vulgar tongue: and it was
a capital offense among the Persians for any one to put the Kings Crown upon
his head as Dion Chrysostomus denotes in his first oration De liberate and
servitute. Likewise the priests of the Gentiles wore a crown upon their heads,
for demonstration of that repute which appertained to the splendidness and
maintenance of their Sacerdotal office: whence the Ancients were stupefied, at
a sudden view of the great Priest of the Comani, to whom (as Strabo writes)
was granted the first honor next the King, and to wear a Royal Crown. Besides
in Emesa a City of Phoenicia, the Priests went clad with a long robe, having a
Crown of precious stones of various colors in token of Majesty upon their
heads. Which Ornament Antoninus being made Emperor of the Romans, by the
multitude, the Soldiery and the Priests of the Sun, would not part with again,
as Herodianus in libro quinto clearly proves: and so afterward the Emperors of
Constantinople triumphing, elected this ornament, which was called by a proper
name as we read in the life of Basilius Porfirogenitus. Triumphum duxit tiara
tecta; quam illi tuphum appellant, although some modern Authors call it
Calipora, as says Niceforus Gregorius in libro sexto.

Or Bishops then having two royal Dignities, to wit the spiritual and temporal,
deservedly wear a double crown, as Innocent the third in his third sermon De
coronatione Pontificis, confirms, saying that the Popebears the Mitre in token
of the spiritual power, and the Crown in testimony of the Temporal, both which
are conferred upon him by God omnipotent, King of Kings and Lord of Lords.

But let us examine a little whether the Mitre, and the Crown, are Ornaments
adapted to the Ecclesiastical customs.

The mitre by Suidas is called the swathe or Fillet of the head, bound about
with gold and silver as Brissonius explains: and Eusebius in his second book,
the first Chapter, calls it a shelter; with which Saint James the Apostle
called the Brother of our Lord, was suddenly adorned, when by the Apostles he
was chosen and consecrated Bishop of Jerusalem: which Ornament, although it
took beginning with Aaron Priest of the Hebrew Law, is nevertheless received
into the Christian Church, to the end that therewith the Bishops of all Nations
may be adorned. Policrates Ephesinus wore the Mitre (as Eusebius in the 31st
Chapter of the third Book relates) as Priest of Ephesus: and likewise the other
Priests wore almost all the Ornaments of the ancient Priests, as the Robe, and
the Mitre, that they might appear the more adorned and majestic says Eusebius
in his Book; whereof Amalarius, Rabanus, and others the gravest Authors treat
more amply.

What we have spoken touching the Mitre is without contradiction, and is held
for truth by the consent of many and sundry Nations, but what is to be spoken
touching a Kingdom, and a Royal Crown, is not so perspicuous to all, wherefore
to our best power we will endeavor to manifest the same.

Then first is to be observed, that it is the common opinion of all, that this
sort of Ornament upon the head of the Pope had its original from the Emperor
Constantine the Great, as appears in the Acts of San Silvestre the Pope: the
same opinion is also embraced by all other Roman Bishops, as by Leo the ninth
in the 13. chapter of his Epistle against the presumption of Michaele, and
Innocent the third in his first Sermon of the blessed Silvester, confirms That
Constantine the great at his departure from Rome to Constantinople, would have
bestowed his own Crown upon San Silvester, which he refused, but in lieu
thereof put a covering upon his head entirely circular, and a little after
Innocent follows in words to this sense: And for this cause the Roman Bishop,
in testimony of Empire, wears a Regal crown called in Latin Regnum, and in
testimony of his Pontificacy he wears a Mitre, which is most convenient, for
him in all times and places universally, because the spiritual power has been
ever esteemed for the Prior, more worthy and more great then the Temporal. And
reason will yield, that San Silvester would not wear that Crown, but such a one
as only covered the Temples, in respect his head was shaven as the Popes ought
to be. Which shaving gave good reason that it was not decent to wear such a
Diadem, but rather that circular covering which he chose named properly Tiara
Phrigia, whereof Juvenal speaks in his sixth satyr saying. Et Phrygia vestitur
buca tiara.


Which Ornament may be supposed to be borrowed either from Phrygia or
Phoenicia, as we please, because the Phrigians had their original from the
Phoenicians. And that this was given the Pope by the Emperor Constantine the
great, is most evident in the Acts of San Silvester, where the Emperor reckons
up those things, that he had bestowed on the Pope, and being come to this,
gives it the name Phrygium, as it was its proper name; but in respect it was not
manifest to all, what thing Phrygium denoted, he explains himself in the sense
by us set down, saying et Phrygium nempe tegmen capitis sive Mitram.

This particular required so much explanation, for that Theodorus Balsamones,
confounding the signification of Phrygium, by joining it with the subsequent
Lorum, which imports a perfect different thing has caused many to err in
believing that Phrygium and Lorum put together do denote Pallium, the Cope
which Arch- Bishops wear by the concession of the highest Bishop. But it is not
convenient for us to dwell longer upon the dispute, let the intelligent read
the latin Itinerary in this place, where they will meet an ample discourse upon
the significations of these words.

Other authors will have, that this Crown came not from Constantine but from
Clodoveo, as they labor to draw from Segeberto under the year of our Lord 550.
who speaks to this sense, Clodoveus the King received from Anastasius the
Emperor, the Codicils of the Consulacy, a Crown of Gold with Jewels, and the
red garment, and on that day he was called Consul and King, but the same King
sent to Saint Peter at Rome the Crown of Gold with the Jewels, the Royal
Ensign, which is called Regnum.

Armonius also confirms in his first book the 24th. Chapter, that from
Clodoveus the Pope had the Crown: and Anastasius the Library Keeper under Pope
Hormisda, testifies that Saint Peter received many gifts: In whom I have read,
that in the year 776 that Philip the first Pope and Constantine the second Pope
were both consecrated in San Peter's Church (but we must observe that the
ancient Authors under the word consecration understand also the ceremony of
coronation) for that when they say, that Charles the great was consecrated
Emperor, they also by it understand he was Crowned, whence we may draw, that
the Coronation of the Pope, had its rise in long since past times, since that
in the year 683. under Agathone the first, and Benedict the second, was raised
the custom of giving moneys at the coronation of the Pope, and of expecting
the authority of the Emperor. Eugenius the second was crowned the 22d. of May
in the year 824. Benedict in the year 855, Formosus the first in 891. But after
Clement which happened in anno 1044. all succeeding Popes were crowned as (
Panuinus observes) in such a manner, as by it from that time forwards, the
Prophecy of Isaiah in the sixty first Chapter may be well known to be
fulfilled, where he says as our English Translation renders it: For he has
clothed me with the garments of Salvatio, he has covered me with the Robe of
Righteousness, as a Bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments: The Italian
says, they (meaning the Priests) are crowned as Bridegroom: after that the
Pope is elevated to this supremedignity he wears the garments of eternal peace,
and a Crown upon his head: This is that Son of Eliachim spoken of from God by
Isaiah the Prophet in the 22d. Chapter, to whom even at that time God promised
the Robe the Crown and the Key, as you may read in the 20. 21, 22, 23, and 24.
verses of that Chapter and so forwards: The Crown is an Ensign of Empire, the
Robe is a sign of familiar government, the which things are found in their
excellency in our Pope. So in the 14th Chapter of the Revelation of Saint John,
at the 14th verse it is said that Christ (named the Son of man) appeared sitting
on a white cloud, adorned with a golden Crown upon his head. And in the 19th.
of the Revelations about the 11th. verse it is said, that the same Word of God
appeared upon a white horse, with many Regal Crowns upon his head and all his
Friends, as may be read in the subsequent verses.

For this occasion principally were these significations by Crowns to wit that
Christ through his Wisdom (signified by the figure of a Crown of Gold) has
obtained victory over all Creatures, and subjected them to his Dominion. So
likewise the Roman Bishop who is over all Nations, who has brought all the
People under his authority, (by the consignation and power of God) deservedly
puts on the covering of his head three Crowns, thereby demonstrating that in
glory, Authority, and great works, he surpasses all the other Kings and
Princes of the world.

After so many fore-passed Popes, Paulus the second created in the year 8465.
of the noble Venetian Family Barbi, as he was of a fair aspect and great
Spirit, so he took great care to adorn the papal Mitre, with precious Jewels
and curious workmanship. Lastly let us advertise the Reader that in those
breifs written by Caesar Costni in the third chapter of the first book of his
various doubts deceives himself, where he would maintain that the Popes bearing
a Mitre with three Crowns proceeds from those mysterious significations by him
alleged, when indeed there is no necessity of them and let thus much suffice.

Of the holy year of Jubilee which is celebrated in ROME every twenty fifth year.
The Narration of P. M. GIROLAMO da CAPUGNANO of the preaching Order. Extracted
from the Book of the Holy Year. CHAP. XII.
GOD granted to the Jews divine benefits indeed, whereupon afterward that
Nation boasted, saying, That his divine Majesty had not treated other People
after that manner: But those graces which the Church our Mother has received
from the goodness of God do far surpass and exceed the Benefits bestowed upon
the Hebrew People: For that the Lord that she might be clean and adorned in his
sight, gave the blood of his only Son to wash her, and the Treasure of his
Wisdom to beautify her. Among the other benefits conferred on the Hebrew
Synagogue, that of the year of Jubilee was most excellent, called most holy, for
that it was the year of remission and of the commencement of all things, which
the Omnipotent God ordained to be from 50 to 50 years. The like grace being due
to our Church the Spouse of Christ (though with a different end, for that the
Synagogue attended only to temporal affairs, and the holy Church to spirituals
singly) by divine disposition she thought convenient to ordain also the year of
Jubilee, though at first only from 100. years to 100. years. perhaps to draw to
good use, the ancient diabolick custom of the celebration of the secular Games,
which to this end were celebrated every hundredth year in Rome, with a
preceding general invitation from Cryers, who proclaimed through the streets
come to the games, the which none ever saw since, nor shall again: which drew
into the City of Rome infinite People of all Nations for the service of the
devil: And all those Nations since the institution of the year of Jubilee,
render themselves at Rome though with much better reason viz. to serve the true
God, for the salvation of their own souls: nor ought our pains seem strange to
any, for what is said concerning the mutation of evil into good, because that
not only in this, but in diverse other occasions the holy Church has had this
aim, to consecrate that to God, which the foolish generations had before time
dedicated to Satan, as may be seen in diverse Temples of Rome, now dedicated to
the true Lord, and his Saints, which were formerly the Temples of Idols used
for the distribution of candles, and to make their Feasts, as in San Pietro in
Vincola, the first of August, the first of those ceremonies was made in Rome,
in honor of Februa by the Romans taken for a Goddess, the other in memory of
the triumph of Augustus Caesar. We find that Boniface the 9th. in the year
1300. published the year of Jubilee by his Bull, wherein he declares as a
Restorer rather then an Inventor or institutor of this year: And it is no wonder,
that we find no firm testimony of its institution before that time, because the
Church has had so many persecutions, and so great toiles, that it is a miracle
that any ancient Memorials are preserved rather then a wonder that some are
lost. At that time then, the Pope in writing divulged this year, conceding
entire and plenary remission of offenses and punishments every hundredth year,
which number of (Centum) one hundred, bears also a certain sense of returning
to good from evil, as is fully proved by Girolamus and Beda, principal
Ecclesiastical writers.

Clement the sixth at the Instance of the Romans reduced Jubilee to every
fiftieth year, chiefly for that the life of man is so short, that very few
arrive to one hundred years, and for that in the number quinqua ginta fifty,
are contained many mysteries pertinent to the Christian Religion; but
principally it signifies remission and pardon, the proper effect of the Jubilee.
Moreover the Jewish synagogue had its Jubilee every 50. years, so that if for no
other reason, at leastwise that the Synagogue might not appear richer then the
Church it was fit, that she should likewise have a Jubilee every fifty years.

Urban the sixth reduced it to thirty three years for the increase of the
Church treasure, afterward to be disposed of by Saint Peter and his successors
on the like occasions. But last of all Paul the second reduced it to every 25th
year, and so Sixtus the fourth his successor observed it, as in like manner
have all following Popes done. The which we must believe was made for many
considerations, and chiefly for these, for that the world as it grows old
becomes worse both in quantity and quality of Life* so that through the
thousand dangers which always threaten life, and through the infinite Sins
wherein many Creatures are involved, it has appeared good to reduce the time
of Remission to a shorter time, whereby to offer frequent invitations to all,
to accept the spiritual Medicine of Redemption of so great virtue) and to fly
the works of iniquity.

As to what appertains to the name, it is to be observed, that it may be called
in Latin Jobileus and Iobileus, of which the last is least used,
notwithstanding that by the vulgar, it is more frequently called Giubileo than
otherwise: This word is not derived from Giubilo, which signifies Mirth and
content (although in truth it ought to be a year of rejoicing) but from the
hebrew word Jobel, which is as much as to say a Trumpet or Sacbut, for that the
Israelites the seventh month before the fiftieth year used to proclaim the year
of Jubilee with the sound of Trumpets: furt hermore the Hebrew word Jobel also
signifies remission and beginning, the proper actions for the year of Jubilee,
for then the Jews remitted all debts, and returned all things to their first
state.

The Pope cannot concede greater indulgences, then those which are granted in
the year of Jubilee, for then they open the treasury of the Church, and bestow
on every one as much as is absolutely necessary for him, pardoning to him sins
and penances, as well imposed as not imposed, freeing of him wholly and
absolutely from purgatory, yea although he should have forgotten his mortal
sins in his confession or that he should not have confessed the Venial sins
(for it is not of necessity to make confession of Venial sins although such must
suffer pains in purgatory for them, if they be not in some way cancelled in
this world) in such manner, that the soul that in that time shall part from the
body, does instantly fly to enjoyment of the selicity of Paradise.

Our Jubilee has certain ^imilitudes with that of the Jews, for that they
proclaimed the year before, so do we ours: That they published in the Piazza^s,
we ours in the Churches: that they with Trumpets, we ours with the voice of the
Preachers: In that they left the Land unmanured, ours by the merits of Christ
and his Saints supplies our Labor: in that Servants became free, in ours we
acquire spiritual liberty with pardon of sins and penances, in that they
redeemed their Credits, in ours we receive pardon for our offenses: in that
sold possessions returned to their first Patrons, in ours our crimes being
cancelled the power and virtue of the soul is vivi^ied: in that banished
persons returned to their Country, and in ours, who departs this life,
immediately ascends to the heavenly Country. Boniface the eighth opened the
doors of the Church Vaticano, and bestowed most ample indulgences of all sins;
Clement the sixth, added the doors of the Church Lateranense, ordaining as is
above declared. Paulus the second afterward added Santa Maria Maggiore and San
Paolo, in the Via Ostiense, for visitation. Gregory the 13th. in anno 1575.
ordained, that who would participate the grace of the Jubilee, should first
communicate in the year of Jubilee: allplenary indulgences are understood to be
suspended with certain mutations of words, of which the Authors treating on the
Jubilee, speak to that purpose.

The Hebrews proclaimed their Jubilee the 10th day of the seventh month of the
forty and ninth year. Ours, we publish on Ascension day in the year preceding
the twenty fifth year, upon two pulpits in the Church San Pietro, reading the
Popes Bull in Latin and the vulgar.

We begin our Jubilee, on the Vigil of the birth day of our Lord in the evening,
when the Pope with great solemnity opens the door of the Church San Pietro,
which at all other times stands continually walled up: and he causes the Lords
Cardinals at the same time in the same manner, to open the doors of the other
deputed Churches, all which doors (the year ended) are again shut up.

In the holy year, that is to say the Jubilee, resort so great concourse of
People from all Countries to Rome, that historians write, that at the time of
the Jubilee of Pope Boniface, Rome was so full of people, that one could hardly
pass in the City, though so great: and in the year 1505. the feet of Gregory
the thirteenth, in one morning were kissed by thirteen thousand persons.
Clement the 8th. in anno 1600. would needs wash the feet of diverse Prelates,
and other poor strangers come to the Jubilee: and the most illustrious Cardinals
among which were Montalto and Farnese expressed great charity and humility to
poor pilgrims.

That it is convenient to celebrate the Jubilee in Rome, rather then any other
City is maintained by pregnant reasons: Rome is the most worthy and noble of
all other Cities and we therefore understand when we name Citta or City,
without any other appellation, that it must be Rome. She has had the Empire,
is the head, the Mistress, and a compendium of the World. She is full of Riches:
has beauty in her Site, her Country, fertility of soil, great comodiousness
from the Navigation of the Tyber, and the proximity of the Sea. She is the
common Country of all, and in her are of all Nations, and every people may
there find a proper Church for their own Nation, as in deed most Countries
have. There Religion flourishes more than elsewhere as appears by the infinite
Priests and Friars, which there at leastwise in their divine duties, if not
continually praise the Lord and pray for all. There the Churches are much
visited, the Poor releived, the virgins married, and many other pious works
performed worthy of perpetual memory. She is a City of singular sanctity, and
in her are placed the most noted things appertaining to our Religion as the
Manger wherein our Lord was laid at his birth, the swa^ling clothes, the
Cradle, the garment, the Coronation Robe, the Crown of thorns, the Nails, the
Iron of the Lance, the eross* and the Title of Christ. In it are bodies of
Apostles, of Martyrs, of Confessors, of Virgins, and infinite Relics of
Saints. She is the seat of the Pope, who is Prince of the Church, Vicar of God,
Pastor of all, who when abroad, is beheld, admired and adored by all, every one
seeking to kiss his Feet, wondering at the grandezza of the Cardinals, the
gravity of the Bishops and the multitude of the Priests. A treasury of
Indulgencies in Rome lie continually exposed to whomsoever needs them, where in
former times the Christians were persecuted and more cruelly entreated then in
any other place. And finally the Faith of the Romans was and is such, that even
in the Apostles times, it was preached through the world, that is to say in
that part only then styled Roman before it was Christianiz'd Rome, then (which in
greek imports strength, in hebrew Greatness) being the most worthy place of the
whole world, with good reason in her and not elsewhere, ought the Jubilee to be
celebrated.

The Narration of STEPHANO PIGHIO touching those military Ensigns, which the
Pope uses to bestow on temporal Princes. CHAP. XIII.
THE Roman Bishop uses to bestow great honor on Princes, which for all that
does seldom happen, from the rarity of the occasions for which they are sought.
This custom was most ancient, begun with the foundation of the holy scripture
in the history of the Maccabees (part of our Apocrypha) as we read in the 15th.
Chapter of the second book of Maccabees: That Judas the Captain of the
Israelite Army before he came to battle against Nicanor, saw in a Vision Onias
the high Priest, holding up his hands toward Heaven, and praying for the whole
people of the Jews: and Jeremias the Prophet, giving unto him the said Judas a
sword of gold exhorting him to give battle in these words: Take this holy
sword a gift from God, wherewith thou shall wound thy adversaries, wherewith
Judas being comforted, drew to battle on the sabbath against the Enemies, and
behaved himself so well, that he slew not less then thirty five thousand Men,
with Nicanor their Captain and so remained victorious. Hence then proceeds the
custom, that the Roman high Priest every year, the night before the Nativity,
before he begins the Duties, blesses and consecrateth a sword, with the
scabbard, the belt, and the pummel of gold, and a hat placed on the top of it,
not made after the common sort, of Felt, but of the finest blew silk, with the
whitest Ermine skinns round about it, and a Crown of gold interwoven all over
and set out with Jewels of good value. This is a noble donative which. the Pope
provides only of that night, to bestow it upon some Christian Prince, who
either has done or is to undertake some notable impress for the Christian
Religion: nor is this without mysteries, but has many, the which every
Christian Prince ought to know, and consider.

The Roman Rivale teaches us, that the sword so consecrated, tipifies the
infinite power of God, which is in the eternal word, wherewith God has created
all things: Which word on that night put on human flesh, and to which the
Father Eternal gave all Power, as himself declared about the time of his
Ascension into heaven, and then consigned it to Saint Peter, and to his
successors, whose duty it is to govern that holy Church then newly by him
instituted, and consecrated with his own blood, against which hell should not
prevail: Commanding that they should teach all those things which were learned
from him, and to invite and entreat, all Nations (through Baptism and the
Gospel) to enter this new City, out of which there is no salvation, and in
which they must obey the Laws of the divine Empire. Who is not surprised with
consideration of the dispensations of God, in the divine Majesty's election of
this City Rome, for the head and bulwark of the Christian Republique, which was
upon the point at that time Head and Lady of the whole world. Whence Saint
Peter the Governor of the first Church was destinated to this Province, and
it was commanded to him, that the Cross should Triumph in the Campidoglio, to the
end that thereby and thence the light of eternal truth might with the more
facility be dispersed into all parts.

By the sword then thus consecrated is denoted that Empire, and that supreme
power of government upon Earth, which Christ left to Saint Peter his Vicar, and
to his successors; and that the Roman Bishop ought to be acknowledged for the
head of Christianity, whom, all those that tender their own Salvation, ought to
obey and serve in spirituals for the love of Christ.

Furthermore that sword signifies, what prudence, and Justice, every Prince
ought to observe, and because the sharp point wounds where it is thrust on by the
hand, therefore the handle of this sword is adorned with gold, a metal which
amongst the Ancients imported Wisdom, whereby the Prince ought to learn, that
near his hands wisdom must have her seat, that so he may not transact any
thing rashly, nor without due consideration, Gold has been taken for the
Symbol of Wisdom, from her similitude in Excellency, for as the one surpasses
and mastereth all metals in goodness and value, so Prudence or Wisdom, as we
may say, surpasses and overcomes all other things, And this caused Solomon in
his proverbs to make his exhortation saying, My Son possess thou Wisdom, which
is better than Gold, and get thou Prudence, for this is more precious than
Silver, Saint John in the Apocalypse calls wisdom enflamed Gold, which
penetiates the breast with the ardour of the holy Spirit. The Magi offered Gold
to Christ then an Infant, and the Egyptians were despoyled of their Gold by the
Israelites, the one and the other thereby signifying, Wisdom in a mistical
sense; and it was so in truth spoken literally as our histories relate Plato
(whose doctrine did not much disagree from the Christian) often compares
Wisdom and the Beauty of the mind to pure gold. Finally the Aunt and Gryphen
of India signified no other thing which. Animals (as antiquity feigned) got
together as much gold as possibly they could and afterward kept it with
diligence: even so Wisdom is not to be had without labor, and nobleness of
mind; the Aunt here being an emblem of a laborious Creature, and the Gryffen
(feigned to proceed from the copulation of an Eagle and a Lion) here represents
the greatness of mind. Whence the same ancients wisely and properly dedicated
the Aunt and the Gryffen to Apollo the God of wisdom.

Moreover the sword signifies the Tongue, the best and worst member in Man, as
it happens to be employed: and therefore the ancient said, that evil spoken men
carried a sword in their mouth: and Diogenes the Cynick, seeing a fair young
man to speak dishonestly, said to him, art thou not ashamed, to draw a sword
of Lead out of an ivory scabbard? and in Isaiah we read Posuit os meum quasi
gladium acutum: and Christ in the Gospel says. Non veni pacem mittere sed
gladium, where we see, that by the sword is intended the word preached from
God; and so in other places of Scripture under the name word, is comprehended
the tongue or the sword wherefore aptly also to our purpose it may receive the
same signification, the Pope giving to understand to Princes, that they in
particular ought to have their tongue and speech adorned with Gold, that is to
say clothed with wisdom and prudence, with which sword they ought to separate
the good thoughts from the bad, and by their wise counsels to penetrate and see
into the very hearts of others.

To this misterious sword the holy Pope adjoyns a belt interwoven with gold,
which even of old was a sign of Majesty and military dignity: well then may the
Prince (on whom it is bestowed) apprehend the exhortation by it given him, to
demean himself well for the holy Church against all factions.

The Hat, which is the covering of the head, the most noble part of man, is an
Ensign of nobility and liberty, which hat also anciently was wont to be made
in the form of a half sphere, as twere one part of a great egg divided just in
the midst, but in later times our modern ar^ificers not apprehending the
significations, or willing to fructify humors, make it after another fashion.
Its round form putting us in mind of Heaven, by which we are covered, and
advises the Prince, to direct all his actions to the glory of God, and the
benefit of his soul, for whose eternal dwelling were the Heavens made: the
celestial color of the said hat denotes the same thing.

The white color of the skins and the Pearl, signifies that sincerity and
purity of the mind wherewith the Prince ought to be endowed, to the end he may
in the end accomplish a concomitance with those most sacred minds, the which to
that time he has or ought to have endeavored to imitate with all clearness of
conscience. The Color white, has been always esteemed grateful to the
Almighty, being a mark of Inocency and therefore from great antiquity all men in
the duty of sacrifice used to cloth themselves therewith; Pythagoras his
sentence is, that every white thing is good. Fully in his second book De
legibus says, that white is very agreeable to God. We might also bring
testimonies to this purpose from Cicero and others, but to what end should we
search profane authors: since Christ himself in his glorious Transfiguration
made himself obvious to many, clothed with rayments white as snow: and the
Angels also who were at the sepulcher of our Lord the morning of his
resurrection day, when the women went to seek after the most holy body,
presented themselves in whitegarments: from the above specified records the
Prince is advised of the nature of that Animal the Ermine, off which those
skins are taken, for the Ermine is infinitely neat, and enemy to filthiness and
dirt, in so much that the mouth of their Cave being environed by the hunters
with dirt, they do rather expose themselves to be taken then to run for their
escape through dirt to defile themselves.

All which things then advise us. That God does expect in us, Cleaness of
heart, sincerity of tongue, wisdom of mind, elevation of the understanding and
prudence in our actions. whereof his Holiness by that beatified sword adorned
in the aforecited manner, intends to give the Prince a continual remembrance,
that in goodness and works he ought to surpass all other sort of people in an
eminent degree, begin by the omnipotent God in the government of the world made
so much superior to all other People.

The Prince at the reception of this gift, kneels down, and the Pope then gives
it him, exhorting him by many expressions to be a good soldier of Christ: Then
the Prince acknowledging the Pope as Vicar of God returns his thanks in Latin,
swearing that he will not lay any thing more to heart, then a correspondence by
his actions, with the desire of his holiness, and all other Christian Princes:
afterward he delivers the Sword to his most noble and chief Minister who bears
it before the Cross while the Pope goes out of the Vestry. At last, having had
a congratulation from the Cardinals and Ambassadors, and taken leave, the
Prince with the sword born up before him, being accompanied by the Governors of
the Castle, Saint Angelo, by the Comptrolor of the Palace, by all the
Nobility, by the Pontifical Family, and the Palatine Court, with great Pomp and
the sounding of Trumpets and noise of Drumms, he marches out of the Palace by
the military Porticue, thus attended to his own Dwelling.

Of the increases of the TYBER.
CHAP. XIV.
ON the 9th. day of November in the year 1379. the Tyber rise three braces or
yards, and the mark of it may be seen at Santa Maria Della Minerva.

In 1422. on Saint Andrews day under Pope Martin it rose above a brace and
half.

In 1476. the eighth of January a little above the Channel Shores.

In 1495. in December being the third year of the Papacy of Alexander the
sixth, it augmented thirteen foot, and a little after in Leo the 10ths time
somewhat more.

In 1530. Under Clement the 7th. on the 8th and 9th. days of October it
increased twenty four feet, the mark of it appears at Saint Eustachio, upon a
wall in the midst of Santa Maria del Popolo, and in Castle Saint Angelo, where
the Governor Guidon de Medici then caused a signal to be made of it.

In 1542. it rose, and of that rise Maria Molza speaks elegantly.

In 1589. the 24th. of December, in the 7th. year of Clement the VIII. it rose
with so vast a destruction to the City Rome, that there remains no memorial of
the like: at which time the Pope was but just returned from Ferrara, being then
lately received and restored to the Apostolic Chair. Whence we may receive for
truth this maxim, that sorrow and wailing are the subsequents of Joy. The Pope
had enough to do for all the following year, to repair the structreus which by
that inundation were ruinated, and to restore Rome to a convenient condition
against the year of Jubilee, which happened in anno. 1600. The curious are
referred to the tracts of Lodovico Genesio and Giacomo Castiglione.

Touching the preserving ones health in ROME.
UPON this subject wrote Alesandrio Petronio a Roman Physician and Marsilio
Cognato of Verona, a Physician also at Rome, in his book of observing a rule in
diet, in the four books of his diverse lectures, and others also to be found in
Rome also: Girolamo Mercurio, speaks somethings of it in his various readings.

The air of Rome is thick, and ill tempered, wherefore you ought to abstain
from walking abroad, at such times as the Sun does not subt elize it, that the
sky is not serene; that is early in morn, or else late at night, or when the
weather is disturbed or foggy.

In the Church Santa Maria della Minerva, you may read these verses to the
purpose of preserving health in Rome. Enecat insolitos residentes pessimus aer
Romanus, solitos non been gratus habet.
Hic tu quo vivas, lux septima det medicinam,
Absit odor faedus, sitque labor levior.
Pelle famem frigus, fructus; femurque relinque
Nec placeat gelido font levare sitim.
Romes evil air the stranger kills
Brings to its Natives unwelcome ills
Who Will live the seventh day Physic must
Nor noisome smells, nor labor trust
Hunger and Cold, avoid, Fruit and Venus fly
Cold water drink not though nere so dry.


The Wines drunk in ROME.
They drink in Rome the best wines, as hereafter follows.

Vin greco di Somma, the best white, grows in the Terra di Lavoro in the Monte
Vesuvio. named di Somma, from the Castle Somma, which stands at the foot of it.
Chiarello a brisk white wine from Naples. Latino a mean wine from Naples.
Asprino a white wine from Naples, which is stiptick, or as we may say
astringent. Mazzacani, a small white Wine from Naples. D'Ischia, the best Greek
wine, this Island is under Naples. Salerno white and red. Sanseveren white and
red both good, Corso d'Elba, a strong white. Corso di Brada a gross white.
Corso di Loda a heady white. From the River of Genoua, white and red, Gilese,
white and red, small, and wholesome. Ponte Reali, from Genoua, white, small and
healthful. Moscatello di Sardia of a deep color, small, and wholesome.
Vindellia Tata from the Genoueses, small and wholesome Lacrima, the best red.
Romanesco, small white, of diverse tastes. Albano white and red. De Paolo,
indifferent white. Di Francia, moderate red. Salino, mean white and red from
Tivoli, and Velletri. From Segno moderate. Magnaguerra, the best red. Castle
Gandolfo, the best white. Della Riccia, the best white, but small, made Respise
wine. Malvasia, from Gandia. Moscatello, the best and most excelling wine of
Italy.
Of the diverse sorts and kinds of wine some Italian Physicians have also
written: to wit Giacomo Prefetto Netino printed in Venice in anno 1559. Gio
Battista Confalonieri of Verona, printed in Basilea 1539. Andrea Baccio stamped
in Rome in the year 1597.

And now, not recollecting any thing more to be spoken of to the purpose of
this small tract, concerning Rome, we will make a conclusion with certain
verses writin praise of her, that we may observe the same method we began with,
in our discourse of Rome to wit her due comendations.

Verses composed by Faustus Sabeus a Brescian in praise of ROME.
ENCOMION.
MArtia progenies, quae montibus excitat urbem,
Civibus and ditat, conjugibusque beat.
Tutaturque armis, Patribus dat jura vocatis.
Jam repetit caelum Post data jura Jovi.
De nihilo imperium ut strueres, te hac Romule causa.
Gignit, alit, servat, Mars, Lupa, Tibris aqua.
Encomion Julii Caesaris Scaligeri.
Vos, septemgemini, caelestia Pignora, montes,
Vosque trumphali maenia structa manu,
Testor, adeste, audite sacri commercia cautes,
Et Latios animos in mea vota date,
Vobis dicturus meritis illustribus urbes,
Has ego Primitias, primaque sacra fero
Qui te unam laudant, omnes comprenderit, orbem
Non urbe^, qui te noverit, ille canet.
The End of the Second Part.
THE HISTORY OF ITALY, CONTAINING The VOYAGES and JOURNEYS FROM ROME TO NAPLES,
The Third PART.
From NAPLES to POZZUOLO, With the Return to TIVOLI.
TRavailing from Rome by the Via Latina, to Marino, you pass between great
ruins of many famous Villages, the which were no less rich then numerously
dispersed over the Tusculan Champaigne and the Apenine Hill during the
flourishing age of the Roman Empire: and hence it is that the old Town Mariana,
will derive her Original name from the Castle Marino. On the right hand
whereof, lies near the villa Luculliana of the Lieinij, and the Villa
Murentana, famous for the Tusculane questions of Mar cus Tullius Cicero, His
immortal testimony of Morality and Learning: At this day it is called Frascati,
and is distant from Rome twelve miles: in this circuit you may, also behold the
Ville or Manor Houses of the Portii, and of many other the prime Persons of the
Roman Republic, whom we find recorded by Strabo, Pliny, Seneca, Plutarch, and
other writers.

Departing thence turn toward the Strada Appia, leaving Veletri on the left
hand, where the Ancestors of Augustus were born, and on the right hand Aricia,
now called Ricia, and Lo Spechio, or the looking glass of Diana Trem^rense, as
Servius calls the Lake near that Castle, which Lake is consecrated to Diana
Taurica, together with the wood famous for the fiction of Acteon, and a Temple
named Artimisio by Strabo. Heretofore this was a famous place for the old, but
barbarous Religion, instituted in that place by Orene and Iphegene, to wit the
custom of the Scythians, the sacrificing with humane blood: Here was that
Temple, whither the Fugitives brought from Tauri the Image of Diana hid in a
pyle of wood, whence in Italy they gave the Surname of Fascilede and Fascilina,
to Diana: but of this superstition shall we with better convenience treat in
another place.

Pursue the Journey just to the Pontine Fens, where at a little distance, lie
the Tres Tabernae or three Taverns the famous Hostery on the Via Appia
mentioned in the 28th. Chapter of the Acts: which are distant from Arelia
eleaven miles and from Rome thirty three, as is clearly demonstrated by the
ancient Roman Itineraries, and the very distance of the places: they are
indifferent entire, being built as the other Fabrics of the Romans of great
stones and bricks in squares. Saint Luke writes in the Acts of the Apostles
that certain Brothers yet Fresh men (as we call them at Oxford) in the Faith of
Christ, left Rome and came to meet Saint Paul as far as the Tres Tabernae, at
such time as he was transmitted as a criminal Person with a guard of Soldiers
from Judea to Rome by Portius Festus the Procurator. Thence leaving the Stra^
or street Appia, (as it may be called from the former beauty, testified by the
ruins of Houses and Tombs, etc. on each side) carried through the Pontine Fens
with vast expense though now wholly obstructed and impassable, through the
waters of the Fens, the ruin of structures and fall of Bridges, you are
necessitated to take a long journey, by the Volsci, the foot of the Apenines,
the craggy and sharp Rocks of Mountains to Terracina. You shall see Setia on
the left hand, celebrated by the old Poets for the goodness of the wines, and
going more onward you leave behind you in the plain the walls of Priverno
destroyed by the Germans and Brittons, as Biondo testifies: where in the
circumspection remember that Ca^illa exercised the Empire of the Volsci. Thence
passing by Priverno Novello now Piperno situate in the adjacent Mountain,
round which runs the River An^asceno, you may behold before your eyes, though
at some distance, the Coasts of the Mediterranian Sea, and some Promontories,
which seem as it were disjoined from the Terrafirma, the firm Land, of old full
of famous Castles, and now little less then wholly abandoned. There will
appear to you, in what site AEneas built Lavinium in those days, and where
the City La^rentum stood near the sacred Fountain, and the Lake of AEneas or of
Jove Indigete. Furthermore, there is demonstrable, where stood Ardea the City
of King Turnus, and Antium the head of the Volsci, together with the famous
Temple of Fortune, and where Astura, in famous (that we may not call it famous)
for the death of Marcus Tullius Cicero, the Dictator, so active and famous.

Thence also will your eyes meet the situation of the house of Circe the
Sorceress, celebrated in the fictions of Poets, of old an Island, now a most
high Promontory, placed upon certain Rocks over the Sea conjoined to the Terra
firma, by the Plashes of water, and Fennish hills, full of woods and Trees,
where Fame says that Circe the most beautiful Daughter of the Sun transformed
her guests into beasts and Cattle by her Magic Art (which if not credible)
let us believe she did it by her whorish Art.

Strabo says, that in the time of Augustus here was apparent a Temple of
Circe, an Altar of Minerva, and that Goblet which Ulysses made use of, when his
companions were metamorphosed into beasts as Homer in his verses declares. They
assert commonly that in truth the mountain abounds with various plants of
occult virtue and with infinite rare herbs, and that thence this Fable had its
Original. For the relaters of Natural causes averr, that Circe. (...), in
Greek, signifies the revolving of the Sun, through whose heat, and the reflex
of the Summer Rays, the plants and animated things receive vigor, and
mutation. Thence then departing, you must pass through the humid and large
Pontine Campagna,: which is divided in the midst by the Strada Appia Regina,
(the Queen of streets as we may call it,) from the Mauseoli, the Sepulchers,
Temples, Villages, and Palaces, wherewith it was once proudly adorned on both
sides, now only miserable relics of its former luster lying dejectedly and
dispersedly in the waters.

TARRACINA.
WAS an ancient Colony of the Romans, and first of the Volsci, it was first
called Anxur, or Ansure, as most suppose in the greek Language, from a certain
place sacred to Jupiter called Ansure the most famous and most ancient; which
they say the Spart ans built in that very place, in the same form, as is that
of the Dea Feronia, in the Pontine Fields, built by the Sircei, and Rutili, who
through the rigidness of Lycurgus his Laws deserted their Country, and after
long voyages fixed their abode in the maritime confines of Italy, as Dionysius
Halicarnasseus in his second book of Antiquities sets forth: Virgil also makes
mention of such a name in the eighth of his AEneides standing on the Circean
Mountain in these verses. Circiumque jugum queis Jupiter Anxurus oris Praesidet.


Upon which Servius in his Comentary gives the derivation of Anxur in these
words, Circa tractum Campaniae, colebatur puer Jupiter, qui Anxurus dicebatur,
quasi, (...), id est sine novacula, because that Jupiter imberbis was there
worshipped: and he says in another place, Feroniam Junonem virginem ait
existimatam fuisse, veluti Jovem Anxurum, vel sine novacula, et perinde non
abrasum; qui coleretur Tarracinae, quae etiam Anxurum aliquando dicta fuit. And
I remember my self to have seen a marble Altar dedicated by vow to Jove, a
child, as its ancient inscription testified.

Strabo writes, that the Graecians called her by another name to wit Trachina,
as much as to say sharp, from the greek word (...) being seated on a sharp and
stony mounta in; from which word it seems likely the Romans took the name
Tarracina as is evident by some antique inscriptions: for all which, according
to this form I conceive we ought to correct whatever word we meet with
differing from this as we find in the fourth of Titus Livius. Anxur fuit quae
nunc Tarracinae sunt, urbs prona, paludes: He seems to have in his mind the
sharp and stony Horatian Country, when he so graciously describes this very
voyage of the Strada Appia in the second book, Ora manusque tua lavimus Feronia
lympha,
Millia tum pransi tria repsimus atque subimus.
Impositum saxis late candentibus Anxur.


Tarracina is situate three miles off the Temple of Feronia in the Circean
Promontory, in the Strada Appia; which heretofore as Solinus testifies, was
environed by the Sea, now a populous though small Country: whereof that part
toward the Sea is fertile and pleasant, of old most adorned and pompous,
through the gardens Palaces and possessions of the Romans, who were rich and
potent, whereof some Relics and ruins lie scattered here and there, as also
some footsteps of that famous Port which Antoninus Pius restored with so vast
expense. A part also of the Temple of Jupiter Imberbis yet stands in the Walls
of the Dome, as the vast Marbles and pieces of Pillars witness; before it are
some old inscriptions with a Pillar to Theodorick for having dried the Fens and
renewed the way as by this appears. Inclyta Gothorum Regis monumenta vetusta
Anxurei hoc oculis exposuere loco.


The Strada Appia is compacted of solid stones and even all the way to Fondi,
which may well entertain the Pilgrim with its mavelous structure, and the
consideration of its old Fragments, and above all where it is cut out of most
hard milstones, and reduced to a direct plain by chizels of Iron even to the
Promontory of Tarracina. The Spectator rests stupid at the eve^ness of the
straight way for foot Passengers, at the length of the stones, some being
little less than 20 paces long and three broad, adorned with ridges or cuts
for the dryness of the way for passengers, and at every ten foot are stones
raised for the more easy getting up on horsback or into Cart. Who is not
astonished at the solid wall of the same white Rock, whereon are distinguishable
every ten foots distance, and the great number of those ten feet described and
easily to be seen? Who is not pleased with the design of those characters so
well made, and with so good proportion: and who is not amazed to see those
Tombs and Marbles on the ways, of old adorned with triumphs of enemies now
deprived wholly of all their fair habiliments? By these ways it seemed good to
the ancients to propagae the majesty, and authority of the Roman Empire through
the world, and to cause by those vast Labors and cost their greatness and
power to be feared by Foreign Chiefs and Ambassadors repairing from beyond the
Seas and the Alps to Rome; that they might be Astonished with the Ornaments of
Italy and Rome. All which things represent to the present age the vastness of
the Fabrics in past times, though now appearing little less than deformed.

FONDI.
FONDI is but a small Castle, but placed in an admirable site, in the plain of
the Strada Appia, and is as we may say, risen out of the ruins of the ancient
perfection of Towns, whch bore the same name, whereof some Fragments yet appear
in the adjacent Fens near the Lake Fondano. To speak of it with authority take
these verses of a certain German Poet. Collibus hinc, atque inde Lacu, simul
aequore cinctum.
Citria cui florent hortis e littore Myrti
Hesperidum decus, et benevolentia culta Diones:


In our times this Castle received a foul disgrace from the hands of Hariadeno
Barbarossa Captain of the Turkish Armada, who by a sudden in road took it,
leading away all the Soldiers and Inhabitants sacking the Castle, profaning
the Churches, and arrived at his Galleys clapped all his prisoners into Chains.

The Strada Appia is the largest, and was the famousest among the other twenty
eight streets or ways of note, which took beginning at Rome, and was called the
Queen of streets: because that by it passed to Rome such as came triumphing
from the East. Appio Claudio made it as far as Capua, and Caligula caused it to
be paved with square stones, and lastly Trajane renewed and restored it to
Brandizzo, beautifying it on each side with a green hedge of Laurels, Bays,
Pomgranats, and Mastick trees: pursuing this way before arrival at Fondi you
meet the Mons (...), noted amongst the ancients for the good wine it bore as
Martial says. Caecuba Fundanis generosa coquntur ahenis.


And leaving Fondi for Gaeta, in the way you see the Villa Formiana famous for
Cicero's slaughter, and the Castle Itri, situate among certain hills, most
fruitful in Figs, Olives, and other fruit. Mola of old called Formia Formosa
from the gardens, lies thirty stades thence; a stade being 125 paces, eight
whereof make an English mile. Thence three miles taking the right hand you
arrive at Gaeta, which Country, although all along it be but a bank, is so well
cultivated, and so lovely adorned, that it may not only fascinate and entertain
the eyes of the Traveller, but may be said like that in the Fable, The
residence of the Nymphs, being in truth infinitely pleasant, and delightful:
on the right hand of it you have the prospect of the Sea, on the left,
Flowers-Greens and Trees, which being on this and that side bathed by the
murmuring Rivolets, afford a most excellent savor for refreshing the
Travellors wearied senses

GAETA.
Virgil speaks in honor of GAETA or CAJETA in these verses. Tu quoque
littoribus nostris AEneia nutrix
AEternam moriens famam Cajeta dedisti.


GAETA enjoys a Port and a Fort, which heretofore Ferdinando King of the
Arragonians founded in a Corner of the Promontory toward the East, having then
driven the French out of the Kingdom of Naples: within our memory the Emperor
Charles the 5th. added to it the neighboring rock, conjoyning it by a bridge,
which may be drawn up at pleasure, to the rock that is highest, and so
redoubled the buildings, augmenting its strength, with Towers and ramparts, and
enclosing the whole mountain, joined it to the City by Ditches and Walls: from
which Towers (such is their contrivance) the Port and the City though lying
much lower, receive a perfect defense and protection: being always guarded
with a good garrison of Spanish Soldiers: nor is any person permitted to enter,
neither stranger Townesman or Country man.

The City therefore may be well esteemed secure, since so well provided for by
art, with all those Forts bulwarks, etc. and by nature, by its own situation,
having contiguous with it, that Promontory as twere hanging over it, and almost
round it the waters of the Sea, being as twere in a Peninsula, having but a
narrow Isthmus to come to it by Land, excellently defended by a bridge, a Gate,
a Fort, and the Sea waters on each side.

The Promontory shows it self with two Heads, on that side regarding the
Mediterranean, lies the City on the plainest and levelled part, on the other
Cliffs, Rocks, and Praecipices which extend into the Sea; it is open from top to
bottom, occasioned by a great earthquake, and that a long time since, such many
times happening in these parts of Italy. The old Poets and Prophets sometimes
called Neptune, Ennosigaeo, and Sifittone, for that as they feigned he turned
upside down the foundations of the mountains with his Trident. The Inhabitants
and neighboring people in boats with great devotion row into that wide space,
and religiously reverence the place: for that they certainly believe that
mountain was thus cleft in sunder by an earthquake, at the time our Redeemer
Jesus Christ suffered upon the Cross for the salvation of mankind: as in the
holy Gospel we find it written, that at that time the Mountains, and stones
were rent in sunder. in the midst of the opening of this mountain, stands a
Church and a very rich Monastery dedicated to the most sacred and great
Trinity, built with the alms of devout souls, you may there see a vast stone,
so fallen from the top of the mountain that it may be said to be sustained by a
miracle between the broken walls of the opening, where it begins to narrow.
There Ferdinand King of Arragonia, erected a fair Chapel, dedicating it to the
S. S. Trinita, which appears as in the Sea, and they go to it from the
monastery by a way made with hands in the rupture of the Mountain: the broken
stones on one side, and the hollowed places whence they fell on the other, when
tom out by the earthquake, afford an enticing object.

Among other things there worth a view, is a shrine made by Charles of Bourbon,
a famous though wicked Captain of later times, who in the bloody assault and
sack of Rome dyed of a wound from a gunshot: The bones of this bad man, are
enclosed in a chest or coffin of wood covered with black silk, and are obvious
at the first entrance of the Castle in an eminent place: under it may be read
this Epitaph. Francia mi dia la luche
Espanna m'es fuerzo, y ventura
Roma mi dia la muerte
Gaeta la Sepoltura.


Englished thus by Jo. Raymond Gent. France gave me breath
Spain strength to arms did call
Rome gave me death
Gaeta Burial.


But to study brevity, I have deliberated to run over those things only, which
may afford some fruit in reading and learning to the Ingenious.

IN the upper part of the Temple or great Church they show all the precious
gifts and ornaments of that magnificent house, wherein the episcopal seat was
at first placed, after the burning and destruction of the neighboring Formia,
bestowed on it by the cruel hands of the Saracens. Out of whose ruins was
drawn that huge Bacchical Crater or Boul, which holds many of those measures of
wine which are called Crati or runnelets it is made of the whitest marble and is
now applied to the use of a Font for holy Baptism. Corona Pighio reports, not
to have seen a Vessel (of that sort) more fair nor perfect: in it are most
artificial greek Carvings, so well wrought that the sculptor (to show his own
satisfaction) engraved his proper name: the greek letters engraven show Salpion
an Athenian to be the Author: as appears by this. (...)

The Vessel is engraven with excellent de sign and grace, and in it is figured
Dionysius, he that had two mothers (as the Poets say) and was of the nature of
fire: whom Mercury by commission from Jupiter imediately upon his birth took
and carried to Lucotea the sister of his mother: they feign, that this Dionysius
or Bacchus, was begotten by Jupiter on Semele, who being ambitious of equal
honor with Juno, requested of Jupiter to accompany her in his divine Majesty,
wherefore Jove attended by his lightning and thunder came to her, but she not
able to endure his presence, fell forth with in travail, and was delivered of
this Son before full maturity, and dyed; and some as foolishly feign, that
Jupiter cut a hole in his thigh, and put the child in there till the full time
of his birth. Orpheus, Pausanias, and Ovidius call her Matuta or Nysa (the more
ancient poets Jno) who they say gave the first suck to Bacchus a boy, who grown
to more bigness, was delivered to the Nymphs to be brought up: whereof Ovid in
the third of his Metamorphosis speaks thus Furtum illum primis Ino matertera
cunis
Educat, inde datum Nymphae Nyseides antris
Occuluere suis lactisque alimenta dedere.


Here then may she be seen in the habit of a Matron sitting upon a rock,
receiving the boy brought her by Mercury into her arms, swathing him, and
hiding him in her breasts, the Satyrs and Hobgoblins dancing round in the mean
time to the sound of a Tabour and pipe. Of which fable who would relate all the
mysteries, should have enough to do; wherefore we will reserve it with many
other things to be met with in this voyage to a more opportune place, all which
the diligent Inquisi torof antiquity Corona Pighio, has communicated to us.

At Gaeta twill quit the pains of climing up the top of this high Promontory,
to be enabled to see and measure the Mauseolum of L. Manutius Plancus the
Orator a Pupil of Ciceroes,

From which a Chronologer may collect, it is of near sixteen hundred years
standing, and built in the time of Augustus Caesar: which for its entirenesse
on every side of the sea seems a miracle, the people now call it Torre
Orlandina, the reward of the rustickness of posterity, who little regarding the
antiquity of history, originate the works and famous deeds of their ancestors,
at their own time, and attribute them to whom they please. This Fabric is of
an orbicular sorm, and seems to be made of the same architect as is that of
Metellus the Son of Quintus Creticus in the Strada Appia: being composed of two
rounds or circles of solid wall, the outmost whereof built with great square
stones contains in the diameter 28. paces or 84 foot whence may be deduced the
great largeness of the Sepulcher, by reducing the Line of the Diametre into a
Circle: nor does the height seem less, for as much as the eye can judge of
measure: being raised by 27 stones placed one above another, of a foot and half
in thickness; on the top of which is laid a Crown figured out of the rays or
battlements of the walls, pompously adorned with the enemies arms and spoils.

At the entrance of the gate is a space of seven foot wide, made out of the in
ward Circle, all small manufacture of bricks, and conjoined with the walls
without with a high Arch: and that enclosed by other high Arches represents in
the middle of the Mauseolum the form of a round Temple, which has four large
receptacles for preserving of statues. The inward walls seem to be pargetted
most neatly like marble, giving a luster so shining and white that it seems
like glass, and it is supposed that the reflection of the snow which is beaten
in, redoubles the light: there being no other entrance for any then at the
door, which of it self cannot sufficiently enlighten the place: over the door
may be plainly read the title of Lucius Plancus the Orator, with an elogie of
his enterprises, as fairly engraven as if writ on a Tablet: whereof take the
exact copy drawn out by Corona Pighio, the best corrected of any other. L.
Munatius L. F. L. N. L. Preu.
Plvncus. Cos. Cens. Imp. Iter. VII. Vir.
Ep. L* Triumph. Ex. Raetis AEdem Saturni
Fecit de manibis Agros Divisit In Italiae
Beneventi in Gallia Deduxit Colonias.
Lugdunum and Rauticam.


From whence with certainty we collect the age of this Mauseolum, for from the
Offices and Magistracies administered by L. Plancus nominated in this writing,
we conclude it must be built fifteen or sixteen years before the birth of our
Lord Christ; and from our Annals of Magistrates it appears, that he was laft of
all Censor 25 years after his Consulacy and that he dyed in that dignity the
year of Romes Rise seven hundred and thirty one. And therefore may we
assuredly believe that the Title making mention of his Censor ship this Fabric
was finished a little after his death and this inscription set up in honor of
him, for a memorial of his high dignity and other noble impresses. Thus much
shall suffice touching the Mauseolum of Plancus. Strabo writes that the
Lacedaemonians who came in old time to inhabit there, called this Promontory
Gaeta from its Obliquity, by which term all other things of a crooked nature,
were called in the Spartan tongue, to wit (...) and this gave denomination to
the Castle: to the like purpose likewise we read that the ancients termed any
Dike or whirlepoole, occafioned by earthquake caiaza. Some say that the Trojan
Armada burnt it self in the port of Gaeta, and that it was therefore called Apo
tou caiein which signifies to burn: but be it as twill, the better part of
ancient writers believe with Virgil the Prince of Poets, who sings, that AEneas
returned from hell named the place Gaeta and was there buried, from whence by
opinion of the ancients it was ever esteemed a most antique place.

You may with delight here have the prospect of Capua, the Coun, treys Falerna,
Stellata, and Leborina, the most beautiful parts of Italy, whose hills are
plentifully fraught with good wines, whence who delight to drink well and to be
intoxicated, fetch from far these wines for the celebration of that gusto; and
here the ancients were wont to say, an important combat was fought between the
Father Liberio the Finder of wine, and Ceres the Goddess who was the Daughter
of Saturnus and Open and wife of Osyris King of Egypt, whom the Greeks suppose
to have first invented the sowing of wheat and barley, which before grew wild
among other herbs, etc.

The Gaetan port for its amplitude and antiquity is famous among authors, being
well fortifyed by its proper site and nature against all sto^my winds from its
neighboring mountains and the Country about it. Giulio Capit, places the
Ports of Gaeta and Terracina, among the other public great and noble Acts of
Antonio Pio Augusto, as if formed by him.

Taking the Strada Appia between Mola and Suessa, you will meet some grand
structures of Sepulchers of the ancients, but laid wast, and among other that
which is showed for the sepulcher of Marcus Tullius Cicero, being supposed to
be the same by Giovanni Pontano, in whose time they say, a piece of Ciceroes
Epitaph was there found. Yet Corona Pighio will not believe, that Sepulcher can
be so ancient: it is built orbicular, covered at top by bricks, which are
supported by a pillar standing in the midst: on the right hand of it lies the
port, whence certain stone steps conduct up to the Room above, which are filled
with thorns and bushes: it takes name from the Dukes Palace standing opposite
to it.

SUESSA.
THis City merits a most peculiar view, being no less famous for its antiquity,
then the frequent recordation of ancient writers: in her (as Dionysius
Halicarnasseus writes in his 5th. Book) the Pemetini retired themselves, when
driven out of their Country Pometia, destroyed by Tarquinius Priscus King of
the Romans, whence it began to be called Suessa and now Sessa, it was also
named Suessa by the Aurunci (as Livy testifies) who being overcome by Titus
Manlius the Consul, aiding their adversaries the Sidicini, recovered this place
with their wives and Children: This City is situate in the Campagna Vestina
near the Monte Massico on the Strada Appia, in a pleasant fertile and Country:
and was esteemed for being the principal City of the Volsci, as well as for
being a Confine to the Romans: it was made a Colony about 440. years after the
birth of Rome as may be collected from Livy, though Velius writes, that people
were sent thither and a Colony made three years after Luceria: it groaned under
frequent losses, and important destructions, both in the Carthaginian war, and
in the civil Factions: but afterward from these misfortunes rousing it self,
it flourished under the Emperors, chiefly under Adrian and Antonini Pii, as we
draw from the Titles of Statues, from the Elogies, and inscriptions on Marble
Tablets, extant in diverse places thereabouts.

On the right hand of the Church of the Preaching Friars, stands the tomb of
wood of Augustinus Nifus a most learned Philosopher of his times.

Looking toward the Sea, on the right hand you may observe populous places yet
but villages, excellently cultivated, which are called the Casati di sessa.

At twelve miles distance from Mola you meet the River Liris, in its descent
from the Apenines, and passage to the Sea, pleasantly irrigating the
neighboring Meadows.

In these Marius hid himself in his flight from Sylla, here also lies the Torre
di Francolesse, where Hannibal being besieged by Fabius Maximus, escaped
through that famous stratagem of making his enemies drunk: these Meadows were
esteemed by the Romans as highly as any under their dominions, as may be easily
comprehended from Cicero, who magnifies beyond measure the Strada Herculatea,
calling it a way of great delights and Riches; contiguous lies the Monte
Caecubo, famous for being the producer of so generous wine, and for having such
celebrious Fens near; which very much pleased Flaccus when he praised the
Attick victory of Augustus in these verses. Quando repostum Cecubum, ad festas
dapes
Victore laetus Caesare,
Tecum sub alta (sic Jovi gratum) domo
Beat Maecenas bibam?


This River Liris terminated old Latium, which passed, you came into the
Meadows Minturna asore specified, where you may see the Monte Massico and
Falerno, Sinvessa and Minturna and diverse others places, whose description
you will meet with under Scotio, in the mean time behold Capua.

CAPUA.
Capua of old the head of the Champain, then was stigmatized with the Character
of great arrogance and wilful obstinacy as aamong others may be collected from
Marcus Tullius, who speaking against Publius Rullus, Protests, that the Campani
the inhabitants of the Plain or Champain, are haughty minded and proud of the
goodness of their Fields, the quantity of fruits, the wholesome air and beauty
of their City; From which abundance sprung that foolish request which the
Campani made, to wit that one o^ the Consuls might be chosen out of Capua;
whose delights were such, that they overcame and enervated the army of
Hannibal; before his arrival there, invincible and powerful above all others:
Cicero calls Capua the Seat of pride, and mansion of delights, and says that
it creates in the people such customs as if they proceeded from the principal
of generation, when it may be rather supposed they happen from the nature and
air of the place, and custom of living and eating, and hence it falls out for
the most part, that the genius of the place generates inhabitants like it self.

The new Capua is situate on the banks of the river Vulturnus, two miles
distant from the old Capua, the delight of Hannibal, and Paragon with Rome and
Carthage; where the ruins of Theaters, Acqueducts, Temples, Porticoes, Baths,
Palaces, and other Structures show its former magnificence: there also may be
seen many great subterranean vaults and conservatories for water, and pieces of
vast columns, sufficient testimonies of the power and pride of the old Capua,
although the new adjacent City has drawn thence a great part of those infinite
relics. Strabo will have Capua to be named from the Champain, and Publius
Maro likewise, who calls the City Campana as also Tullius and Livius, its
Citizens and the other inhabitants Campani, from their manuring great Fields,
in that happy plain of Campania, now Terra di Lavore, which most Authors as
well modern as old, extol for the most fruitful plat of earth in the Universe:
in a word it was the subject of Virgils Georgicks. Yet the Poets Maro, Lucan,
Silius and other sings, that the Capi Trojani companions of AEneas gave to it
Inhabitants, walls, and denomination.

Of her were first Patrones, the Opici, and the Ausoni, and afterward the Osci
a Tuscan People, from whom it was called Osca, as Strabo writes: these latter
were driven out by the Cumani. and they by the Tuscans, who augmenting her
power by adding eleven other Cities, made her the Metropolis, and as Livy
writes called her Volturno from the approaching Rivers name. At last the Romans
finding her potent, a neighbor, and in the heart of Italy, a perpetual enemy,
and no less emulous of their Empire then Carthage it self, terrible and fierce
through the friendship and company of Hannibal, reduced her under their
dominion by raising many Forts about her, besieging her to Famine, and the
slaughter of all her Counselors, and then they sold all the Citizens and
other people together with the Campana, forbidding for the future the City to
have any head or public assembly, Magistrates Counsel or other footsteps or
honor of republique: and commanded that her Palaces should be raised, that she
should be an habitation for husbandmen only; and frequented by none but
libertines, Factors, and other the viler sort of artizans. In this deplorable
condition lay Capua above one hundred and thirty years, and her Champain
Campania, was the Romans public to the time of the Consulship of C. Caesar,
who by the favor of the Julian Law, made against the will of the Senate and
nobility, consigned his part by one and one to his Soldiers, and first
surrounding her with walls, made her a Colony, as appears from the Fragments of
Julio Frontino; when as from a resurrection she began and continued to flourish
under the Emperors in the power of the Romans, till she was taken and distroyed
by Gensericus King of the Vandals, who driven out by the Ostrogoths, they
possessed her, and they expelled by Narsete, he restored her, but at last she
was again ruinated and wholly destroyed by the Longobardi, But it is not known in
what time this new Capua rise out of the ruins of the old, nor by whom
transplanted at two miles distance; although most likely, that the Citizens
driven away and dispersed by force, and through fear of the barbarous at last
retired themselves thither, and pian piano by little and little out of the
ruins of the abandoned Capua founded their new habitations: the new Capua
lying on the banks of the Volturnus is now a great and powerful City whereof
Julius Caesar Scaliger the Poet sings, no less biteing than obscure in these
verses. Plammeasi valeat superare superbia fastum,
Pinguem luxuriam deliciosus amor,
Hoc mollem pinges Capuam, Capuaeqne colonos,
Et quae alijs visa est, nec sibi meta fuit.


Capua was the Metropolis of eleven famous Cities in Campagna, which as also
Carthage, and Corinth, Cicero esteemed so potent and rich, as that he thought,
either able to sustain the greatness of the Roman Empire: Hannibal writing of
her to the Carthaginians says that after Rome she had the second place in
Italy.

AVERSA.
THe Road to Aversa lies through the Campagna Stellata, and thence by the
Leborina, Pandolfus Collenutio the writer of the Neapolitan history affirms
that it was at first called Adversa for this reason, because the Normanni, having
planted and fortified their quarters in the ruins of old Attella against Capua
and Naples, founded in the midst of the way the beginning of this City, to the
end that from so convenient a place they might abate the force of two such
potent Cities.

Having passed the River Liris, you go through Campania, the which as well in
its abundance of Fruit Corn wine and oil, as in the frequenzy pleasantness and
largeness of the Champain, far surpasses all the other provinces of Italy: it is
a Land which voluntarily receives the Iron, and permits not it self to be broke
up in vain, but seems studiously willing to afford the Labourer the greatest
usury; it is named Terra di Lavoro, and La Campagna, and all the way from Capua
to Aversa, with good reason was called by Pliny, Leborina quasi Laborina, a
Field in Campania, where the stubble of the Corn is so great, that the People
do burn it instead of wood, as we have it in Coopers Dictionary. It has had
also the attribute of happy too, which was never given to any other province of
the world except to Arabia in the Orient: It Is therefore no wonder, that the
Cumani, the Opici, the Toscani, the Samniti, and lastly the Romans, could not
despise so great riches and plenty of all things. In particular the Pianura
Stellata, is so fat and fertile, that with good reason it holds the chief place
in Italy for abundance of all sorts of fruits; which the inhabitants call
Campagna St ellata, from that propitiousness of the stars it enjoyes: Cicero in
his orations, styles it the most beautiful Champain of the whole world. Hence
they fetch their Victuals for the Roman armies, and this, Caesar (who then
prepared his way to the Empire by gifts) divided amongst twenty thousand Roman
Citizens. Here the Samniti to the number of three hundred and sixteen thousand
were cut in pieces by Lucius Vetturius and Appius Claudius Roman Captains: Here
they make Macheroni in excellency, a sort of eating, composed of pieces of past
boiled in water and put into a dish with butter, spice, and grated cheese upon
them: and here properly grows the Vino Asprino, which is drunk at Rome with so
much gusto in the great heats.

ATTELLA DE GLIOSCI.
THe old Attella was a Castle built by the most ancient people of Osci it is a
famous Castle, and celebrated by all for the Satyrick, lascivious, ridiculous
and sharp stories there rehearsed and thence styled Attellane: which afterward
with their facetiousnesse acquired such authority, that from the mumming place
of that Castle, they mounted even the Roman Theaters: at present both the Land
and Towns can boast of naught save some Gentlemen's and Lords Palaces there
lately erected, more of of it will be spoken under some Mediterranean places.

NAPOLI. NAPLES.
AFfter eight miles travailing from Attella, you arrive at Naples, where in
every corner as well within as without the City you behold as well beautiful
places, as proud Palaces, made with great art and infinite expense. This City
is maritimate on the Mediteranean shore, and spreads it self into a large
circuit: situate among most pleasant hills lying on the north and east parts;
and on the south and west parts the Sea: from whose port, without the least
impediment, in a serene season, may be clearly seen the two promontories Miseno
and Minerva: as also the Islands Capreas the delight of Tiberius, Ischia, and
Prochyte, of old so much celebrated by Srabo Virgil and other Authors, who
unanimously agree that the neighboring people the Cumani built it: and that
it was called Parthenope from one of the Sirens there interred. They write,
thatafterwards she was transplanted by the said founders, for that seeming to
them to flourish too much, and to increase from the fecundity of the soil, they
feared she might one day get the possession and into the room of their adjacent
Mother Cuma; for which fact they relate that the Cumani groa^ing under a most
heavy pestilence, were advertized by the Oracle that the means to pacify that
great affliction and disgrace, was for them to reedifie the City, and annually
to honor with sacrifices the Sepulcher of the Goddess Parthenope: wherefore
she was restored and rebuilt and thence it is inferred she was called Napoli, by
a greek word: there are also others and diverse opinions about this matter: as
Licofrone Calscidese, who in his Alessandria calls Napoli mano di Falero, and
Isaac Tzetze, adjoines his interpretation, that Falerus the Tyrant of Sicilia
built Naples in Italy, and that because he cruelly tormented and slew its
strangers of what sort soever, thence the story grew, that the Siren Parthenope
dyed there, and that to her was erected a Tomb, and she there reverenced and
annually adored with sacrifices under the Title of a Goddess in form of a
Bird. And we certainly know, that therefore the Sirens were adored as Goddesses
among the tutelary Gods the placeby the Campa^i over all that tract of Magna
Grecia, and this in the flower of the Roman Empire: I remember furthermore that
(many years since) I saw in Naples the Siren carved together with Ebone and
Sebeto, tutelary Gods of the Neapolitans upon a round marble Altar, which is
now placed in the receptacle of the fountain water, lying on the extremity of
the Mole in the port of Naples; besides which said opinions, there are of those
(as Diodorus Siculus and Oppianus) who hold that Naples was built by Hercules:
and Oppi^ in particular alluding to the name of the City in his poem of
hunting, calls Naples the new Camp of Hercules. In fine all writers concur in
this, that she is a most ancient City, and was famous before Rome, flourishing
among the most illustrious greek Cities of Italy for the Pythagorean
philosophy. Afterward the Roman Empire spreading it self over Italy, because
she most forwardly submitted her self to it, whilst they were in agitation to
subject Campania, the Romans received her among the other free and confederate
Cities: and Livy affirms as well as many other Authors, that she from that time
constantly continued her Friendship, and observed that Faith which at the first
she had given to the Romans: Furthermore the affairs of the Republique being
reduced to a bad state in the sixth year of the C^rthaginian war, she not only
resolved not to withdraw it self from the Romans, in despite of the near lying
Capua and the other rebellious Cities, but also as the said Livy relates, sent
Ambassadors to Rome, and by them would have presented as an Act of Liberality
and Nobleness, to the Senate then in Court, forty Goblets of Gold of great
weight, and therewith offered force, riches, and in sum all whatever their
Ancestors had left them in; aid assistance and defense of the Empire and City
of Rome: To which Ambassadors then with all demonstration of courtesy were
returned great thanks, and only one of those Goblets retained, and that also
weighed the least of them: wherefore for her great and constant fidelity was
she ever esteemed, held and honored among the free and Confederate Cities of
Italy, as well in the times of the Consuls as under the Emperors, she ( Capua
being oppressed, subdued and reduced to the servitude of the Praefectura)
augmented sufficiently, and most happily enjoyed for a long time the fruits of
her fidelity. Hither as Str^bo instruct^us, the youth to intend their studies,
and many ancient men to enjoy quiet and tranquillity of mind, were wont to
retire themselves from Rome, as to the purpose Silius Italicus, and before him
Horatins Flac^us to the same sung, saying Nunc nidles urbi ritus, atque hospita
Musis
Otia, and exemptum curis gravioribus aeuum.


Italy affords not a place enjoying so mild and benign a heaven as Naples,
having a double spring yearly in flowers, which the surrounding Fields produce
plentifully as also great variety of Fruits, and those the most prized;
participating no small quantity of fountains, and springs, and of healthful
and good waters: to say no more it is scarce to be believed a natural thing but
wonderful how infinite is their abundance? and therefore with good reason may
she be called the Paradise of Italy, which particulars have chiefly been the
inviting argument for so many Emperors, Kings, Princes and ingenuous Persons,
to make their frequent applications and residence here, and to this day it is
reckoned the third City of Italy, and the delights which nature has allowed
this place are so great, that meritoriously, is she stuffed with so many proud
Palaces and stately houses of Princes and other Grandees, who reside in them
the most part of the year. It Is most perspicuous and known to all, that Titus
Livius the Padouan Historian, Q. Horatius Flaccus, Statius Papinius, Claudins
Claudianus all famous Poets, Annius Seneca the Philosopher, and infinite
others, who have rendered themselves immortal by their wits, and learned
writings, retired to Naples for their better and more due attention to their
studies. We read furthermore that P. Virgilius Maro, lived most sweetly for a
long space in Naples. and there composed his Georgicks, as at the end of his
fourth book may be collected. Illo Virgilium me tempore dulcis alebat
Parthenope studiis florentem ignobilis ori.


He dying in Brindesi commanded that his body should be hither conveyed and
buried in Naples, as we learn from diverse testimonies of old Poets. Servius his
Comentator writes, that Virgils Sepulcher lies two miles distant from Naples in
the way of Pozznolo near the gurge of that subterranean cave, the famous Grot
under Pausilipus, now the Inhabitants show the place in the gardens of San
Severinus; over the door of the garden is this inscription. Maronis Urnam
Cum adjacente Monticulo, extensaque ad Cryptam Planitie.
Modiorum trium cum dimidio circiter, Urbano VIII. annuente etc.
Renovanda Mem. Praesentis Concessionis singulis XXVIII annis in actis Cur.
Archiepiscopalis.


Virgils Tomb is built in a Rotunda or Cupola, about five paces long: on the
infide, the walls are of brick in square after the Roman way: the outside of
massive stone, covered over with bushes and among them, three or four bay trees
(an immortal testimony of the Prince of Poets there interred) shoot forth about
a man's height, round it lie scattered ruins testifying its formers beauty: in
the Rock just opposite to the entrance, where his known Epitaph of Mantua me
genuit was, that being decayed, is placed a Marble stone with these Verses.
STAISI Cencovi^s.
15. 89.
Qui Cineres? Tumuli haec vestigia, conditur olim
Ille hoc, qui cecinit Pascua, rura, Duces,
Can. Rec. MDLIIII.
What dust lies here? this Heap protects his Hearse
Who whil'ome Warbled Fields, Farms, Fights in Verse.


The Crypta Neapolitana a perfect sign of the Roman magnificence is the Rocky
mountain Pausilipus, cut thorough; very high spacious and well paved, so that
for the space of a mile, two Coaches may go on front under ground.

From the garden of San Severinus you may see the house of Attius Sincerus
Sannallarius the Poet emulous of Virgil: which by his testament was made a
Monastery, whose Church is called Della Beat Virgin, therein stands a marble
Sepulcher car ved with great industry: on the one side is Orpheus or Apollo, on
the other the Sybil, or the Muse wrought of white marble, and here read this
Epigram of Cardinal Pietro Bembo. Da sacro cineri Folres, hic ille Maroni
Sincerus Musa proximus, ut tumulo
Vixit annos 72. Obiit anno 1530.

To return to Naples: it is a City at this time no less famous for the nobility
and magnificence of her Citizens and inhabitants, then for the vast expense,
and for the beauty of the structures of all sorts: for that the Governors of
the Emperor Charles* the 5th and after them of Philip King of Spain, of later
years Presidents or Viceroyes, in the Kingdom of Naples, have wonderfully
enlarged and forti fied her with a new wall, bull wark, Ditches, Towers,
Castles; in so much that she is now almost invincible. She is furthermore full
of regard for the many and magnificent Churches, Colleges, Courts Palaces of
Princes and other great Men, as also for many old relics of ancient houses,
Epitaphs, Statues, Sepulchers, Collumns, Altars, Marbles with most artificial
and fair engravings, and other things, which to recite would take up too much
Room here.

Among the rest, any one may meet contentin the grand ruins of the Quadrate
Temple of Castori which though the fire has consumed for the most part, yet
appears before it a part of a most beautiful porticue, with six prime Pillars
of Marble with their cornishes yet a foot, of Corinthian architecture*
wonderful for their vastness, and the art they are wrought with: they have for
Capitols, some Cesti, Iron Clubs (used among the Grecian wrestlers) to which
were tied with leather straps or dried Sinews* balls or bullets of lead, which
in theit Olimpick games, they use to hurl or cast: which with the Foliage and
revolts represent a becoming covering; and on the Frise, to which the Rafters
are fixed, may be read a greek inscription, which clearly manifests, that this
was the Temple of the Castori, and that the Greek language was in use among the
Neapolitans, when the Roman Empire flourished: which is also confirmed by the
characters by the vast expense of the whole work, and by the exquisit
perfection of the art, in the Ti^pano or triangular Frontispiece of the roof:
upon these Collumnes were carved many images of the Gods, which the Flames and
Age have for the most part consumed. On the Tres^el was figured an Apollo, and
on one and the other side of it, lies Earth and Water in the form they are
usually figured, that is in form of a body half raised up, half lying along,
naked to the Navil: Earth has the right hand, holding in its left the horn of
the Copia, the rest cannot be discerned, being too much broken and ruinated.

The Churches of our Religion, are there in excellent order and rich, as well
as many: and so well placed, as pleasant flowers for beautifying a Garden. For
example the Church of S. Chiara, enjoying a great and fair monastery, was very
magnificently built by Santia the Spanish Queen, and wife of King Roberto, who
by others is named Agnese: which the ancient Kings of the noble house of
D^razzo have made famous with their sumptuous Tombs: and in San Domenico, is
the Sepulcher of Alfonso the first, and of many other Kings, Queens, and
Princes; and what is more important, the Image of that Crucifix which spoke
unto San Tomaso d'Aquino, these words: Tomaso tu hai scritto been di me: Thomas
thou have written well of me: and that of Oliveto: so also in other Churches,
you may see many proud depositories and memorials of the Kings of Spain, of the
Heroes and other Princes, with statues of Marble as if natural. In the Church
of San Giovanni dalla Car boniera is the Sepulcher of King Roberto, whose
praises were writ by all learned men, among the rest by Petrarcha and
Boccaccio. In that of S. Maria Nova, lie interred the bones of Odetto Foix
named Lotrecce: and of Pietro Namarro, of Consalvo Ferrando Cordovese, and in
the most religious Tabernace of San Giannuacio, are preserved many holy
relics of Saints. Where once in the year at least they show one by one, all
those worthy objects: as bones of Saints and other Relics enclosed in gold
and Silver with precious stones, with the precious gifts bestowed by Kings and
Princes, and other things. Among which with great reverence, is the head of S.
Gianuario, Bishop of Pozzuolo the Martyr; and his blood still remaining in a
glass vial, though dried and become hard through time: which vial when brought
to the Altar is set near the head of the Martyr, on the Corner of the Chorus:
and the blood (to admiration) begins to become liquid and to boil as new wine
in the must, as has been annually observed and seen by all, not without great
stupour. Thence you go to the Annunciata, a Church famous through the great
devotion there exercised, and rich through the many offerings made to it: as
also for many relics of Saints of importance, among others two small bodies
of a foot and half long, yet entire, covered with the skins of innocent
Children slain by Herod the King, at the time our Savior was born in
Bethlehem, the wound of one is in the head, the other in the breast.

Contiguous with which lies an hospital, built like a spacious Castle, wherein
are maintained as their condition, age, and health require, two thousand souls:
therein are also brought up children of the poorer sort, more than eight
hundred, between orphane and exposed infants as well males as females:
instructed in letters and art, according to their inclination till they become
great. It Is a pleasure to see and observe their several diligent exercises and
works: and this custom of Christian Charity is certainly very comodious, which
as Corona Pighius observes, resembles Platoes Republique in part, and imitates
that Economical government of the Apes, described by Xenefonte, and by Virgil
the Prince of Poets, described and de painted so well to the similitude of
Platoes City.

Castle Nuovo, the name is new although built more then 300 years since by the
Brother of San Lodovico, King of France, who was Charles the first King of
Naples and Count of Anjou, to the end he might thence aid the City and the Port
against the maritimate inroads of enemies. Alfonsus the first of this name,
King of the Arragonians, restored it within our memory, after he had expelled
the French, and subdued the Kingdom; and so well fortifyed it, that it is now
held one of the strongest Forts of Italy: more especially since the last Kings,
the Emperor Charles the 5th. and Philip his Son completely furnished it, and all
the other Forts of this City, with victuals, good soldiers, and all other
necessaries and engines of war to keep off the Enemy.

In the midst of this large Castle, stands the pompous Palace of the governors,
furnished with royal and most lovely household stuff wherein the King or Emperor
may find a comodious receipt for all his Court: strangers are astonished at the
engines of war, the Artillery, the great quantity of Iron Bullets, the murrions
inlayed with gold and Silver, the Shields, the swords, the Lances, and the
other preparation for war there continually preserved. and that admiration
becomes much lessened, at the view of the said palace so richly laden with
tapistry of silk interwoven with Jewels and gold, the engraving, the statues,
pictures and the other noble furniture.

Thence you may see the Castle Del'ovo, so named for that the shelf which there
in largeth it self to the similitude of an Island, retains an oval form.
Collanutius writes that this Fort was built by William the third a Norman, and
thence called Normannica, which afterward Alfonsus the first King of the
Arragonians, repaired and beautifyed in many things: it is said that the ancient
called this by a greek word Miagra, either from a salutatiferous plant there
growing, or from the site and quality of the place, or for that it was difficult
to escape out of it: This Mole is like an artificial street casting it self
into the Sea, whither all the gentry in the evening resort for the benefit of
the Fresco.

The Townsmen show one after another Grottes hollowed under the shelf, also
some old memorials erected upon Cliffs, and great quantity of Arms of different
fashions.

Afterward pass into the Court of the Palace by the Gulf of the Sea called by
Strabo and Tazza, della forma; and if you would learn the discipline and labor
of the Galleots you must view in the passage, the near shores, the Islands and
Promontories round about, as Liseno, Procrite, Patecusa, Capreta, Herculaneo,
and Atheneo or Miner^vio, which as Pliny relates was the residence of the
Sirens, and that gave denomination to the Promontory: and here as Strabo
records, Ulysses consecrated a Temple to Minerva, for his deliverance from the
crafty wiles of the Sirens.

For the most part 40 galleys lie in this Port, besides other vessels to
discover and do other service: which Port is very large, and as well as is
possible defended against fortune with a large bank; which for the space of
500. foot runs from the shore into the Sea in form of a bended arm: and the
whole length and breadth made of huge pieces of squared stones.

There gusheth out at one end of the Mole a fountain of sweet water, conveyed
thither through the midst of the said Bank; this fountain has much marble
under it, wherein the water is received, the name is drawn from a Latin word,
the foundations are known to have been laid by Charles the second the French
King above two hundred and eighty years ago: which Alfonsus the first a
Spaniard, amplified with all magnificence afterward as well as many other
public edifices within the City: this fancy also Charles the 5th. Emperor, and
Philip his Son took up, in augmenting, fortifying and furnishing the same for
its commodity and ornament, without respect to the expense.

Hither the mariners in little boats row persons to see the Galleys and the
life of the slaves with their arts, who from the want of bread learn to speak
with the words of the Poet Perseus, Venture Magister, etc. and sitting, exercise
themselves; together with the munition and naval preparations for war: here in
a little time may be learnt the mariners art, with their manner of living,
wherewith they keep their bodies in health, and the offices and charges of the
Presidents of the Vessels: thence you go to see the denoted stables of the
King, where are kept and managed whole herds of beautiful and valuable
horses, where some Princes are always to be found, beholding with attention and
delight, their swift course, their wheelings, and turnings, made in as little
room, and with as much art as is possible, their curvets and leaps of all four
performed excellently at the nod of the switch of the Rider.

Thence you go to the Castle Santermo, on the top of the near mountain, very
strong, looking on and defending, the City, the shore Port and Islands in the
Sea: King Robert Son of Charles the second built it 250 years ago, adding to it
such strength and defenses as render it little less than inexpugnable, the
Emperor Charles the first and Philip his Son some years since enlarged the
Guasto, conjoyning it with the City, and increasing the structures in the
inward space with new walls and new forts.

On the top of the Hill you meet a most fair and rich Temple with a stately
Monastery possessed by the Carthusians; In which Monastery if you can obtain so
much favor from the Monks (who lovingly receive forraigners and show their
Monastery) you will meet an ample satisfaction in the view of the Monks
chamber in a corner of the Monastery: where you have as great delight as Italy
affords: for on the right hand is presented to your view, the prospect of the
Sea, as large as the eye can reach, the Islands Enarea, Caprea, and Prochite
and opposite the manured places of Pausilipo, the gulf of Surrenio, the
straight of Surrentano, some Cities and many Buroughs: On the left hand the
Field Holana, very large, and the mountain Vesuvius as high; then looking
downwards, you behold Naples, which, whither to be styled the miracle of art or
nature is disputable, since there you may see, have and enjoy, what ever is
esteemed pleasing or sweet.

In the voyage see the garden of Gacia di Toleda, kept in as good order as any,
it was made with vast expense, and with as many curses; (being with the sweat and
blood of enforced galley slaves, reduced to that perfection it now retains) in
the time that his Father Pietro di Toledo, continued Lord of the City and
Kingdom, under the benevolent aspect of the Emperor Charles the 5th.

Nor is it a mean pleasure, to view the places surrounding the City worth the
seeing, especially in a good season: the which are in that fertile plain, near
the Sea in pleasant scites very pompous; and adorned by the nobles with
magnificent Edifices and fair gardens, well kept, and enriched: which have such
plenty of Fountains, grottoes made by art, and Fishponds adorned with Curral,
mother of Perle, and Fish shells of all sorts, as the beauty is almost
impossible to be ghes^ed at, as also of Porticues, walks, vaults covered with
Leaves and Flowers of diverse sorts, Roses, pomegranates, collumnes and Lodges
beautifyed with pictures, statues, and marbles of antiquity, and among those
Lodges those of the Marquis di vico, and the other Princes, placed on the
strond near the Vesuvius, are very famous: as also the Villa of Bernardino
Martizano adorned with many relics of of antiquity; Poggio Reale, a vast
Palace, built heretofore by Ferdinand King of Arragonia, whither the King used
to retreat, when he desired to repose himself, and to recreate his mind from
the fortunes of the Sea, in a blithe and secure port. This Palace is contrived
in this manner, four square Towers, upon four corners, are bound together by
great Porticues, so that the Palace has two bredths in a length, each Tower
has fair and pleasant Chambers above and below, and you pass from one to the
other by the means of those open galleries; the Court in the midst is ascended
by certain little steps, and therein a fountain and clear fishpond, and on all
sides by the nod of the Master, from the pavements rise sprouts of water, by
means of infinite subtle Channels there placed with art, and in such plenty
that they suddenly wet all the aspicients not thinking of it, in the summer a
sufficient cooling: these Fields by the vicinity of the Vesuvius enjoy great
plenty of sweet waters, the Fire within forcing out many fountains of sweet
waters purged and pure: hence also the Sebeto acknowledges its being and the
greatness of its Chanel being conveyed into all the streets of Naples by
Pipes under ground, to all the public and private palaces and habitations: so
great comodity of all things brings to its inhabitants, the Paradise of Italy
(as Corona Pighio frequently and not improperly calls her) that flourishing
part of the Neapolitan territory, although many times afflicted with wars and
earthquakes.

IL MONTE VESUVIO.
VEsevo, or Vesuvio, or Vesuvius, (so called by the Ancients from the
sparkling) was a most fair mountain; and formerly a goodly Country for about
four miles compass lay at top, which then produced the excellent Graeco, but
it is now laid wast: It Is an imitator, and companion or rather the Brother of
flaming AEtna, and is begotten by earthquakes and fire, the materials whereof
it continually retains in the profoundest part of it: which as if withheld
within it self for some years till come to maturity, and as if the spirits were
summoned and fomented, with fury evaporates fire, breaks open the firm parts of
the Mountain, and vomits forth its inward parts, as earth, stones, flames,
smoke and ashes, throwing them up into the air with horrid noise, and with such
force, that the Vesuvio seems to imitate the war of the Giants, by fighting
against Jupiter, and the Gods with flames, arms, and huge stones, (some whereof
four porters can scarce move) and seeming to draw the Sun down to the earth, to
change the day into night, and lastly to cover the very heavens. Experience and
the testimony of Strabo, Vitruvius and other ancient Authors assures us, that
under Vesuvio, and the adjacent Maritimate Mountains, and of the neighboring
Islands, are vast burning sires, of sulphur, pitch, and allume: the hot bathes
and sulphu reons boiling fountains sufficiently prove it: and therefore the
Vesuvio, when abounding with fire, sometimes asends and sometimes uses to move
earthquakes and vast ruins and destructions. That incendium was the greatest
and most famous which happened under the Emperor Titus Vespasianus: described
in a print by Dion Cassius, and other Authors, the ashes of which fire, were
not only exported to Rome by the wind, but over the Seas into Afric and into
Egypt; the Fish in the boiling Sea were dressed, the birds were suffocated in
the air, and the famous and most ancient adjacent Cities Stabia, Herculeano,
and Pompeo, were heaped and covered over with ashes and stones, while the
people were sitting in the Theater: and C. Plinius the famous Naturalist, who
then governed and commanded the Armada of Misenus, too inquisitive after the
cause of this intestine fire, approached too near, and by the heat and savor
received his end, by being suffocated near the Porto Herculiano: Francesco
Petrarca noting this acutely (in his triumph of Fame) says he wrote much but
dyed little discreetly. Mentr'io moriva, subito hebbe scorto
Quel Plinio Veronese suo Vicino
A scriver molto, a morir poco accorto.


Yet for all, that to Pliny succeeded so fearful his dalliance, Stephano
Pighino, himself not thereby fore warned, could not forbear, but took a voyage
(of 30. years old) in order to his studies, into Italy through Campania and
Naples, to the end he might search out, and behold the place of such wonders,
although very high, and no less difficult to ascend which cost him an entire
days labor. and with his two companions, he marched round the mountain,
reaching the very top: where he could scarce satiate his view, in looking on
the bourg, the Country round about, the Islands and the Sea: Vesuvio, rises
in the midst of a most fertile Country; the ashes scattered over it, the
stones and clods of earth burnt by the fire, and dissolved by the rain
afterward, infinitely enrich and fructify all the country; in such sort that
the vulgar to purpose enough, call Campagna, the mountain and the Castle built
at the foot of the mountain, Sommano from Somma, the sum and wonderful
abundance of generous wines, and excellent fruit; the Vesevo, as well as the
Campagna, and neighboring hills, being surrounded with fair vineyards.

So also Martial sung, that in his time it was green, with the sprouts of the
vines, bewailing in his first book with a fair epigram that fierce fire,
happening in Vespasians days: the top in all times and ages has been ever
held barren through the burned stones, as if eaten up by flames. It Is hideous to
behold the deep cracks in the earth through which the streams of sulphur pass,
but when arrived at top the Vorago represents hell, so terrifying is the
spectacle; It Is a hole about three miles compass and round, as if formed like
the middle and lower part of an Amphitheatre, it is called Lazza from the form of
the Rock Fish, the bottom of it reaches to the bowels of the Earth, The place
is cold now, nor seems it to emit the least heat or smoke which the said
Pighius testifies, who descended as far into that profundity as the the
precipices and obscurity of the place would permit; the first entrance of the
Vorago, is fertile through the earth and ashes cast on it, and grows green
through the fur and other great trees growing in it, as far as the Sun can
reflect into it, or the rains penetrate; but the parts under, restrained to a
narrow compass are as twere stopped by the great pieces of stone and rocks, and
arms and bodies of trees fallen down: which obstructions, when the in ward
Materials of fire abound, like little bundles of straw are easily raised and
mounted to the skies, by the invincible force of its smoke or flames.

The fire also is known to open it self a way, not only by the ordinary mouth,
but on other sides also, as occasion offers; whereof we have a memorial in the
Italian Annals: To wit that two hundred sixty and six years since, in the
Pontificacy of Benedict the 9th. from one side of the Mountain gushed out a
stream or river of flames which ran into the Sea, in a liquid fire like water:
the issue and footsteps of which Cavern it is said appear yet: The Roman History
tells us that besides the mouth, it had other issues and courses for the flames
of old: for instance, it says that Spartacus the swordplayer having begun to
raise the war of the Fugitives against the Romans in Campania, and having
possessed the mountain Vesuvius with his army, as a strong fortress and sure
retreat for war, and being there afterward besieged, he escaped from the Roman
siege by an admirable way: for that covertly fastening chains at the mouth of
the Mountain, he with his companions let themselves down to the bottom: (as L.
Florus briefly relates in his third book of the Roman history) whence issuing
forth by an obscure breach, he at unawares put to sack the quarters of the
Captain Clodi^s, and of the rest who were at the siege: who never conceived the
least thought of it.

Whither at this day any subterranean ways or caverns, leading from the
Vineyards to the mouth of the Mountain, are found out* I cannot tell. Pighius
assuredly tells us, that he observed at the top of the mountain about the
mouth, certain vents, whence proceeded a continual heat: wherein putting his
hand, he perceived clearly a heat although small and without smoke or vapor:
but our Country man Raymond observed in his view there, a certain hill rising
in the midst of the Vorago, that still vomits thick smoke, which he says the
fire within has raised within few years, that it daily increases, and when
grown to a fuller bulk, Caveat Neapolis. Thus much touching the Vesuvius.

Between the mountain Vesuvius and Attella, in the Mediterran^, are situate,
Mereliano, Acerra, and Sessola, at present ruinated, of old possessed by the
Camps of the Leborini, where the Romans and the Samnity fought most fiercely:
hither reach those mountains of Capua, called by the Ancients Tisata, and those
that extended toward the Mole Northwards; here is Forche Caudino, and other
Castles with many inhabited places, among which the chief is the Castle of
Aciola: at the foot of these mountains lies Caserta the City and Country of the
great Cardinal Santorino, called Santa Severina: near which lie Maddalone,
Orazano and Argentino; Behind Tifata on the back of the Mountain is situate
Sarno, flowing with waters by means of the River Sarno, which there takes its
rise: these are mediterranean places about Naples and Campana, whence you go to
the Marca.

The Kingdom, whereof Naples is the Metropolis, co^menceth from Latium that
part where the River Ufente runs into the Terreno; Then toward the Apenines it
passes to Terracina, thence to Frigella, or Ponte curvo, Ceperano, Rieti,
Tagliacozze a Ducal City, and Matrice, where Trent begins its source,

Then follow the way along the River for eighteen miles to Colonia de gli
Ascolani, where the River discharges it self into the Adriatic Sea: that part
of the Kingdom opposite to the Promontory called of old Leucoperta, now Capo
Dell'armi, respecting Sicilia, is distant from Poggio, forty eight stadii, each
of which contains 125 paces; whose head is called Tarlo: It Is 418 miles of way
to go by Terracina, Bossento, and Reggio toward Naples. This Kingdom of Naples
is one thousand four hundred and sixty eight mile in circuit: whereto some have
assigned ten provinces, others nine, others seven and we thirteen.

The Terra di Lavoro, taking in Naples, has three Archbishops, twenty five
Bishoprics, one hundred sixty six Castles surrounded with walls, and one
hundred and sixty Towns: the Principality named Di qua on this side has twelve
Cities, two hundred and eighteen Castles; the Principality Di la beyond,
eleaven Cities, one hundred forty and one Castles, the fairest among which is
Consa. La Ba^ilicata, has ten Cities, ninety three Castles, the fairest
Venesa. La Calabria di qua, has ten Cities, one hundred sixty two Towers and
Villages. La Calabria di la, wherein is Reggio, has sixteen Cities and one
hundrd and thirty Castles. The Province of Otranto has besides Brindesi,
thirteen other Cities, and one hundred fifty eight Castles or Towns. The
Province de Bari has fourteen Cities and fifty Castles. La Capitaota, thirteen
Cities and fifty Towns, whereof the most notable is Manfredonia: The Country
of Moliseo, four Cities, one hundred and four Castles, the fairest Trivento.
L'abruzzo di qua has five Cities, one hundred and fifty Castles, the chief
Teate. L'Abruzzo di la, besides Aquila, has four other Cities and two hundred
eighty four Castles: but with more brevity to speak of them, this Kingdom, has
twenty Arch-Bishopricks, one hundred twenty and five Bishoprics, ten
Principalitys, twenty three Dutchies, thirty Marquisates, fifty four Earld omes
with authority over their subjects, fifteen Lords who have jurisdiction, four
hundred forty three petty Lords with title and authority. a thousand Towns
enclosed with walls, and villages in great number. The most famous Islands of
this Kingdom are Enaria, Procida, Lipari: and thirteen others of small fame.

The Offices of this Kingdom are great Comestable, who is Viceroy. Grand
Justiciary, Grand Admiral, Grand Chamberlain, Grand Prothonotariy, Grand
Marshall, Grand Chancellor: as also the Sindico or Judge, who publicly
performs his office, in attending the busine^s of the City Naples: which has
five kinds of assembly of the Nobles: di Nido, di Porta Nova, di Capuana, di
Montagna, di Porto; which congregations or assemblies, although under other
denominations, the City Capua likewise enjoyes

Many Cities most ancient and adorned with signal conditions have been in this
Kingdom, whose memory is yet in being, except Osea, Metaponto, Sibari, and
others hereafter spoken of.

The Foster Children of this Kingdom, truly famous in Letters, were Archita,
Eurito, Alemeone, Zenone, Leucippus, Parmenides, Timeus, Ennius, Lucillus,
Pocuvins, Horatius, Ovidius, Statius, Juve^al, Salustius, Cicero, and San
Thomasus, besides others more modern

I will be silent of such sommi Pontifici, or Popes, the Emperors, Kings, the
valorous Captains of war, and the thousands of Prelates, Princes and Heroes, as
likewise of the male and female Saints, (who perpetually contemplate the
Countenance of God) as this Kingdom has happily given birth to.

These following have been Lords of the Kingdom of Naples, to wit, the Greeks,
the Goths, the Vandals, the Longobards, Sarazens, the Turks, the Hormeni, the
Suevi, the French, the Catalonians the Arrago^ians, the Flemmings or Spaniards,
and sometime, the not to be forgotten Romans.

The Journey toward POZZUOLO.
THe Mountain Pausilippus, though very high is well manured with vineyards, and
rich Towns also in old time as we collect from Pliny and others; it extends
into the Sea in form of a Promontory, and shuts up the way between Naples and
Pozzuolo, and was an intolerable toil to the Travelers to pass over or go
round it, before it was cut in two; it is now by the industry of the passengers,
through their hollowing it for the head, and levelling it for the feet become
the mistress of ways, being strait, plain and easy: therefore the Graecians to
the purpose by a word in their tongue called it Pausilippo, as if they would
say a remover of troubles and labor: by which surname the Graecians of old
called Jupiter, as we read in Sophocles. The mountain is hollowed within for
one thousand paces in length, twelve foot wide, and as much more in height, on
which as Strabo writes two Carts may commodiously meet and pass under earth:
Seneca calls the cavern Cripta Neapolitana: though now the name is changed for
Grotta, where he writes to Lucullus in the 58. epistle, to have run the whole
fortune of the Atlesi, for that he found copiously in a part of the muddy way,
implaistrings, and in the same cavern, abundance of the dust of Pozzuolo: we
also have proved and tried that dust, as others did. for we find that troops in
the passage by foot or horse raise the dust, and that at our issuing out of
that obscurity we were all yellow, and looking and laughing at one another we
much wondered at it, finding a more then desirable inconvenience; in cleansing
our selves of that filth. The cause of which dust is easily known to proceed
from the exclusion of the wind and rain, so that the raised dust (as Seneca
says) having no Vent falls down on it self, or on those that raise it: whence
we collect that in the time of Nero this cavern had no Casements or breathings
whereby it might receive air or light, more then at the entrance and end,
because Seneca calls it a long and obscure prison, where nothing is to be seen
but darkness. Yet Cornelius Strabo testifies, by the riving or chops of the
Mountain in diverse places, that many windows gave it light, which being closed
or earthed up, either through the earthquakes or the carelessness of the times,
we may rationally imagine, rendered this longcavern so darksom. Pietro Rassano a
Sicilian Bishop of Lucerie writes, that in his time, which we may count to be
above 250. years since, this cavern was found without any holes, and without
light, and that the entrance and the out-passage were so filled up with ruins
and bushes, that it was terrible to enter without light: and that therefore the
King of the Arragonians Alfonsus the first, having reduced this Province,
enlarged and levelled the way and the entrance of the Caverne, and closing the
top of the Cavern opened two lights, which obliquely enlighten it, whose
reflection at a distance seems to the aspicients, snow scattered on the earth:
in the midst of this darksome way is a little sacred place cut in the walls of
the mountain, where night and day a lamp perpetually burns, which puts the
travelers in remembrance of the eternal light, and shows in a painted tablet
our salvation, proceeding from the virgin Mother Mary: a Lamp perpetually
burns there, and the words at the Encounter are Alla Marina, Alla Montagne.

In our times D: Pietro di Toledo, magnificently restored and aggrandized this
work so worthy of eternity, being then governor of Naples Kingdom by the favor
of the Emperor Charles the fifth: the way is now become so strait, that it seems
to such as enter the cavern, a Star, to which they ought to direct their course
in the darkness, by means whereof, with what pleasure they behold all such as
enter on foot or horsback at the other end, who seem like Pigmies at that
distance, is scarce imaginable. Diverse are the opinions of the learned touching
the time and beginning of this great work worthy of the mind of Serse: omitting
the idle prating of the vulgar who attribute it to the magic incantations of
the Poet Virgil, whose ashes by the opinion of many ly at the mouth of the
Cavern: or of others who make one Basso the author, of whom there is no record
among the ancients: we believe we may draw from Strabo, Eforus, Homerus and
other greek writers, that the Cimmerij a most ancient people dwelt in that
Canton of Campania, between Baio, Lucerno, and Averno, and that they lay in
denns and subterranean Caves, and that running the one to the other they dug
out metals, and hollowed mountains, and in profound Caverns exercised (by means
of their Priests,) Negromancy and enchantments, conducting travelers, and
pilgrims to the oracles of the infernal gods: which people being destroyed, the
Greeks, who succeeded them and built Cuma and Naples, accommodated as most
suppose those Caves of the Cimmerii into hot baths, and baths, ways and other
conveniences for humane use. So likewise the Romans, after the example of the
Grecians, being chiefly inclined to great and magnificent impreses increased
these laborious underground structures, and at the time when they became the
Lords of the world, they there erected their Palaces of Recreation, and Manor
houses little inferior to Castles when the rare quality of the dust of
Pozzuolo was discovered (extracted from those mountains) to be very efficacious
for binding, building, and establishing foundations of Edifices in the waters.
Strabo affirms that in his time M. Agrippa under Augustus, cutting up the wood
on the mountain Avernus, which corrupted the air, among the other antique and
magnificent things found out a subterranean cavern hollowed even to Cuma, the
which as was conjectured, together with another between Naples and Pozzuolo,
was made by one Cocceio; and that in his time the custom of the Country was to
make such underground ways and Caverns: from whose words we collect, that for
a long time before Strabo, the Cocceian family were got together in Campania,
and that the place was called Spelonca though for truth we cannot set down any
thing of certain of him that first made it: nor is it probable to me, that
Strabo could be ignorant of the deeds of L. Lucullus, the which in those places
were very great and of excessive expense, from which he was called Serse
Togato, by Pompeius Magnus, by Tuberone, by Cicero, and the other principal men
of Rome: wherefore their sense pleases me, who impose on him the concavating
the Pausilipus for the convenience of his Villa: because it is written by Marcus
Varro, Pliny, and others, that L. Lucullus cut a mountain in the midst of
Naples, with greater cost, then he expended in building his Manor house: for to
what end should he? not to level and accomodate the way for passengers: but
rather to open a gulf of the Sea. whereby at his pleasure to admit and let in
Sea water to his Fishponds that so the caves of the mountain might be a good
receipt for his Fish (which he kept alive) to lie in as well in Winter as
Summer.

At the outgoing of this Cavern, you perceive by little and little the odor of
brimstone in the air, which here and there proceeds out of diverse vaults. By it
lies the Lake Aniano, in similitude of an Amphitheatre surrounded and shut in
on all sides by the Mountains, and through a mouth of a hill cut with iron
great plenty of Sea watet, and great concaves, made ponds for Fish, at present
filled with mud, sand, and ruins of structures: Leandro and others write from
the relation of the peasants there, that in the midst of the Lake there is no
mud: and that in the spring time, with great noise and fury fall down from the
highest praecipices of the rocks there round in to these waters Knots of
Serpents knit and bound together, which are never seen again to get out.

Near them are the sweating Rooms of Germanus vaulted: from under which,
through the superficies rise vapors so hot, that who enters though naked,
shall soon perceive a mighty sweat trickle down his body.

Wherefore those places are held of exceeding validity to such as suffer under
the gout by purging the bad and malevolent humors, they heal internal wounds,
and are helpful for many infirmities of the body: which if any desire ampler
satisfaction in, he may read the Tract of Gio Francesco Lombardo, who gives an
account of all such as have writ in verse or prose of the baths and wonders of
Pozzuolo but we are obliged to too much have, to relate with care and amplitude
all particulars we meet with.

In the Campagnia of Pozzuolo, Baia, Cuma, and the near Island Enarie, by the
old Greeks called Pythecus, are found great quantity of the like Miracles, that
it might be well believed that there nature serves Apollo perpetually, and
AEsculapius, Higia, and the Nymphs: although the earthquakes, and the volleys
of fire which frequently happen, demonstrate sufficiently that in diverse
places, that as well under the foundation of the Sea, as under the Mountains,
and in the lowest parts of the Earth great fires are kindled, whose boiling
vapors and flames working their own way through the veins of Alum, sulphur,
pitch and other materials, cause to rise in diverse places hot and boiling
fountains, and create baths in the Caverns comodious for sweating. Yet the
nature and faculty of these things are different, being conformed to the
propriety of the materials and the earth whence the source proceeds: so that
among the medicinal and healthful faculty of these waters, we find some waters
and vapors mortal, which issue out of some muddy earth, evil in it self. Pliny
in the second of his natural Histories writes, that in Italy, and particularly
in the Campagna of Si^vessa, and Pozzuolo, are vents or breathings, so evil,
that they evaporate a mortal air.

At the foot of the mountain which circles the Lak Anianus, not far from the
said waters appears a Cave called Grotta di Cane, eight or nine paces in
circuit, by which mouth two or more men may commodiously enter together: where
from the inmost part of the stone, from its invisible pores proceed hot
spirits, but so subtle and dry, that they carry not with them any similitude
of smoke or vapor, although they condense the air, driven thither by the wind
and the colds of the Cavern with great heat, and change them into water, as the
d^ops demonstrate which hang at the entrance of the Cave, shining like little
sta^rs, when they are beheld at the opening of the Cave, by those without in
the light: they have been often* taken for drops of quicksilver. All men
generally believe this Grotta to have such an innate property that if any
living thing should pass the prefixed term of a certain ditch in the entrance,
it would without doubt suddenly fall upon the earth, and would be wholly
deprived of life, if not immediately drawn out, and cast into the near standing
waters or pool, called Agnano, by whose coldness only in a short time by little
and little it recovers Life. Whereof Travelers daily make experiments, if
curious to know the wonders of nature, by casting in cocks or dogs or some
other live creature to which they fasten a rope to draw them up by. Leandro
Alberto writes that Charles the eighth King of France, when a hundred and 14.
years since he drove out the Spanish and for some time Lorded over Naples,
caused an Ass to be driven in, who suddenly whirled about and dyed.

Another who two hundred years since wrote of these baths, relates, that a foot
hardy rash Soldier, run in armed and dyed miserably: Corona Pighio writes,
that in the presence of Charles Prince of Cleves, the Spanish Captains cast two
cheerful dogs by force into the Grotta: who strove all possible to avoid it,
as if they had formerly experimented the danger; the which being taken out
dead, by means of the refreshing waters in the aforenamed Lake were restored to
life: one of which being again cast into the cave, and being thence drawn and
cast into the Lake, returning not thereby to Life, was left for dead on the
bank, who not long after as waking from a profound sleep raising himself, and
limping and staggering, so soon as possible, ran away, every one that saw it
smiled, and Charles praised the dog, that he would not for that time become a
victime to the bears; after this trial they cast a brands end lighted into the
Grotta, beyond the prefixed sign, which come to the bottom seemed to
extinguish, and raised up a little higher, to rekindle: which demonstrated that
the spirits proceeding from the superficies, as more hot and dry in the bottom,
consumed the more subtle nutriment of the flame, but having less vigor at
more distance from the foundation, they rather rekindle the hot and gross smoke
and flames of the brandsend: as we see the flame of a lighted candle will pass
to another newly put out, by means of the so oak; and the beams of the Sun when
united by a burning glass, are very vigorous and will set tow or flax on fire
if approached too near. Pighius through his exceeding love to study, travialing
over Italy, and having an extreme desire to inquire into the nature of all
things by which he might acquire knowledge, wondering at the reports of the
miracles of Pozzuolo, resolved to search out the cause by a nearer scrutiny
then had been made by others.

He could not believe that those drops that hung so resplendent at the end of
the Caverne, were quicksilver: wherefore being counseled by a certain
juvenile and youthful audacity, he passed the proposed measure in the Cavern;
having inclined his body a little and getting somewhat nearer, he found they
were drops of clear water, and taking them on his finger from the sharp pendent
of the rock, he demonstrated the truth to his companions, requiring them either
to believe or enter and make proof.

Which also happened: for that Antonio Anistelo, and Arnoldio Niveldio, two
Holandesi, noble youths and companions in the journey with Pighius, got near:
who when he had for some time stood in the Cave, and perceived the heat, how it
ascended from his feet to his legs and knees, yet underwent no other then a
giddiness and pain in his head; and sweat only on the forehead and the temples
through the heat of the place: he learnt by experience that that heat, and
those nocive vapors are not lusty and violent, but when near their rise; and
there they kill small animals or great, but chiefly the four footed, because
they always go with their head downwards, whereby being necessitated to draw
in with their breath those hot and boiling vapors, their vital spirits become
suddenly suffocated with too much heat: the which also are as suddenly releived
by the imediate refreshment of the waters in the Lake, if the animal be
forthwith cast therein when drawn out of the Cavern. Whilst Pighius was
performing this, an Italian who guarded some herds wondered strangely at his
temerity, and remained astonished at the success, many times demanding if he did
it not by the magic art, nor would he be persuaded that Pighius could avoid
the nocivenesse of that Grotta, otherwise then by enchantment or witch craft:
which made him mock at the plebeian simplicity, laughing at the vulgar, who for
the most part attribute that to the Magic art, which appears wonderful, and
produces stupendous effects, from their incapacity to comprehend the cause:
but to return to our voyage.

From the Bucca Coronea, we are brought to Zolfettara, as at present they call
those places which were of old celebrated with the invention of various fables
of old Poets for these wonders of nature: who sing that the Giants buried under
this mountain, even from hell cast forth of their throats, Flames at that time
when earthquakes happen. Et montes, scopulos, terrasque invertere dorse,


These Mountains are full of Sulphur, Alum, and Vitriol, the chief whereof as
Strabo writes, stood pendent at a few paces distance from the Colonna of
Pozzuolo now distant from the castle Novo, about a mile: from the form of which
place, it is guessed, that the top of this Mountain was at last consumed and
emitted into the profundity of the near valley by the continual fires, whence
that which of old was a high and eminent top or head, is now a great ditch in
the plain of a valley and that which was of old the ribs and flanks of a
mountain, are now the upper part of shelfs and rocks, which surround the plain,
with a certain fence in length about a thousand and fifty foot, in breadth about
a thousand foot: Pliny writes that they were nominated from their whiteness
Leucogei, and the plain or Level, Campagna Phlegerea, from the flame and fire
there ever extant: which Silius the Italian confirms.

Cornelius Strabo calls this place the Piazza and shop of Vulcan, where
likewise some fable, the Giants to be overcome by Hercules: here the Mountains
seem continually to burn at their roots: for that on all sides they emit smokes
by many mouths which smell of sulphur which smokes are blown by the wind all
over the neighboring Country, and sometimes to Naples. Anciently these Hills,
as we draw from Dion Cassius and Strabo emitted greater fires, as also those
about the Lucrino, and Averno, which are not a few, burnt and emitted like
furnaces gross smokes and flames. Now the plain as also the hill Phlegrei are
deprived of their perpetual flames and are cavernous in many places and become
yellowish, as from the material and color of sulphur: the earth when spurned
by the foot, resounds like a drum, through its concavity underneath, where you
may hear (with wonder) under your seet boiling waters, gross and inflamed
smokes to make a horrid noise, and run too and fro through the subterranean
Caverns, which the force of the exhalation has made, which how great you may
thence guess; stop any of those mouths or holes, with a good great stone, and
you shall suddenly and with violence see it amoved by the strength of the
smoke. Here they compose medicinable pots of brimstone.

In the same plain or level lies also a great marish filled always with a
black scalding hot water: which sometimes uses to change place, and the waters
making themselves hard (as tried sewit uses being cold to bind it self to the
sides of the Vessel it is melted in) do thereby and with the force of the
exhalation increase or diminish. When I was there it boiled with great noise
and smoke, as if it had been a huge chauldron filled with blackish mud, and
therefore exceeded not then its bounds and limits: but I remember, that at my
view thereof, this Vorago mounted and cast up of asudden like a Pyramides,
eight or nine foot high, (beyond the common stature of man,) that thick water
yellow and of the color of sulphur: which also the people of Pozzuolo affirm,
adding that sometimes twill rise from sixteen to twenty four feet.

When the Sea is in a storm, this water is of various colors; though for the
most part like sulphur, and sometimes other, according as the subterranean
winds are disturbed by the sea blasts, and being in vigoured among the flames,
with all possible force expels some of the earth mixed with diverse colors from
the deepest veins. These very winds, when most quiet under ground, the top of
the Fens or moors being only disturbed, cause a gross thick water, colored
with black to be cast out. These things of such occult nature, do certainly
afford useful and welcome matter for consideration and study to such as love
to search thereinto; which Cicero very pertinently terms, the natural food of
the mind. And hence we certainly know, that the globe of the earth is not in
every part solid, and massy, but in some places hollow, cavernous, and full of
vains and pores, like as is the living body of any animal: and that with the
continual motion of the imbodied elements, water and air, it becomes
penetrated, and is by the same nourished, increased or diminished together with
its several kinds and changes of plants, and that the earth soops up vast
quantities of the Sea waters, dispersed on it by means of those pores, the which
being encountered by some fierce winds, occasion a motion of those waters in its
inmost part, and in the straitest passages; and the same winds there split in
sunder among the rocks and stones, grow violently hot, and kindle vast fires,
the which con^uming whatever they meet, empty the internal parts of the earth,
and drawing to themselves through those pores the neighboring winds, together
with great smokes; they there augment beyond measure, searching out an egresse,
with horrible noise and shakings of the earth and mountains. Pellunt oppositas
moles, ac vincula rumpunt.


As more at large Cornelius Severus a most learned Poet has declared in his
AEnea, and hence proceed the earthquakes, whirlpooles, and openings of the
earth, the forcing out of flames, the rivolets of fire, boiling fountains, and
hot vapors. Dion Cassius writes that in his time, the said Mountains of
Pozzuolo, had more fountains of running fire in the likeness of water, that
through the excessive heat the water took fire and burnt, and the fires with
the mixture of the waters acquired a fluxible corpulency, in such sort that
these contrary elements, did not separate: and we find even in our time that
the flames and sulphur, conserve and nourish themselves in these waters, and
that they endure for so many ages and never consume, but always continue and
gush out in the same conduits, the which Severus the Poet graciously sets down
in these verses. Atque haec ipsa tamen jam quondam extincta fuissent,
Ni furtim aggeneret secretis callibus humor
Materiam silvamque suam, pressoque canali
Huc illuc ageret ventos, and pasceret ignes.


So also he writes of the Phlegrean Fields and of the same place between Naples
and Cuma, whereof we now discourse, viz. Ejus ab aetern^ pi^guescens ubere (...)
In merces legitur.


As at present the King exhausts a great toll from that brimstone, and
merchandise of alum. We observe furthermore, that these sulphurious or
brimstone waters commixt with the saltness of the Sea, and with the ashes of
burnings, turn into stone after they have cooled themselves by running a short
course: and that they communicate the same faculty to those rivers and brooks
with which they commix, whereof though a clear experiment cannot be had, yet
that innate quality in all the rivers of Italy, as the Tyb^r, the ^everone, the
Lake of Luca, in the Nera and others of vesting the sides or brims of the banks
and the Conduits whereby they pa^s as also the conserves and receptions of
their standing pools, give sufficient proof. Besides it is as clear as the Sun,
and daily observed that their continued washing of wood, plants, arms, bodies
and roots of trees, the stubble of herbs, and the leaves by little and little
are covered with a kind of scurf of stone, and by revolving become by chance
formed like comfits of ani^eeds, fennel, cinnamon and almonds, and so much
resembling such, that with no great difficulty some more greedy then wary have
been cousened with them: and in truth what Vitruvius, Seneca, Dione, Pliny, and
others have writ of the wonders of Vesuvius and Pozzuolo, seems beyond reason;
to wit that the waters receive that nature and particularity from the tenuity
of the ashes of the burned sulphur; which ashes the fire having in part
reduced as small as atoms, in part dissolved into liquid moisture, and in part
expelled by the vapors of the subterranean fires through the veins of the
earth and by springs, we observe to be converted into that dust which the
ancients called Pozzuolo from the place; and that they unite so soon as they
attain the waters, and cooling with them, attain the just substance of stone,
and that the waters which run by those places mutually receive a certain nature
of connexing to any thing, so that they easily cleave to the body they touch,
and make it become stone,

And for wonders of this kind, scarce can any be found like those in the caves
of the Apenines near the old chanel of the A^iene by Vico Varo, where the
waters distilling through the clefts and chinks in the Rocks, in their fall by
little and little form it self like stone, in the likeness of high Collumns in
diverse forms, branchy bodies of trees, and monstrous bodies of Centaures and
Giants; in which Caverns or labyri^ths of pure darkness, with candles may be
found out objects which in one word, may worthily be said to feed and satiate
the mind of the curious searcher into the secrets of nature: but beware that
the light be not extinguished by the frequent flappings of the night bat^, who
thither retire as to a secure retreat by millions to avoid the light of the day.

Thus beholding the hills Leucogei, and the various surges of medicinal
fountains, of baths, hot baths, and the Cavernes, you go to Pozzuolo, amids the
great and spacious ruins of the ancient Colony.

POZZVOLO.
THe Roman Empire flourishing, that maritime tract of Campania, about Cuma,
Misena, and Pozzuolo, was in great reputation for the temperature of the air,
the pleasantness of the site, the quantity of good waters, and the extreme
fertility of the fields, and therefore replenished with great possessions of
the Gentry, and proud Palaces, of the principal men: And to speak truth, no
other part of Italy nor of the Provinces, or the world, appears more proper for
the consumption of the Romans riches then that piece of Campania lying betweeen
Capua and Naples, and extending to Cuma, where with good reason the common
saying was that Bacchus and Ceres contended for superiority. the luxury and
sensuality of which maritime places and Islands, made the old Poets in their
ancient fables of delights call these the house and habitation of the Syrenes:
And this caused some old Poets and them of no small esteem to aver those things
which happened between Ulisses and the Nymph Calipso, to have been acted in the
Island of Pozzuolo and not in Ogygia a place of the Thebans, or in the Island
of the Promontory of Lacinio; which Goddess by some called the daughter of
Atlas, by others of Oceanus and Tethys, was held a Nymph of the Sea, and
reigned in the Isle Ogygia, * receiving Ulysses when he escaped drowning; and
took this name from her adornments of body, and delights she lived in: Homer
calls her a Nymph very well adorned with fair riches: And in truth who
considers the shores of Pozzuolo, must in truth conclude that to his
imagination, a more pleasant delightful and glorious place cannot be found out
than it, nor a Seat more inclined by nature to receive and carress Travelers;
thence it is that the Poets of old feign that Ulysses there fixing and dwelling,
recollected his many past peregrinations and perils, and also in the Isle
Ithaca, whereof Dion Cassius and ^hilostratus Lemnius, in the Life of
Apollonius make mention. And although at present the whole is filled with
ruins, and every thing lies even with the earth, through too intolerable
sufferings by war and time, yet are there objects enough, which such as will
reap any profit from the curiosity of the ancient arts and histories, ought
maturely and with great industry to consider. But to begin, Pozzuolo is a City
situate on a hill in the midst of a shore of the Sea, which though very fair
and large, cannot yet be at all compared in any part with the riches and
grandezza of the ancient Colony, as may be clearly extracted from the ways
pitched with flint, and the foundations of public edifices: whereof the Sea
has swallowed up one part, and earthquakes and wars the other. It was a most
ancient Colony of the Graecians which. the Samii conducted hither in the time of
Tarquinius Superbus, in the sixty second Olimpiad, as the Chronologer Eusebius
writes and Stephanus ^ysantius confirms: which happened about the time that the
republique of the Samii was ty ranized by the three Brothers, Policrates,
Silus, and Pantagnostus. At that time also Pythagoras Samius, flying from his
own Country in Morava, attained the potent City of Italy Croione, where he
laid down a new Philosophy then called Italian, and by it acquired a high
esteem: with whose Laws the Italian Cities (being reformed from the Grecian,
by the endeavors of three hundred of his Scholars, as Diogenes Laertius
writes) received the government of Aristocracy, under which they lived happily
for many Ages. Others will likewise that the Colony of the Samii from the
observance of the Justice of the most holy Empire, wherewith it was governed
was called Dicearchia, by which name all the Greek writers styled, it and many
times after their example, the Latin. Strabo writes, Dicearchia was once the
Piazza of the Cumani, and that afterward the Romans called it Pozzuolo, either
as some will from the many deep pi^s, or as others from the sulphurious
stenches of the waters there arising; It became under the power of Romans in
the war with Hannibal, when Capua was taken by a seige, and severely chastised
for the perfidie and ingratitude it exercised: from which was then taken its
government and liberty, and annually sent thither from the Roman people a
prefect to govern them, which happened the five hundred forty second year after
Romes building: when many Castles and Cities ran the like fortune with it, for
that they had with arms defended Hannibal as Titus Livius sets down, wherefore
Sextus Pompeiu^ sets Pozzuolo among the ten Praefectures of Campania, on which
the Roman People every year imposed Governors: for all which some years after,
they passed farther by disposition of the Acilian Law, to with that they sent
thither a Colony of Roman Citizens, and made it one of the five maritimate
Colonies, which were drawn from Rome in the five hundred and fifty ninth year
by force of the Laws of the said Acilius the Tribune, as is clear in Titus
Livius: being then Consuls Publiu^ Scipio Africanus writes the second time, and
Titus Sempronius. Vellejus Paterculus from the opinion of some, that the Colony
was later sent thither, to wit 3 lustres or 15 years after the above written
time, and adds that in sum the verity is not punctually known.

Yet verily the old memorials of Pozzuolo, copious enough in the house of
Hadrianus Guilernus the most courteous, learned, and curious beyond measure in
ancient histories, wholly agree with Titus Livius: where is extant one of those
stone Tablets, containing the second Law, the Regulation of public edifices
and expenses there to be had: which was made in the Consulacy of P. Rutilius
and Cn. Mallius Maximus, the six hundred forty and eight yeear as the Fa^ti
Capitolini demonstrate, which happened in the ninth year after the conduct of
that Colony to Pozzuolo, as these words set down on the beginning of the said
Law clearly prove. Ab Colonia deduct a anno XC. N. Eufidio N. F. M. Pullio Duum
vir R. Rutilio. Cn* Mallio Cos. Operum. Lex. II.

From which words we clearly comprehend, that the comencement of this Colony
was under the Consulacy of Martius Portius Cato and L. Flaccus, in the five
hundred forty eighth year, although Livius sets it down to have been the
following year. Augustus being at last become Conqueror in the Civil wars,
having restored peace, and shut up the Temple of Janus; for reward of the
veteran Soldiers, disposed them into the 28 Colonies of Italy, among which
Pozzuolo was one, then made a military Colony, as Suetonius writes and as may
be drawn from the fragment of the Military Colonies.

From the above written observations is certainly known, how ancient the Colony
of Pozzuolo is, and that many times Inhabitants were thither sent and enrolled.
And therefore this Author holds for very imperfect, and ill treated from the
insufficiency or inobservancy of the remembrancer, what Tacitus sets down in
the fourteenth book of his Annals: and so Justus Lipsius thinks also, for in
the acts of Rome in the eighth hundred and twelfth year, the Emperor Nero and
Cossus Lentulus being Consuls, we find these words of Tacitus. At in Italia
vetus oppidum Puteoli jus Coloniae, and cognomentum a Nerone adipiscuntur,
adding no more as if Pozzuolo for no preceding time had the quality of a
Colony, whereas Titus Livius clearly proves it to have been in that condition
two hundred and forty years before: but these two may be easily reconciled, by
the adjusting of one single word, to wit the writing it verus instead of vetus:
in these words. At in Italia verus Oppidum Puteoli novum jus Coloniae, and
coguomentum a Nerone adipiscuntur: for that being at first called Colonia
Augusta, with Nero it was called Augusta Neroniana, and thence it is that Tacitus
says that Pozzuolo obtained a new condition with a new name: but Tacitus not
explaining the occasion why then a Colony was sent thither, or who gave it new
condition, and what that condition was, the place seems to want more then one
word: and because the particle At separates the word before specified and the
difference of things and the particle non tamen is placed in the midst of the
period which follows, this place is therefore believed defective and that
therefore these words set a cloud before the eyes, and scruples in the studies
of the curious, which this Author has thought not easily removable without
some supplement to that place of Tacitus to the effect following, viz. At in
Italia verus Oppidum Puteoli novum ius Coloniae, and cognomentum adipiscuntur
aeque cladem passi: Queis irrit^m Principis beneficium facere Coloni ex
diversis legionibus undecunque coa^ti, numero licet frequentes, ut veterem
Tarentium, and Antium adscripti, non tamen infrequentiae locorum subvenere,
dilapsis pluribus in Provincias, in quibus stipendia expleverant: And thus will
the diffe rence be known between what ^ell out to Pozzuolo, and what to
Laodicea, by the copulation At: of which Cities this returned to its proper
state by its own power, the other not, although it assisted the Prince, as did
happen to Tarento, and Antio, the occasion of which misfortune Tacitus
graciously declares.

The learned are entreated to have due consideration of this place and to note
the defects with a stelletta. To return then to our first purpose: the Author
when he copied out those in scriptions, whilst there permanent, it occurred to
him, that a Colony was of new conducted to Pozzuolo under the Empire of the
Vespasiani, and was called Flavia, for that he espied among those old stones, a
great square marble one engraven with letters of a foot long a piece, the which
by being continually exposed to the surges of the Sea, has its characters
almost eaten out, yet not so wholly but that one may read the third part of the
elogy inscribed in the old Marble Arch, the which the Flavian Colony erected to
express a grateful sense to Antonius Pius Caesar for his liberality in
restoring the ports: which part of the Elogy will hereafter be repeated. In the
mean time behold in Pozzuolo and its neighborhood, the meritorious objects:
Among others a vas^ Church now entitled S. Proculo Martire, the which of old
Calphurnius had dedicated to Augustus Caesar: it is built in a corinthian order,
as may be understood by the Porticue, containing one piece of the old title in
the frontispeice in these words. L. Calphurnius L. F. templum Augusto cum
ornamentis. D. D.

All Authors question who this Calphurnius the Son of Lucius was, chiefly for
that there were so many Calphurnij, and they famous in the time of Augustus:
and if it be lawful to make use of conjecture none comes nearer then mine,
that L. Calphurnius Son of Lucius called Pisone Frugi, after he had been Consul
and Prefect of Provinces, was also Prefect of Rome, after T. Statilins Taurus,
who was twice Consul and triumphed: he exercised this very charge in the time
of Augustus and Tiberius for twenty years, as Tacitus in the fifth Book of his
Annals sets forth; who writes that his father was a man appertaining to the
Censor: whence it is impssioble but L. Pisone must have been his Father, of whom
the eloquent tongue of Cicero speaks so much ill, as that he was banished
whilst he was Consul. He was then Censor in the seven hundred fifty and third
year, whilst Caesar Dictator warred against the confederates of Pompey. Among
all the greatest charges and employments which the Calphurnian family
participated, they only twice administered* the Censorship. The first time L.
Pisone Frugi was Censor after the Consulacy, in the 695 year of Rome who being
Tribune of the People, prevailed for that Law against the rapine of the
Provincial Magistrates: and the second time fifty eight years after,

This Temple is so well built, that in the space of so many ages neither Time
the consumer of all things, nor the insolences of enemies, who have many times
destroyed the rest of the City, have been able to ruinate, which could not come
otherwise to pass the^ from the beams being composed of marble, in which
scarce a fastening appears: yet the impetuous force of the earthquakes have in
part moved it out of order, in such sort that the right angle of the
Frontispiece is fallen with a part of the Title, where certain ruptures appear.

Of such esteem was this Fabric, that the architectors were not ashamed the
work being finished to place their name there: being Luccio Cocino Liberta of
Luca, and Caio Postumi, as we read in the left wall of the Church in these
words. L. Cocceius C. Postumi L. Auctus Architect.

Many other holy sacred places that were therein are either fallen to nothing* or
at least wise very badly handled. The Temple of Neptune as Cicero affirms was
the most famous, of which some great Fragments to this day remain near San
Francesco, as vaults, arches, huge walls and other places with their nooks for
the statues: but its columns and high ornaments of marble are taken away. Also
near the Amphitheatre, are the footsteps and ruins of a Temple, which Antonius
Pius Augustus had erected to Adrian the Emperor his Father who dyed at Baia in
the Manor house of Cicero as Spartianus relates. Some years last past many
fair statues and vast pieces of Columns and Marbles were amoved, together with
the Elogies of Nerva, Trajan and Adrian the Emperors, that is to say of the
Father, Grandfather and great Grandfather: to whom Antonius (having created
them Gods) had (...) sacerdotal sacrifices, of the Flamins and their
companions: and hence some believe he obtained the surname of Pius the Pious,
as we are instructed from the aforesaid Spartianus, and by Julius Capitolinus.

The Temple of the NYMPHS extant on the Sea Shore without POZZVOLO.
IT seems very likely that either the Sea or Earthquakes have swallowed up the
temple of the Nymphs, the which, we read in the 8th, Book of Philostratus
Cennius in the life of Apo lonius Tianeus Domitianus the Emperor built on the
sea shore without Pozzuolo: he writes that it was built with white stone, and
that of old it was famous for divination, and that in it was found a fountain of
running spring water, from the which though any quantity were taken away, it was
never perceived to diminish; but this with ^nfinite other antiquities is now
gone to nothing; yet now is evident at a little distance from the Land near the
Via Campana in the Sea a fountain of sweet water, which gurgles to this day
with great force; whose source may be always perceived almost to admiration,
if the Sea be quiet and calm: let the studious of antiquity consider if in this
place the Temple of the Nymphs may have been, which conjecture will not seem
far from truth upon weighing the words of Philostratus, who relates, that
Apolloneus Trineus appeared to his two D^sciples Damides and Demetrius was in
the Temple of the Nymphs on the Sea shore without Pozzuolo, who were disputing
the nature of the abovenamed fountain, where also is the Island of Calissus to
whom the successes of what happened with Ulisses they relate in the fables.

Furthermore, as twere in the midst of the Colony, remains yet a most huge
Amphitheatre little less then entire, composed of squared stones, the which
not withstanding its ill treatment by earthquakes the taking away many of its
stones, and the plowing of its soil, yet appears in its first form, enlarged
into a more l^rge circuit, then was usual for the Emperors, and Leandro Alberto
says that by measuring he found it to be in length in the plain within, 172
foot, in breadth only 92. foot.

Ferrante Loffredo Marquis of Trevico affirms, this the most ancient
Amphitheatre, supposing it to be built before Rome, lost its liberty under the
Emperors, from an old inscription in marble there found, demonstrating under
what Consuls this Fabric was repaired at the public expense of the Citizens
of Pozzuolo: which inscription although much sought for by me, I had not the
good hap to see.

Many fragments of Acqueducts are yet to be seen, which either passed through
or surounded the Mountains: nor is it an easy matter to number the conserves
for the waters made in diverse forms, some entire, and some ruinated by
earthquakes, many of which are under ground and very large, which who enters,
without a clue of thread, a light, or a well practiced guide, may dwell there
for ever, so intricate are the labyrinths, built without gates, heads or
turning streets: from which we may assuredly know, that the Romans with vast
expense thither drew, and therein preserved great plenty of those sweet waters,
abounding on that Maritimate coast. The vulgar unskilled in old history, as in
all things very ignorant, have most injuriously expressed themselves, in giving
ridiculous names to these edifices, calling them, Piscine mirabili, wonderful
fishpools, Cento Celle, the hundred Cells, and Grotte Draconarie, Dragons
Caves. So also have they handled the fountains and baths in number forty or
more between Pozzuolo, Misseno and Cuma, of diverse sorts, and efficacious for
sundry diseases. But it is not our purpose to look back and take notice by one
and one of these things, having already set forth whatever is there rare and
worthy view; we shall therefore refer such as desire more ample and complete
satisfaction in the like objects to Leandro Alberto, and the other writers
herein before mentioned.

The description of the Ancient Port of POZZUOLO.
SUch and so great wonders, as here by degrees present themselves to the view
of the Traveller as he approaches the Sea side, may well entertain him; for
like mountains in the waters rise the immense moles of the old Port, that is,
thirteen immense Piles, which spring out of the water like square Towers, which
in old time were conjoined in manner of a bridge by frequent arches, but now by
fortune and antiquity those gross engines are separated, and the falling down
of some of the Arches renders it unpassable from one to the other: which must
have been caused either from earthquakes or the furious Sea, the whole fabric
being composed of burned earth like bricks of two foot square, not easily to be
divided and broke down by any other accident.

It Is certainly known, that when this Port was in being, it extended it self
into the Sea, in form of a large bridge, and bending it self in the fashion of
a bow, reached the shore and the Avernus, and so defended the place from the
raging force and storms of the Sea, whose haughtiness was comodiously bridled
by means of those Moles.

And it is believed that the Ancients there made those Arches, to the end that
through them the sea waters might enter into the Port, and by its continual
flowing and ebbing keep it cleansed of the mud, which the rivers and rain
waters brought down in to it from the Terra firma and the neighboring hills,
through which in their course to the Sea those waters must first pass; and it
had not been possible to avoid the filling up of that port in few years, by
that perpetual inroad of dirt, had not the Sea waters through those Arches
continually purged it of that mud and filthiness so drove into it: and this
the inconvenience in the port of Naples and diverse others, who are only
surrounded with a bank without arches, sufficiently proves.

Suetonius in the life of Caligula from its vastness calls it the Mole of
Pozzuolo, from whence thorough the midst of the Gulf of the Sea, Caligula, as
he writes, to show his greatness and vanity, and to be able to tread and walk
on the Sea as well as upon the Land; or as Dion says because he would imitate
King Xerxes, who passed his Army out of Asia into Europe over the straight of
Hellespont upon a wooden Bridge: commanded to be brought together and new built
all the ships he could get, which were infinite, and therewith caused a Bridge
to be made with the said Ships set in two Banks fastened and moored together
with anchors chains and cables, which made them stand fixed and firm, and
extended even to Baias through the gulf of the Sea: he commanded this bridge to
be made of boords so strong and even and to lay so much earth upon the same, as
it seemed to be firm ground and one of the streets of Rome like the Strada
Appia. This being finished, he proudly attired in Robes of Gold and pearl, and
a crown of Oaken boughs on his head (called Civica,) on horseback entered at
one end of the bridge and road to the other, accompanied with the Band of the
Pretorian Soldiers, and all the Nobles and Gentlemen of Rome: and the next day
returned habited like a Campanian, in a Chariot, with a great multitude of his
Friends. Dion writes that the night he lay on this bridge, he caused such an
infinite number of Torches, lanthorns and other Lights, to be lighted and set
up, that the clearness thereof did exceed the darkness of the night: Caligula
boasting, that he had made of the night day, and of the Sea Land; and because
it happened that these two days the Sea was calm, he said that Neptune did it
for fear and to do him Reverence; Suetonius adds, that Caligula having invited
many, who being on the shore ready to go on the Bridge where himself was, he
turned them all over, breaking the bridge, and commanded some that endeavored
to catch hold of the ropes of the Vessels, to be forced into the water with
oars and other staves, which served for a jest and pleasant spectacle to this
Monster: Seneca in his 78th. Epistle calls this Machine by the name of Pila,
saying Omnis in Pilis Puteolanorum turba consistit, cum Alexandrinarum navium
conspicitur adventus. And therefore this Machine, in a serene sky served to
those of Pozzuolo to pass and walk on, as if they had been in a Piazza* At the
entrance on this Mole as aforesaid was a large Arch built of Marble, dedicated
to the Emperor Ant onius Pins by those of Pozzuolo, by way of gratitude for his
remembrance of their Republique with liberality in moneys for repairing the
Port, as we find from that piece of an Elogy aforementioned, here set down, for
the benefit of such as delight in these particulars, AEsari, Divi
hici, Nepoti Divi
onino Aug, Pio
olonia Flavia;
uper Caerera Benus Pilarum vigin
quo, et Munition.


The entire contents whereof cannot easily be comprehended from these few
remaining characters, but may in some sort be supplied from the said words, and
the marks of the Lines wherewith those characters appear, which being formed
to our thoughts, seem after manner. Imp. Caesari Divi Hadriani filio Divi
Trajani.
Parthici Nepoti Divi Nervi Pron. T. AEl. Hadriano.
Antonino August. Pio. Pont. Max. trib. pot. coss. pp.
Colonia Flavia, Aug. Puteo lanorum.
Quod super caetera beneficia, ad hujus etiam tutelam,
Portus Pilarum viginti molem cum sumptu fornicum,
Reliquo, et munition ex aerario suo largitus sit.


Julius Capitolinus much favors the subject of this elogy, by what he writes in
the life of Antoninus Pius, to wit that he gave moneys to many Cities, to the
intent they should either erect new public structures, or restore the old.

The Promontory of MISENO,
THus having viewed the old and great foundations of the Piazzza and the Port,
pass by bark directly from the Mole to the Promontory of Miseno, famous and
immortal by the verses of Virgil, and the writings of other good Authors. This
mountain lies in the Sea, and is boared and hollow, full of grotts and caverns,
which made the Poet much to the purpose and with no less ingenuity to style it
AErio or ayry, as if he would denote it windy, by reason of the ways and
concavities in it self, saying further, that under it, AEneas gave sepulture to
Misenus his dead Trumpeter and man of oars, or as Servius writes afterward
sacrificed to the Avernus as in his sixth he says. Imponit suaque arma viro,
remumque tubamque
Monte sub AErio, qui nunc Misenus ab illo
Dicitur, aeternumque tenet per saecula nomen.


Seeming by the Oar and the Trumpet, to glance at the future famousnesse of
that Port, and of the Armada or Fleet, which Augustus had then placed there for
defense of the Mediterranean Sea, under E. M. Agrippa, And Dion commemorates,
that Augustus being made Captain, made use of it for the harbor of the Fleet
in the Sicilian war, against Sextus Pompeius, where they then lay in the sea
between Miseno and Cuma, environed with hills, in form of a crescent, a place
very capacious and more then opportune for the Navy at Sea, by reason of those
three gulfes of the Sea, situate between Baia and Pozzuolo, that is the Lake
of Baia, the Lucrino, and the Averno, the which Lucius Florius calls by a most
gracious Metaphor, the Ease of the Sea: of which the Averno now called Mare
Mortuum, being included, where it issues out with fand, seems a stagne or
Moore about a thousand paces distant from the allodgment of the Armada. And
therefore the neighboring precincts, as also the Miseno, began to be
accommodated for the Soldiers stations, for that the Fleet there was wont to
winter, and both Strabo, and Servius: the Commentators upon Virgil, report,
that the wood and Trees on Averno were cut down, because they through their
thickness rendered the air offensive, and prejudicial to the health of the
Inhabitants: furthermore hills were boared thorough, and leuel ways laid, to
the end there might be a short and facile access to the shores of Baia and
Lucrino. And that fresh water might never be defective, with infinite expense
and no less labor, Rivolets from Rivers and fountains from springs were
conveyed thither from a far off: cisterns and conservatories were built, (vast
enough) in diverse figures as the convenience of the place afforded, both in the
plain and under the ground, and in the very bowels of the hill, that so cold
water might be at all times ready for refreshing the bodies in the excessive
heat of the Summer: it is for these reasons that we find the Miseno in great
part, hollow and concave within, and exposed to the air to the very top. In
which we see sitting places for washing, baths, lakes, and tables for eating:
being within full of grotts, ways and edifices arched, here and there
sustained by frequent pillars, part built with brick, part cut out of the same
rock; among which edifices the biggest conservatory of the waters called
vulgarly Grotta Dragonacia is admi rabble, as are the conveyances into it: for
the rain waters descending from the Promontory; the which Grotta is capable of
many thousand butts, being large beyond measure, and twnety five foot deep: the
largness not being to be measured, for that the vaults and ruins fallen into
it have filled many parts of it: all these conservatories are incrusted or
plaistered with a certain hard composition used by the ancients for rendering
them tenable of the waters, so that none could pass nor soak thorough: the
inward space between the walls, is two hundred foot long, and eighteen broad:
having four doors through which is entrance into four great chambers: near
these are other conserves different in artifice and grandeur.

That which vulgarly they call Cento Camere, from the multitude of abodes (by
some thought to be Nerva's prison, where among the other Fabrics they
preserved their waters, is wonderful for the vastness and art wherewith it is
built: its walls within are conj^ined within in squares, and support the
vaults, forming every where square chambers, which on all sides have small
doors by which may go from one to the other the servants, whose office it was
when the waters were spent to cleanse them of the dirt and soil: the vaults of
these chambers have certain open holes, whereby the waters might be drawn up as
occasion required. The Piscina Mirabili or Pool for water was admirable and
famous, and known by this name, the which is yet almost entire on the back of
the Promontory of Miseno, toward the Port for the Navy, and Cuma. This Fabric
Leandrus Albertus affirms, is enclosed by four walls, is five hundred foot
long, and two hundred and twenty broad: and the Vault somewhat higher: raising
a little archwise from the walls, it rises higher toward the middle, being
supported upon forty eight columns, each of which is three foot square, which
being disposed into four ranks represent a beautiful and proportionable object
for the whole length. The whole Fabric is composed of brick, and the walls
being of a great thickness, render it of an extreme firmness; both the Walls
and Pillars with in are exactly incrusted as useful to keep them from leaking:
and in the arch are many open ovals for drawing up the waters: at each end were
forty steps for descent to the very bottom. The Pavement on the sides is
higher even to the midst of the Porticue: whence was a descent by five steps
into a lesser chamber on each side, and thence was a descent into another very
narrow enclosed place, into which it is supposed the waters purged their filth
and uncleanness, the which was afterward exhaled by the public officers for
this purpose called Castellarij, from these conservatories of waters being
denominated Castella in Latin.

All the Pavement is Terras beaten, with all art and diligence, so that to this
day it holds the rain water like a dish in the lowest part of it.

Many variously conjecture who should be the first builders of so vast
Fabrics: some whereof suppose, L. Licinius Lu^ullus to have been the first
Author, and that this was built out of the ruins of the said Lucullus his
Villa, which Plutarch and Varro write he built most proud in the Tract of Baia
near the Promontory of Misenus: with whom agree Suetonius and Cornelius
Tacitus, who write that Tiber^us the Emperor dyed in the same Villa, whence
(hindered by the storms at Sea being sick) he could not sail over to the Island
Caprea. Others think this was the Fabric of Nero, and thence it is to this day
called Peschiera di Nerone, and Suetonius writes that he began a Peschery
extending from Baia to Avernus, covered and shut in by porticues

But this conjecture pleases not me much, nor any other who has diligently
seen those places, who know the use of the like Fabrics to have been merely
for conserving of waters: and for that these three Fabrics before described,
lie so contiguous one to the other, it may not be far from the purpose to
imagine that (...) and the Princes his successors, built them for the use of
the ^leet, since it is assuredly known, the Soldiers thereof there continually
lodged and wintred, some vast fragments of their military lodges yet being
extant: and I remember that I copied out some Epitaphs of the Soldiers of the
Armada, from the near sepulchers, wherein are placed the names of the Pretorian
ships, as Feed, Isede; Gallo, wherein they had served, whereof some brief ones
for delight of the studious of antiquity hereunder follow. D. M. Ti
Porroniceletis. Not. Alex. Ex. III. Isidevix. Ann. XL. Mil. am. XIIII. Titi.
Us. Aquilibus Epidius Parisi III. Isid. H. A. M. fecerunt. D. M. C. Senio
Severo. Manipulato ex III. Fide Natione Bessus. Vixit annos XLVI. Emilius
dolens Erei E. M. Fecit. D. M. C. Julio Quarto. Ver* Ex. Pr. N. Gallo. M.
Cecilius Felix. S. In^ia. Heraclia S. and S.

These had the captainship of the Fleet, who constantly resided there: as was
Anicetus the libertine of Nero, who was first his Master, by means of whose
frauds, these there slew near the Bauli, Agrippina his Mother. In such a
command (though different from this) was Pliny the writer of the natural
history, in the time of Vespasian at Misenus, and there governed the Armada and
Navy, at the eruption and burning of the Vesuvius, being with it shaken by the
earthquake: but approaching too near with his ships, to assist the oppressed
Soldiers, and to satisfy his curiosity in the occasion of those fires, he was
stifled by the ashes and vapors of this burning mountain as aforesaid: where
with his uncle Pliny was also G. Celius the son of his sister, who related this
story more at large to Tacitus the Historian. And certainly waters were
preserved in these Fabrics for use and delight, both in Lucullus his Villa,
and many other places very numerous in that piece of a fair country, all over
which run pipes, shores, and channels. All the Sea shore and strond is deformed
by the ruins of Towns and Villages, of old full of houses and inhabitants, in
particular that part between Formia and Surentum moves compassion in the
passers by at Sea: which in the flouri shing time of the Roman Empire,
presented to their view at a distance the effigies of a continued City, by the
quantity of structures, and proud Palaces, beautifyed with all splendor,
pompous and vastly expensive: and would any take that pains now as by a strict
serutiny to take a particular account, or to draw draughts, and exquisite
descriptions; enough of importance might be found to satisfy his own
Curiosity, and to fill up a new commentary, nay a just volume.

The Palaces were wont to be very pompous in those parts on the Maritime
coasts, being 150 miles in length: Which was so filled with Palaces, Cities,
Towns, Burghs, Baths, Theaters, and such other proud and magnificent Fabrics,
beginning at Baia, and so continuing to F. Herculanus and Voliurnus, that they
seemed not separate, but one great and fair City, to which no prospect could be
comparable: But in this our time all things there are ruinated except Naples
the head of the Kingdom, and residence of the Viceroy and some other great
Princes.

The Ville or Palaces of pleasure of the ROMANS.
THat we may gratefully please the studious in these things, we thought it not
from the purpose to run over some of the more noble Villes, which the Romans
had built in these parts. That famous Palace then of Lucullus stood in the
Terra Forma, near the Promontorie of Misenus, discovering the top of the near
high hill and the other lesser between the port and gulf of Baia, where he
first bought of Cornelia the Villa of Sc. Marius, banished by L. Sylla, which
he amplified with Fabrics, Gardens, and sumptuous Fishpools; the spaces of
which Gardens appear to this day, toward Cuma not far from the Cento Camere,
and footsteps of the Pescheries at the shore of Baia, with grots, and standing
pools cut into the foot of the Rock by art, that they might be a refuge and
defense to the Fish from the scorching Sun in hot weather: as M. Varro sets
forth, saying that L. Lucullus had given order to his architectors to consume
as much money as they pleased, so they made a sufficient defense for the Fish
against the heat of the Sun, and provided them secure retreats under the
mountains, so that when this work was completed he might say, he needed not
envy Neptune himself for goodness of fish: which shows that he had fishpools
in many places. And in the said Marcus Varro, Q Hortensius the Orator
reprehends M. Lucullus for that he had not after the example of L. Lucullus his
Brother, provided for the convenience of his fish, a retreat into the Fresco,
from the scorching beams of the Sun. It Is thought the Villa of M. Lucullus stood
at the foot of the mountain Misenus toward the Isle Procyda, anciently called
Prochyte, where under the waters may yet be perceived great ruins of
Pescharies.

Villa Di Q. HORTEENSIO.
QUintus Hortensius had his Manor house in the breast of Baiano near Bauli,
whereof some relics yet appear on the shores, and some are covered by the
waters: it is most certain and famous that he had then most fair fishpools, with
some grots cut into the mountain for the refuge of his fish from the Suns
ardoui: so much were they then given to the like pleasures: for which C. Cicero
taunting him) calls him God of the Sea, and the most happy in his pescheries,
in that he had so domesticated the fish, that they came at his c^ll when they
heard his voice; and much condoles the death of ^is Muraena, the Bennet fish,
which it is thought by some will stay a ship if it stick to it: of whom a fri^nd
of his (...) a pair of his Mullets, he answered he would rather give him two
mules out of his litter. Pliny writes that after Q. Hort^rsius, Ant^nia the
^other of Claudius the Emperor possessed these (...) pools with the same
humor, and that she so much loved a (...), that she caused earrings of gold to
be put on him in the wate^s: and that those places were so famous for this
fact, that mary (...) to ^auli purposely to behold it. It Is not certain (...)
Ne^o the Emperor caused Agrippina his mother to be sl^in in this very Villa,
but if not there, it was not far from it, as may be collected from Cornelius
Taci^us in the 14th book of his Annals.

Domitia the Aunt of Nero had a Villa in that neighborhood: whereof in the 13
book of Tacitus is some memorial, and Dion ^ssius says that Nero having
poisoned Domitia his Aunt, poss^ssed (...) of her Livings near Bauli, and
Raven^a: the contrary whereof ^lius I am pridrius reports of the Emperor
Alexander Severus, to wit that besides many Palaces he built in Rome, in honor
of Julia Momea, his mother, he built one most sumptuous with its Pescher^es
calling the place Mamea, which Ferrante Lofredo, Marquis of Trevico supposes
to stand in the midst of Baia, where he likewise erected many other in honor
of his Parents.

The Villa Of C. PISO.
THis stood under the mountain near the hot fountains: hither Nero, (leaving
the other charges of importance) often retired for his solace, as Tacitus
declares in the 15th. book of his Annals. It Is supposed that in this Villa, Nero
entertained his mother Agrippina at table many hours under pretense of the
festival Quinquatrus: a feast celebrated to Pallas five days, but with
intention to make her return by night to her Villa at Bauli, having before hand
given order that in the return, the Bark (wherein she was) should be sunk, and
she thereby be drowned, as Suetonius and Tacitus relate.

The Villa of C. MARIUS, of CAESAR. and of POMPEY.
IN these confines likewise C. Marius, Caesar, and Pompey, had their houses of
pleasure, as Seneca tells us in the second Epistle, but they stood on the very
tops of hills, so that they had more the faces of Castles and Forts and places
made purposely to protect the Country below, then of Palaces for solace.
Pliny speaks of that of Marius in the 6th chapter of the 18 book, which was
afterward possessed and amplifyed by Lucullus, near the Promontory of Misenus,
toward the Port. But the Villa of Caesar stood above Baia and on the top of
the Mountain, as Tacitus testifies in the 15th book of his Annals, whose vast
foundations remain to this day under their old name, near the Temple of Venus.
That of Pompey, they say, was on the third Mountain, between the Avernus and
the contiguous Tritullian hot baths, whence the surname they yet retain: and
there some years since was found a statue of Pompey.

The Villa Academica of Marcus Tullius CICERO.
Pliny in the second Chapter of his thirty first book declares, that the Villa
of Cicero (made so famous by his writings) was in these quarters between the
Avernus and Pozzuolo, upon the Sea shore with a most delicious grove and a
spacious hall to walk in, wherefore Cicero called it an Academy in imitation of
that at Athens, wherein they ordinarily disputed walking. Here Cicero made his
sepulchers: and so much was he pleased with it, that he often spoke of it, and
entitled some of his books from it, Questiones Academicae: Academick questions.
Atticus being in Athens, Cicero in almost every letter recommended his Academy,
that he might send to him from Greece, whatever could be had for ennobling it
with fair ornaments, wherein Atticus failed not, according to the occasions, in
statues, pictures and other the like ornaments. Whence Cicero in his Epistle ad
Attiticum, praises his diligence and the things sent him.

Cicero being retired hither in the calamitous times of the Republique to spend
away the time, toil, and troubles with Books, many of the Principal Romans
repaired thither to visit him, and take some counsel. Of them was C. Caesar
after the victory he obtained in the civil war, C. Octavius the Successor of
Julius, yet before he made himself Emperor, with infinite others: but after
that Cicero was banished, the Villa Academica was possessed by C. Antistius,
who was the Legate of Caesar, and followed his faction in the civil wars. A
little after Ciceroes death, in his Villa, sprung up fountains of hot water,
good among other things for the eyes and sight, celebrated by Tullius Taureus
the freeman of Cicero, with an Epigram set down among the works of Pliny, who
wrote this success, and judged that Epigram worthy of memory. We must believe
that this Villa stood where now the Stadio is, taking that name from the length
of Ciceroes hall, whose ruins yet remain so distinctly, as that it may be
measured how long it was: and although this Stadio, seem to stand too far from
the Sea, in respect of that we read touching Ciceroes Academy, yet this will
not create any difficulty: since the Sea may be in so long a space of time
through diverse causes retired; because truly this Villa in Ciceroes time stood
over water, at leastwise conducted from the Sea, by certain channels, so that
he eating at table, might cast into the waters for the fish to eat, and angle
and fish at his pleasure. The hot fountains are extant in a near field, in a
cavern underground at the root of the hill, which are also of wonderful
nature, because they increase and decrease according to the flowing and ebbing
of the sea, by day and by night: in their increase they cast abundance of water
into the bath, and when full, part of the water returns to the fountain, and
part runs into the Sea by a certain small chanel or gutter made to that purpose.

This Bath vulgarly called Bagno Ciceroniano, the Ciceronian bath, and by
phisicians, Praetense or Tritulliano is as gallant and entire an antiquity as
any in the Tract of Pozzuolo: These waters were so sovereign not many years
since over most diseases, that over every bath was written for what cures it was
good, of which inscription some letters yet stand: but the phisicians of
Palermo (as they tell the story) finding those waters prejudicial to their
custom, went with instruments expressly and demolish't those writings (so that
for the present they are unusefull) the said phisicians being all cast away in
their return. Thus much shall suffice touching Ciceroes famous Villa, for that
Leander and other writers treat sufficiently of its nature and others
thereabouts. From the commencement of Ciceroes Academical questions is
comprehended, that the Villa of Ter. Varro a most learned Roman was not far
distant, but the determinate place is unknown.

The Villa of SERVILIUS VATIA.
SEneca demonstrates in his fifty second Epistle to Lucullus, that on the shore
between Cuma and the Lake Avernus stood the Villa of Servilius Vatia, the
magnificence and vastness of which Fabric may be comprehended from the
fragments yet extant. He says two Caves were here built with great expense,
into the one whereof the Sun never entered, and on the other it shone from
morning to night, into which. ran a delicious water through as pleasant a Meadow
with many Fish. Hither Servilius a noble and rich Man retired himself at such
time as Tiberius Caesar afflicted many noble Romans, and applied himself to
honest Labor far from Rome in peace, for which he was styled happy, and
obtained the fame of knowledge in his affairs above others; by that means
avoiding dangers. Touching the dead and other notable things others have
abundantly writ, let this therefore suffice, for the purpose of the Baianian
celebrious Villa's, since of the other particulars in the times of those old
Roman Princes, it is impossible to treat exactly, all things being so wholly
ruinated and destroyed that scarce any footsteps remain.

The old City of BAIA.
The most fair foundations and pitched Piazzaes of the old City Baia, lie
underneath the waters, scarce any fragments remaining on the Land: but in the
neighboring Mountains in every corner lie baths, hot baths, and structures of
Admirable Architecture, notwithstanding that many great Fabrics were burnt,
many thrown down by earthquakes and many swallowed up by the Earth. In the Sea
may be clearly seen the great old Piles of the Port of Baia, like those of
Pozzuolo, built of Brick with intolerable expense, which now seem like Rocks,
as do the enclosures and foundations, which of old stood for defense of the
Lakes Lucrinus and Avernus, against the storms of the Sea: which was
genenerally believed to be made in this manner, to wit, that Hercules by his
strength, upon two carts abrest, drew as large a piece of Earth as was
requisite, and that a mile in length to the place, and there fixed it: and
therefore Posterity for a perpetual remembrance and acknowledgement of so great
a benefit, erected to him a Round Temple near Bauli, whereof some fragments yet
are extant. But afterward, that repair being wasted by the Sea, C. Caesar
again restored and bettered it, as may be collected from Virgils Georgicks and
from Servius his Commentator; with whose opinion Suetonius seems to accord,
saying that Augustus perfected the Julian Port near Baia, whence it is supposed
that Julius Caesar had first settled it: which must have been in his first
Consu^lship by Commission of the Senate, who gave him that charge at the
instance of the Receivers of the Customs and Tolls, upon their allegation, that
the customs and Tolls much decayed in value through the ruin of that Port:
which was afterward called Julia, from the Reaccomodators name Julius Caesar.
So says Servius upon these verses in the second of the Georgicks. An memorem
potius? Lucrinoque addita claustra,
Atque indignatum magnis stridoribus aequor?
Julia qua Ponto long sonat unda refuso,
Tyrrhenusque immittitur aestus Avernis;


A wonderful Adventure.
In our times, that is in the year 1538 (those adjacent Fields and places being
for two whole years before shaken moved and disturbed) in the end, the night of
the twenty ninth day of September, between the foot of the mountain Gaurus and
the Sea near the aforesaid Lakes, there arose a new mountain called Monte Novo
a mile high in the upright, which now is in circuit at the bottom four mile. A
miraculous thing to fall out in one night. At the birth of this mountain the
shore and the waters of the Sea retired the space of two hundred spaces, one
great and entire town called Tripergolano, was entirely swallowed up by the
Vorago and gulf of the earth, with some of its baths which were very
celebrious: and the near Lakes Avernus and Lucrinus were almost filled up with
stones earth and ashes. This was thought to have proceeded from the ashes which
came out of Sulfatara: how many other old memorials this new mountain has
covered cannot be known. On the top of it is a large mouth about 50. paces in
circuit, which at the beginning vomited out fire, at the bottom whereof are
now found warm waters.

The Lake AVERNUS.
THe Lake * Avernus has been illustrated by the most esteemed Poets, and
diligently described by Strabo and other Historians, for the Fables sake (which
the Ancients gave credit to) appropriated to it. For this was consecrated to
Pluto the God of hell. Hereabouts as Fame went was the Poets Acheron or descent
into hell, and here was the gate of hell thorough which they caused to rise the
infernal Spirits, when any humane creature was sacrificed unto them. And hence
the Gimerian Priests (the ancient Inhabitants of this place sent down (by
certain Caverns) into hell to find Pluto, such Travelers and strangers as came
to be resolved in any questions, or to receive counsel or answer from Pluto. To
this day the vulgar believe, that through the Caverns in the neighboring hill,
(hence denominated Monte della Sibylla) one may descend to the subterranean
residence of the Sibylla Cumana, and that there she is seen and consulted by
many, which things Leandrus Albertus in his Italia diligently advertiseth.
Lactantius says that she among the other Sybils prophesyed of Christ. The
Inhabitants further hold for certain, that Christ returning from Limbus with
the souls of the holy Fathers, arose out of the earth through a certain
mountain near the Lake Averuus and the Monte Novo, and therefore they call that
Mountain by the name of Monte di Christo: which opinion some old Poets confirm,
writing of the Baths of Pozzuolo. Est locus, effregit quo portas Christus Averno
Et sanctos traxit lucidus inde Patres.
And another. Est locus Australis, qua Portam Christus Averni.
Fregit, et eduxit mortuos inde suos.


It Was also believed by the multitude of hot waters springing out all over those
quarters, that this Lake reached to a vein of the infernal waters, and
therefore called Palude Acherosia, the Acherontick Fenns, from which Maro
disagrees not, when he says. Quando hic inferni janua regis.
Dicitur, et tenebrosa Palus, Acheronte refuso.


Though in truth this false opinion was augmented by the natural quality of the
places, and other circumstances: to wit some rare and stupendous miracles
which have there come to pass. Then as to the Avernus, know it lies in a low
Valley, almost surrounded by high hills, clothed of old with thick and heavy
Trees capable to keep out the wind.

Whence the Lake was not frequented by any, but emitting an unwholesome
sulphurous stink, it so infected the air above it (by being so closely (...) by
mountains and woods) that Birds flying over it fell down dead: and thence it was
named by the Latins Avernus, that is to say, without Birds. So also may we
collect from Livy, that in old time this Vale was a horrid place and esteemed
altogether inaccessable: for says he, the Romans waging war against the
Samniti, the enemies (when the Romans put them to flight) by whole Armies
retreated into the Woods in the said Vale, as to secure places.

But Strabo writes not so of it in his time, but says, that then this vale and
nearer hills were delitious places, in respect Augustus had caused the woods to
be felled, and a free passage opened to the air. At present the Lake is full of
fish and water-foul, nor has it any of those incommodities attributed to it by
the ancients. Yet it is true that not many ages since, a vein of sulphurous
pestilential water gushed out of the bottom of the Lake, which suddenly killed
a world of fish, their color and smell (being cast on the earth) confirming
that to be the cause of their death. Joannes Boccaccius in his little tract of
Lakes, says he saw it with his own eyes in the time of King Robert, about the
yeeer 1380.

The Sybil Cumana was she which gave AEneas free passage into hell, as Virgil
^aith; she was called Cumana of the City of Cuma, (here under treated of) and
was one of the twelve Sybils, all which prophesyed of Christ though some more
obscurely, yet two so fully that with submission I shall here insert somewhat
of their prophecies touching the Savior of Mankind.

SIBILLA CUMANA.
GReat Rome shall then look high.
Whose proud Towers from seven hills shall brave the sky,
And overlook the world. In those blessed days,
Shall come a King of Kings, and he shall raise
A new Plantation: and though greater far
Then all the Monarchs that before him are
In Majesty and power; yet in that day
So (...) and humble he shall daign to pay
Tribute to Caesar: yet thrice happy he,
That shall his subject or his servant be.
And the SIBILLA ERITHRAEA, to this effect.
THe times by the great Oracle assigned
When God himself in pity of mankind,
Shall from the heaven descend and be incarnate,
Entering the world a Lamb immaculate;
And as himself, in wisd^m thinks it meet,
Walk on the Earth on three and thirty feet. 33 feet denote years. 6 fin gers 6
months

And with six fingers all his subjects then
Though a King mighty, shall be Fishermen,
In number twelve; with these war shall be tried
Against the Devil, world, and flesh; their Pride,
Humility shall quell, and the sharp sword
With which they fight, shall be the sacred word,
Established upon Peter, which foundation
Once laid, shall be divulged to every Nation:
At one side of the Lake Avernus is the Temple of Apollo, at the other this
Sibilla Cumana her Grott, which is very spacious, having at the end a
magnificent ascent where the oracle stood, with the way that led to Cuma: Her
bath yet stands, and her Chambers painted in Mosaic wo^k; yet all under ground
as most of the aforesaid Antiquities (except the Temples) are.

CUMA.
Leaving the Lake Avernus, you find on the way among the ruins of the City
Cuma, (now altogether undone and desert) great foundations and ruins of
Towers, Temples and Edifices of importance. On the top of the mountain are yet
the footsteps of a Temple of Apollo, which in its time was infinitely
celebrated, and is taken notice of by Virgil and Servius his Commentator. There
is also an Arch built with brick, now called Arco Felice, the happy Arch, of a
stupendous high Vault, through which the ancients wrought an even way between
two heads of Mountains: Cuma was built by the Calcidensi a Grecian people of
Negroponte, who being arived in those Seas with their ships, to seek out a
Country for their habitation, first landed in those near Islands, called
Pitherusa, which lie over against Campania, and were so denominated from the
multitude of Apes thereon found: and afterw^rds taking cour^ge they passed over
into the Terra ^irma, where they built this City Cuma, calling her by this
name, either from one of their Captains so called, or from the Procurator in
those maritimate Coasts, or from its good augury they there met with, to wit a
woman great with child the which confirmed them in their determination to dwell
there, as Strabo Dionysius and Livy relate: for to all these senses Cuma in
Greek, (considering its significations) may be well applied.

These people lived a long time governing their Republique with prudence, and
increased so much, that Pozzuolo, Paleopoli, and Naples became part of their
Colony: we read that the Cumani were under Tyrants, before the Romans expelled
their Kings, but this happened not through their being subjugated by any, but
because they chose to themselves a head and chief to obey, who after the Greek
manner, was called Tyranno, that is, Lord, one of which was Aristodemo Malaco,
elected for his mere valor, as Livy and Dionysius Halicarnasseus write: for
that with a small party, he overcame a great nnmber of Tuscans, Ombrians and
Ausonians, enemies of the Cumani, and slew with his own hand Arunte, the Son of
Porsenna, their Captain. To which Aristodemns say the same Authors, Tarquinius
Superbus (expelled Rome) fled for safety, and by him being well accepted, he
ended his days in Cuma. Afterward the Cumani were overcome and for some time
evilly entreated by the Campani, says Strabo; but in subsequent times there
being no Forts strong enough to resist the Romans, all those people were at one
instant of time reduced under the said Romans, who set a Prefect over the City
Cuma, for that that people would too obstinately have fought for defense of
their Liberty. Afterward that City run retrograde, loosing its splendor and
inhabitants: for that the Romans by their greatness measuring their pride,
possessed themselves of all that Campania or Country, erecting therein their
luxurious and most sumptuous Palaces, which not only obscured Cuma but all the
adjacent Cities: who being bereaved of their Land, first failed of Inhabitants,
and at last became desolate, yet Cuma was the last of those Cities that
underwent this desolation; by reason that being built upon a mountain, when the
Roman Empire began to feel its tottering condition, by the frequent in roads of
the barbarous Nations into Italy, Cuma for the commodity of its site, was
reduced into a Fortress: which caused Agathia Mireneus in his first book of
the Gothic war, to say, that Cuma in his time was very strong, almost
impregnable through its many gross Towers, walls and other fortifications; and
that for this reason Totila and Teja Kings of the Goths, thither conveyed
their Treasure, as to a safe and secure place, together with their most
estimable and dearest things: however Narsetes the Legate of Justinian the
Emperor, after a long siedge made himself Lord of it

But at present naught hereof remains, save only immense ruins, foundations
and profound Ditches cut into the hard stony rock with Chisels. In the
departure from Cuma, you often fall upon parcels of the Via Domitiana, (now
interrupted in many places) and great Ruins of a stone Bridge, raised over the
Volturnus. Domitian cau sed this way to be made, beginning from the Via Appia,
between Minturue and Sinvessa, and so leading to Cuma: Statius Papinius in his
Hendecasillibi, or verses of eleven sillables, makes mention of Cuma, the above
named bridge, and a triumphal Arch of Marble placed on the same way: whereof no
fragments are now to be found.

LINTERNO. And why now called the Tower of the Country.
ON the left hand of the Via Domitiana lie vast ruins of the old City
Linternum, of old a Colony of the Romans, so in the midst of that it was called
the Tower of the Country Campania, which name it seems to have acquired from
the places old success, and was ennobled by the remainder of days which
Scipio Affricanus the Greater spent there, after his voluntary banishment from
his Country Rome: Who being ill treated by his Citizens, whom with their goods
and estates he had defended from their Enemies, and made them Lords of Spain
and Afric, in disdain of so great ingratitude, retired himself to his own
Palace in this place, that he might deprive his Country of himself living, and
of his assistance, by this means dealing with her as most ungrateful: after
his death commanding his body to be there entered, expressly forbidding his
bones to be transported to Rome, as Livy, Strabo, Valerius Maximus, Seneca and
many others relate. Pliny says further in the last Chapter of the sixteenth
book of his natural History, that even to his t^me they found in Linternum of
the Olive trees planted by Scipio Affricanus, and a ^irtle of a notable
largeness under which was a Cave inhabited by a Dragon the guardian of
Scip^oes Soul; from which fable arose this other, which the Inhabitants tell of
the Monte Massico, so renowned for the wines it produced, to wit tha^ in a
certain ^ave on the said mountain lay a Dragon, who slew and devoured all such
as approached to him, and that it was therefore called Monte Dragone and the
Castle standing thereon is called La Rocca di Monte Dragone. Iu these quarters
is a spring or fountain of which was wont to be sharp or sower water and as
it was said would intoxicate: ^ut now it has the taste of sweet and pure water,
and has not the said effect of inebriating, but when drunk cures the headache.

SINOPE or SINVESSA.
UNder the Castle Dragone stood the ancient City Sinope, first a Colony of the
Greeks, and afterward made a Colony by the Romans, calling it Sinvessa, when
they also made Min^nrnum a near City another Colony, by occasion of the war
they had against the Samniti, in the four hundred fifty seventh year after
Romes foundation, Appius Claudius, and L. Volturnius being Consuls, the latter
the second time, as Livius relates, or the following year when Pirrhus began to
reign, as Velleius Paterculus will have it.

Vast ruins of this City lie dispersed on every side there, but chiefly toward
the Sea, where the footsteps of a large port also appear. It Was a renowned City,
having a healthful air, and some salutiferous hot fountains, for which the
Poet Silius st^les Sinvessa luke warm: these fountains are now denominated
Bagni Gaurani, but Tacitus calls them Sinvessan waters, saying in the 12th book
of his Annals, that Claudius the Emperor being restored to his senses, caused
himself to be conveyed to Sinvessa for recovering his health, hoping and
depending much on the goodness of the air and the benefit of the Sinvessian
waters, when his wife Agrippina had prepared for him those poisoned mushrooms
which himself and his Son Brittanicus eat. This Agrippina was Daughter of the
noble Germanicus, Sister to Caligula, and by him abused, she was first married
to Domitius by whom she had Nero, afterward to Claudius whom with his Son as
aforesaid she poisoned, that her Son Nero might be Emperor. But her falsehood,
abomination and cruelty was not unpuni'sht by that Son, who though he had
joined her in equal authority with himself, and carnally known her as some
suppose, yet caused her to be most cruelly slain, after sundry attempts to do
it privately and with least trouble and pain to her. Tacitus says further in
the first book (speaking of the histories of his time) That Onofrius Tigillinus
one of the principal actors of Nero the Emperors misdeeds, had the wezel pipe
of his throat cut near the waters of Sinvessa, whilst disporting himself among
his Concubines he least thought of any such thing.

MINT URNE
The River Garigliano being passed, wherein the Scille or Seashrimp or prauns
are taken, a sweet little fish held very delitious by the Romans, you may see
the relics of Minturnae, of old a most flourishing Colony of the Romans: and
among them the footsteps of vast public and Private Fabrics, some despoiled
of the marble which embel^ished them, and some entire. As a very sumptuous
Aqueduct, a Theater with its Scenes and all other necessary parts, a work after
the ancient way of building but solid; An Amphitheatre with its accommodation
for sitting, one seat above another, but despoiled of its marble, wherewith for
ought appears, the (...) ^rajetto standing on the neighboring hill has been
adorned and fortified, which Amphitheater is now used as an enclosed pasturage
for goats and sheep. Therein lie great footsteps of Walls and Towers, great
arches over gates, and vast foundations of edifices, from whence we easily
collect, she has a been potent and noble City.

This place has acquired an illustrious fame also from that great victory,
which the Christians there obtained against the Saracens and Infidels, under
the Captains of the Christian Army, Pope John the 10 and Albericus Marquess of
Tuscany, when all Italy was delivered from that cursed people, except Monte
Gargano, whither such as could escape, fled and possessed it a long time after,
robbing both by sea and land.

At the mouth of the river Garigliano, was the sacred wood, where the
Minturnesi, honored the Nymph or Goddess Marica the wife of Faunus, to whom
on the banks they built a proud Temple, whereof naught now remains, no more
then of the honorable City Venista, or of Ausonia a most noble City, which was
so named of Auson the Son of Ul^sses and Calypso, which City afterward gave
name to all Italy, over all which it also Lorded: which Cities stood in those
parts along the aforesaid river.

LE PALVDI MINTVRNESI.
THe adjacent Fenns now Medows called Minturnesi, are famous for that they
reduce to memory a notable example of the various changes of Fortune: which was
that C. Marius who had been seven times Consul, and had seven times
triumphed, had the good hap to abscond himself therein for saving his life;
where notwithstanding he was found by a Frenchman an Enemy, but one that had
not the boldness to offend him, being terrified and put to fear by the
Majestic aspect, and noble presence of that great man. Whence Marius (having
reached a ship) passed into Afric, whereof Juvenal speaks concisely in these
words. Exilium, and carcer, Minturnarumque palludes,
Et mendicatus victa Carthagine panis.


FORMIA.
Thence the Via Appia leads by Hercoleana to Formia, which way is very
pleasant, but the Castle Mola now stands near if not in the place where Formia
of old stood; Mola takes its name from the many Mills grinding in that quarter,
by reason of the quantity of water. The Country is such, that a more delicious
cannot be fancied, wherefore Martial says. O temperatae dulce Formiae littus!
And a little after follows. Hic summa legistringitur Thesis vento.
Nec languet aequor, viva sed quies Ponti*


Volaterrann^s and others well skilled believe, that here was the Villa
Formiana, appertaining to Cicero, famous for his slaughter there, which opinion
cannot well be contradicted, because the Epitaphs, inscriptions, and relics
of antiquity, on the Appia and near Towns, demonstrate that the City Formia was
there, but chiefly these words to be read on the basis of a Statue (in that
place) following. Imp. Caesari Divi Hadriani Filio Divi Trajani. Parthici. Nep.
Divi. Nervae. Pronepoti* Tito AElio. Hadriano Antonino. Aug. Pio. Pont. Max.
Tr. Pont. XI. Cos. III. II. P. P. Formiani. Public.

Strabo, Pliny, Solinus and other historians concurring say, that the
Lacedaemonians built Formia in the ancient Territories of the Lestrigoni and
therefore Silius Italicus calls it the house of Antifata, because there
Antifata the Son of Janus and Nephew of Neptune ruled over the Lestrigoni, and
first called it Hormia which in their Language signified a comodious port,
which that was. The Lacedaemonians were afterward subjugated by the Campani,
and they by the Romans, who reduced that with Capua into the form of a
Prefecture, yet leaving Formia in Liberty, or free, and making her participate
of the Roman honors for some time as Livins in his 33 book: at last in the
civil wars, Formia was made a Roman Colony, and reduced with many others in
Italy, into Castles and Forts as Frontinus says, by the Triumvirate, Caesar,
Antonius, and Lepidus. It Was most flourishing in the time of the Emperors
through the goodness of the air it in joyed, as Horace, Martial and other
authors worthy credit relate, which may also be conjectured from the more noble
structures now extant. In the end the Saracens dest^oyed it, with many other
Cities in Campania or the Terra di Lavoro, when Pope Gregory the 4th.
translated the Fpiscopacy to Gaiela. And thus then pursues the Via Appia
leading to Fondi.

VELLETRI.
VElletri was an ancient and potent Castle of the Volsci, whereof the Roman
histories frequently speak: Livius and Dionysius Hallicarnasseus say, that
Velletri was besieged and enforced to yield to Ancus Martius King of the
Romans: and Livy adds further, that it was severely chastised by the Romans for
its frequent rebellions, wherefore the walls were levelled, and the richer sort
of Velletri sent to dwell beyond the Tyber, with penalty of imprisonement to
whosoever should set foot on this side Tiber within a mile of Velletri. This
Castle was also made a Colony of the Romans, and many times replenisht with new
Inhabitants sent thither from Rome, because the old (in the many wars made on
those confines) became impotent and much decreased as Livy affirms. Frontinus
in his Fragmenta says, that he finds many people by precept of the Sempronian
Law, to have been at sundry times sent from Rome to Velletri, and that
afterward Claudius Caesar, made it a Military Colony, dividing his own
Territory among the Soldiers. It Was renowned, because the Ancestors of Caesar
Augustus were of old Inhabitants in it, that is the Octavian Family, and the
same Augustus had a certain noble Seat of his own there, from whence says
Suetonius, he caused many things necessary for sustenance and livelihood to be
conveyed.

Yet now remain very few marks of the old Fabrics, notwithstanding that it is
yet a great and well inhabited Castle. It has a lovely Territory replenisht
with gardens and Palaces through its vicinity with Rome, Pliny in his 14th.
book reckons the wine of Velletri, among the most generous, but it is not now
in that credit, being so crude at present, that they are fain to boil it in a
caldron, to make it drinkable: wherefore Pliny well observes, that even the
Earth has its age and decays as have all other things.

In the voyage present themselves to view, Lanuvium or Lanuvio, a place famous
for the Temple there dedicated to Juno Sospita. The Riccia or Agritia built by
the Sicilians, afterward made the Seat of Alba Longa. The mountain so much
spoken of for the Temple consecrated to Jupiter, and the Latins Feast days
there celebrated. Some Lakes which lie under it. The Hill Albano so fatal to
the Vejenti. The Nemorese famous for the barbarous sacrifices there performed
to Diana Taurica, and Hippolitus Urbius. In sum all that tract of Land is
worthy contemplation for the many records taken of it among writers. The
frequent ruins of great Fabrics lying up and down the Country Tusculanum,
where Cicero, Varro, and diverse other noble Romans had their Palaces, deserve
due consideration: as do the Country seats of the tenn Cardinals, and above
all the fair Villa of Frescati, a place deputed to the Popes recreation: The
Territory of Frescati, was the ancient delight of the Romans, and continues now
of such ravishing delights, as it is fitter for the Gods to in habit then men*
such is the quantity of trees the quality of verts always flourishing, the
murmuring of Fountains and the like.

PELESTINA.
Upon a mountain on the right hand stands Pelestrina the Ancient Seat of the
Aborigini, a people who first possessed the Country about Rome, living abroad
without houses: of the original of this City is no certain knowledge to be had,
being lost through its antiquity, but thereof diverse are the opinions. Virgil
in his seventh (by authority of the Chronicles of the Prenestini) says, that
Caeculus the Son of Vulcan founded it: whose mother sitting by the fire side a
spark happened to light into her lap, by which she said she was concerved with
Child: when her full time was come she was delivered of a Son, whom because he
had very small eyes, she called Caecu^. Of him the noble Family of Cecilians in
Rome would need have their beginning deriving, their Original from him as their
first stock.

Soli^s by authority of Ze^odotus says that it was built by Praenestus the Son
of Latin^s and Nephew of Ulisses: Plutark in his parallels by authority of
Aristotle in the third of Italian things says, that Telogonus the Son of
Ulisses by Circe the witch, after he had built Tusculum, by advisement of the
Oracle called it Preneste from the name of the Crowns wherewith he first saw
the Inhabitants of the Country to dance: but be it as some say from the said
Praenestus or as others will from the situation of the place, a little
pendent, or as others from the scites being so high, it is indifferent, since the
name Preneste will easily accommodate it self to all or either of these
respects.

Yet the more rational opinion for the name, seems to be derived from the
Crowns aforementioned, not only for the aforesaid cause but also for that in
that City there stood a most noble Temple of Fortune, famous for those diviners
by Lots, who exercised themselves in that superstition: and was therefore
visited with many Crowns offered to the said Goddess by vow: of which Temple
some fragments yet remain, and a few years since, were there found diverse
figures of Fortune, in brass, brick, marble and other materials, as also
several Crowns, and diverse medals, upon which were figured the various lots,
fortunes, and chances, with their marks, signs, and letters.

In it also hung diverse Tablets and other things offered by vow to Fortune,
Jove, Hope, and to the Capudini, which things would take up too much room to
recite, yet one Epigram will not be too impertinent, since so eminently
inscribed on a marble basis, dedicate in that Temple by T. Caesius Taurinus,
with the figure of T. Cesius the first his Father, the most famous Merchant of
Corn, who used every year to present a hundred Crowns by vow. On the said Basis
are carved two measures, called Modii, half bushels filled with ears of corn,
on the sides are some little pillars crowned with ears of corn, and in the
middle is the ensuing Epigram. Tu, quae Tarpeio coleris vicina Tonanti,
Votorum vindex semper Fortuna meorum
Accipe, quae pietas ponit tibi dona merenti,
Effigiem nostri conservatura Parentis.
Cujus ne taceat memorandum littera nomen
Cesius hic idemque ritus Primusque vocatur
Qui largae Cereris messes, fructusque renatos
Digerit in pretium cui constat fama fidesque,
Et qui divitias vincit, Pudor ille perillos.
Consuetus portus cura studioque laboris
Littora qui praestant fessis tutissima nautis.
Notus in urbe sacra, notus quoque finibus illis
Quos Umber sulcare solet, quas Iuscus arator
Omnibus his annis votorum more suorum
Centenas addit numero cresente coronas
Fortunae simulacra coleris, and Apollinis aras
AEgeriumque Jovem, quoruum consentit in illo
Majestas longae promit ens tempora vitae
Accipe posteritas quod post tua saecula narres.
Taurinus cari jussus pietate parentis
Hoc posuit donum, quod nec sententia mortis
Vincere, nec poterit fatorum summa Potestas,
Sed Populi salvo semper rumore manebit.


Cicero declares in his second Book de Divinatione, by extraction out of the
Books of the said people Prenestini, how the observation of Chances Lots or
Fortunes came to have its beginning in that City: saying, that a certain
nobleman of Pelestrina named Suffucius by frequent advices and menaces which he
had in his dreams, was commanded to break out of a certain place a great flint
stone, whereat all the other Citizens his Compatriots fell a laughing, but when
the stone was broke, the Lots or Chances suddenly leaped forth engraven in
ancient Letters, which occasioned their honoring of Fortune in that place: and
thence became the place by little and little enclosed and shut up through
respect of the Image of Jupiter there devoutly adored by the Matrons, in form
of a boy child sitting with Juno in the lap of Fortune, in a posture as
seeking out the breast and teat: and that at the same time, after the Temple of
Fortune was built, there dropped honey from an olive tree, wherewith by
commandment of the Southsayers was made a chest, and therein those Lotts were
reposed, the which were mingled and drawn out by a little boys hand when ever
they would see the issue of any thing: as Fortune had at large directed her
intention to be, that after this manner they should draw out the Lots.

This observation was most ancient, and such as affirm L. Sylla to be the
builder of this Temple deceive themselves. Which error they took up from their
reading the thirty sixth book of Pliny, who does not say L. Sylla built that
Temple but that he began to make its pavement with small stones of various
colors in small figures, of which. pavement thus wrought, some years since
certain parts were found under ground, and therein figured many foreign
creatures with their names in greek.

It may then be rationally believed that L. Sylla being victorious in the civil
wars, after he had enforced C. Marius the younger to dye, and his other
enemies who had saved themselves in Preneste, after a long siege took the City,
killing some part and selling others of the Citizens: but repenting afterward
his impiety expressed against the sacred places, for expiation of that crime,
he resolved to restore and embellish anew the Temple profaned and almost wholly
destroyed by him. It seems a notable advise and observation to me, that the
strength of the site of this City has occasioned its own destruction, which
has had a much contrary event in all other strong holds. The cause whereof is
attributed to the assured confidence of the strength of the place, for which
cause in the civil wars the weaker part ordinarily fled thither for safety:
but their enemies being stronger and more potent immediately laid siege to it,
so that at the end if they surrendered not themselves the besiegers ruined the
poor City: whence we read that in the following times of civil discord the
Pelestrini that they might not undergo so great misery as formerly they had
done, abandoned their City and retired to their dwellings.

To this day appear there many subterranean ways from the Castle to the foot
of the adjacent mountains, (besides the Caves used as conservatories for water)
which were made for introducing of assistance, or to fly the City occultly:
into one of which C. Marius the younger having withdrawn himself, and
perceiving himself to be beseiged on all sides, so that he could not fly, that
he might not living fall into the hands of his enemies, agreed with Telesinus
to run one against the other with their naked swords so to kill themselves: by
which means Telesinus was slain, but Mvrius remained alive thorugh desperately
wounded, and soon after caused one of his Se^vants to make an end of his then
begun death, by killing him. From which successes, the Inhabitants of the place
believe the stones of those subterranean ways to be still reddish with the
blood spilt there: which yet is not so, for over all those hills are stones red
by nature, and not through any accident of blood spilt thereon.

Preneste was first a free City and confederate with the Romans, having its own
Praetor as Livy and Festus declare calling her Municipal. Appianus says that
the Prenestini at the time of the Italian war were made Citizens of Rome with
the ^iburtini; but some time after L. Sylla, victorious (as Cicero, speaks, in
Catalines conspiracy) having emptied this City by slaughters and banishments,
and deprived her of inhabitants by the many expulsions, slaughters and
banishments he made of them, there remained so few inhabitants that he sent of
the Romans to dwell there, dividing its Territory among the new comers, and
thus made it a Roman Colony. Aulus Gellius says in the third Chapter of his
16. book that afterward the Prenestini obtained of Tiberius Augustus a
restoration to their first state, that is into the condition of free Citizens,
having the form of a Colony wholly amoved from their City.

TIVOLI.
WHen arrived at Tivoli, first go see those gardens which Hippolitus Estense
Cardinal of Ferrara, planted with so much cost many years since upon the back
of the mountain, together with a proud Palace, which also is beautifyed with
old statues, Pictures and royal household stuff, even to the emulation of the
greatness and magnificence of the Ancients.

But who is able with sufficiency ever to display in words the exquisite
delights, costs and pleasure, wherewith this place and palace is plentifully
furnished? and who shall relate the Labyrinths, the Groves, the half circles,
the triumphant Arches, the Arches laden with old statues, the Caverns of the
Nymphs, and the innumerable fountains which every where sprout forth waters,
the close walks, and beautiful arbours covered with trees, herbs, and tender
branches and other like verts.

Ubertus Folieta of Genoua heretofore described it most graciously, But Corona
Pighio cannot satiate himself with praising of it, who published descriptions
of that Palace and the gardens in Rome stamped from brass cuts, the view
whereof in my opinion may draw as many persons to behold it, as Rome does with
all its wonders. Although we have scarce courage enough, yet conformable to
that published Table will we cursorily describe it, for satisfaction of such as
have not had the good fortune to see them, or at least their draught in
picture. First then the Hill is levelled at top, and upon the plain thereon is
erected the Palace, built of square stones with the grandeur and magnificence
of a Royal palace, and with exquisite art and proportion.

On the right hand whereof lie enclosed gardens, called Secreti, and therein
sixteen great marble Goblets emit clear waters, in the midst whereof sits a
Janus Quadrifrons, with four faces, higher raised then those goblets, which
makes four other fountains adorned like looking glasses: and on the right hand
a Tennis Court, and other sumptuous places for exercise. The forefront has
between the windows many old statues of Marble, as has the first Porticue,
from which lead two fair stone staire-cases up into the palaces.

Before this Porticue in the midst of a Piazza stands a Leda, which Leda was
wife of Tyndarus King of Laconia with whom as Poets feign Jupiter accompanying,
she brought forth two eggs, of the one whereof came Pollux and Helena,
(ravished by Paris) of the other Castor and Clytemnestra. Thence the hill (a
pleasant descent) is reduced into four long Piazzaes and so levelled contains
before the front of the palace four great and spacious gardens, into each of
which at each end and in the middle, three pair of stone stairs (artificially
composed) conduct by a facile descent, whose sides are bathed by diverse purling
streams, running toward their Lakes. Every garden is divided in its orders,
has places to sit in, and fair collumnes erected in diverse parts, so that such
as go walking from one part to another, through places and passages covered
over with leaves and vines, and other verts always flourishing, enjoy a most
beautiful prospect and no less sweet odours from the circumjacent flowers
which make a pompous show. In the appartments grows fresh grass, which with
the flowers by their variety wonderfully entertain the eye and fancy of whoever
regard them, nor can any satiate himself in the view of those infinite and
wonderful statues, pillars, Fountains and other objects there presenting
themselves.

The passage from the Piazza before the Palace on the right hand leads through
diverse walks, trees and small groves, wherein are placed several Fountains, as
that of Tothyde, that of AEsculapius, that of Nigga, that of Aretusa, and
Pandora, and that of Pomona and Flora. In the descent into the first garden,
shows it self the Colossus of Pegasus in Pamosso, a horse feigned to have
wings, under whose shadow a fair Fountain casts up her waters very high and
in the wood and rocks is a Cavern, and near them a statue of Venus and Bacchus:
near which. is a Lake, into which some rivolets run among rocks with a murmuring
noise between two Colossus, one of the Sibilla Tiburtina, the other of
Melicerta the son of Athamas and Ino, whom the Gentiles did honor for one of
the Gods of the Sea. Below which lie the statues of the Rivers Aniene, and
Herculano, conjoined to certain vessels out of which some waters run into the
Lake, as also out of the Urns, round which stand ten Nymphs. In the midst are
two Grotts, the one of the Sibilla Tiburtina, the other of Diana the Goddess
of the woods, both which are adorned with fountains, statues, Curral, mother of
Pearl, and a pavement exactly wrought with mosaic work. On the other side of
the garden you have a fair prospect of Rome in a semicircle, round which appear
her most memorable Fabrics; and in the midst sits Rome in the habit of a
warlike Goddess, between her seven hills: this statue is of marble, bigger
then a man, in shape of a Virgin in a short girt coat, with naked hands,
military buskins, and a sword hanging in a belt from the right shoulder. Her
head is covered with a murrion, in her right hand she holds a spear, in the
left a shield: she sits as aforesaid in the midst of her wonders in the City
and on every side appear her sacred Fabrics, as the Pantheon, the Capitolian
Temples, the Circs, the Theaters, the Amphitheatres, the Collumnes, the
Obelisks, the Mauseoli, the Arches Triumphant, the Pyramides, the Acqueducts,
the Baths, the River Tyber, with the wolf and Twin Brothers pouring water into
the City out of an urn; in the midst of which running waters, rises an Island
cut in the shape of a ship which bears on the main yard an Obelisk, and the
ship seems to be laden with these four Temples, the Temple of AEsculapius in
the poope, and those of Jupiter, Berecinta and Faustus, it bears in the prow.

Thence descending to the lower garden, you find on the left hand in a semy
circle called the great, a green grove, placed between certain Rocks amid which
run fountains this may be called the residence for birds: for on the arms of
the trees you see many images of little birds singing more sweetly then the
natural, who clap their wings as if alive, receiving their motion from the air
and the waters with miraculous artifice, by means of certain little reeds hid
in the arms of the trees: sometimes to please the spectators, they will make a
screech owl to appear, and then on a sudden as if the birds were sensible of
fear, they are all silent, but that again withdrawn, in an instant they all
begin their notes and sing most melodiously.

In the middle of this garden is a round standing water Lake, and in it a
capacious vessel and a fountain named from the Dragons, which vomit out of
their throats great store of waters, having trumpets in their hands which also
emit plentiful waters, with a horrid noise imitating the sound of the trumpet.
On the right hand lies the Grotto of Nature adorned with many statues, and in
it an Organ with fair pipes, the which perform an harmonious consort of various
and artificial music, by the motion of the waters.

The next garden is not only beautifyed by the fair fountains, but by the
quantity of Swans, and fish preserved in their several stations separated with
rare artifice. In the three greater fountains are certain Beacons, called
Sudanti, and other boundaries round them, which cast water very high in such
quantities, that in their fall they seem natural showers, refreshing the air,
and cooling the earth making noise of waters in their fall, as if the winds
were high, sprinkling and washing at a good distance. In the midst of these
conserves you see the effigies of the great Father Oceanus placed in a
semicircle like a Theater, and in the middle thereof a marble chariot like that
of the Venus Marina, drawn by four Sea horses, on which sits a great Neptune
seeming to threaten with his Trident.

Lastly descending into the last garden near the rock, you find in one part a
Fountain of Triton, and on the other a Fountain of Venus Clonina, and in the
rest of the level besides the Pescheries, four Labyrinths difficult enough for
any one to get out of that's once in, placed one by another in four
compartments amidst foreign plants. The entrance and outlet of these gardens,
are embellisht with great Fabrics built of Tiburtine stone, with great
expense. Thus much concerning the Villa of Tivoli, of Cardinal Hippolito E
stense.

The noble sepulcher of Cardinal Hippolito da Este in the Church will
recompense your pains in the sight of it, being composed with marble of various
colors, on it stands a great white marble statue of the said Cardinal of great
cost and fair appearance. The Castle also affords many worthy objects, but what
is more considerable, is the precipitous descent of the River; which falls with
such noise and fury from high cliffs of mountains, that for the most part its
vapors render the air foggie, and many times at a distance there seem to hang
celestial rainbowes, clouds being at most times over it. This River infamed by
the writings of the ancient, takes its rise at the mountain of the Trebani, and
runs into three noble Lakes. which give name to the adjacent castle, called
Sublaco: which Lakes Tacitus seems to call Simbrivini, saying in the 14th. Book
of his Annals, that near them stood the Villa Sublacense of Nero in the
confines of Tivoli, from which Lakes the Aniene running afterward through woods
and mountains, falls at last in the plain near Tivoli, from high stones, with
fury and noise, then it goes some space under ground, and at the foot of the
mountain returns all again above ground, it runs through the three sulphurious
veins, called Albule, from their white color. It Is said, and Strabo confirms
the water there to be medicinal in drinking or Bathing, and Pliny writes that
they heal the wounded. Nor does the Albule only but also the Albunea above
Tivoli consolidate wounds. Regarding the Campania of Tivoli, about the Aniene
you will find huge stones increased by little and little in long time by virtue
of the waters running by, and in the bottom of Lakes there you will find of hard
stones generated by the same means.

In this confine are many footsteps of old edifices worthy contemplation:
Tivoli having been a most noble City, and well Inhabited through the beauty of
its site, the goodness of its soil, and the salubrity of the air: which
made it be surrounded with the fair Villa's, and Lordly houses of the rich
persons of that Country, although now like Rome, and all Italy also it lies
waste and ruinated by the various wars and successes which have destroyed it.
It Is certain that Greeks were the builders of this City, but who they were is
not certain, the writers of the Italian antiquities not agreeing herein: yet
the greater part say that Catillo was its founder, who some say was of Arcadia,
and Captain of Evanders Navy. Others affirm Argiv^s the son of Amfiardo the
Southsayer, after the prodigious death of his Father near Thebes, came by
command of the oracle with his family and Gods (long before the Trojane war)
into Italy: and by the assistance of the Enotri, Aborigeni, drove the Sic^li
out of that place, naming the Castle taken from them Tib^re, from his eldest
sons name. Nor does Pliny much disagree from this, though he does not wholly
agree with it: for in the 16th of his natural History writing of the ages of
Trees he says, that in his time there stood 3 Holme Trees by Tivoli, near to
which Tiburtio the builder of that Castle, had received augure to build it. But
says he was the Nephew not the Son of Amfiardo and that he came with his two
Brothers Lora and Catillo one age before the Trojane war, and that he there
caused the Castle to be built, calling it after his own name because he was the
elder, in which opinion Virgil, in his AEneides seems to concur: but Horati^s
on the other part calls Tivoli the walls of Catillus pursuing the others
opinion: from which expressions we conjecture that the City Tivoli, was before
Rome. Those of Tivoli held Hercules in reverence above the other idols, as
Protector of the Grecian people, at whose festivity infinite people resorted
thither.

In it was also a Temple for the Sorti, lotts or chances no less famous for
their oracles then that in Bura, or in Achaia a country of Morea, mentioned by
Pausanias: whence the Poet Statius says, that such was the beauty of the place
that even the Sorti Prenestini would have chosen it for giving their answers,
had not Hercules first possessed the place.

Th^se are his words. Quod que in templa d^rent alias Tyrinthia sorts,
Et Prenestinae poterant migrare sorores.


He calls the Sorti Sisters; for that good and bad Fortune were reverenced as
two Sisters. It Is thought that Temple under the mountain in the way of Tivoli,
was that famous Temple of Hercules: but this people had another Temple dedicate
to the same God, yet called Hercules Saxanus, as appears by the subsequent
inscription found in a Piazza attaqued to a particular house. Herculi Saxano
sacrum
Ser. Sulpicius. Trophimus
AEdem. Zothecam. Culinam
Pecunia sua a Solo Restituit
Eidem. Dieavit. K. December.
L. Tupilio Dextro. M. Maccio Rufo. Cos.
Euthycus. Ser. Peragendum Curavit


But we cannot conclude with certainty where this other Temple stood: yet many
agree that it was called Hercules Saxanus, in respect it was built with stone
differing from the other greater Temple: just as the Milanesi, called one
Hercules in Pietra, from the situation of that Church in a stony place near
them. Upon the stone arises a certain ancient round Fabric without covering,
built wi^h marble in rare architecture of much esteem, which possibly might be
the Temple of Hercules Saxanus: it is near the Cataracts which augments this
suspicion; for that the Ancients usually placed their Temples consecrate to
Hercules near waters, long ports, and violent falls of waters, to the end that
Hercules by them esteemed the Protector of the firm Land, might cause the water
to continue in its limits, and not infest the country with inundations: the
which Statius clearly shewsin the 11th. Book of woods, speaking of the Villa
(...) of his Pollius, which stood on the sea shore near a port with a Temple of
Hercules, and another of Neptune near it: whose verses now take. Ante domum
tumidae moderator caerulus undae
Excubat innocui custos laris, Hujus amico
Spumant Templa salo, foelicia jura tuetur
Alcides, gaudet gemino sub nomine portus,
Hic servat terras, hic saevis fluctibus obstat.


He feigns also in his third book, that Hercules, having laid aside his arms,
labored much in preparing the foundations of his Temple in that place, and
with great strength prepa^ed the instruments for digging the earth; for thus
the Pagans or Gentiles believed, viz, that Hercules, during his life went
through the world, operating for the public good of Mankind, what ever was
difficult or laborious to be effected; as not only in the taming and killing of
Monsters, ^emoving Tyrants, reducing unjust Lords to the terms and conditions
of Justice, and chastising the bad and evil ones: But also in building of
Castles and Cities in desert places, ports and securities for shipping on
dangerous shores, reducing bad and irksome ways into good, changing the
channels of damnifying Rivers, breaking the course of the waters where
requisite, for preservatio^ of the firm Land: settling peace between disagreeing
nations with just Laws, opening the method and way of dealing and negotiating
between people far eloigned from one another: and insum reducing into a state
of civility such as were wild and fierce: wherefore they built him Temples,
created him a God, and devoutly honored him, giving him several surnames
according to the diversity of the places where they adored him, or the quality
of the benefits which the people held they received from him, or according to
some great work which they supposed he had done. Whence the western parts of
the world had Hercules Gaditani, when on the north side of the straight called
of old Fretum Herculeum, was Mount Calpe, on the South Mount Abila, on which
Hercules placed his so memorable pillars, with the inscription Nil ultra:
because that was then conceived to be the most western bound of the world. But
Charles the 5th: after the discovery of America coming that way, caused Plus
ultra to be engraven either on the same Pillars or on new, erected in their
places. The Batani, called him Monaco. The Genovesi, Banlio. Those of the Terra
di Lavoro, Surrentino. and they of Tivoli, called him Tivolesse and Saxanus.
The Tivolesi, were such Friends to Hercules, that they called their City
Herculea, as if the whole were especially consecrated to him, and in the palace
of Tivoli they honored Hercules just as Jupiter was honored in the Campi doglio
at Rome, and the heads or chief of the public Council and of the Priests, were
called in Tivoli, Hercoleani, being of great dignity: a thing clearly
demonstrable by certain inscrip tions and Epitaphs extant in ancient marbles,
whereof ensue some for the service and advantage of the studious in antiquity.

In the Church of S. VICENZO in TIVOLI.
Herculi Tiburt. Vict. Et. Cereris. dis. Praet. Tiburt. L. Minicius Natalis Cos
Augur. Leg. aug. Pr. Pr. Provinciae. Moesiae Infer. Votis Susc.
In the ascent of the mountain in a Fragment on the way.
G. Sestilius V. V. Tiburtium Lib. Ephebus Herculanius Augustalis
In the great Church.
C. Albius. Livillae. L. Thymelus, Herc. Augustalis.
The tenth Sybil named by the Latins Tibuclina and Albunea by the Graecians
Leucothea, was held in great honor in Tivoli in old time: for they adored her
as a Goddess consecrating to her a wood a Temple and a Fountain called after
her own name Albunea, from the whiteness of its waters, above Tivoli, in that
mountain where Fame says she was born and gave answers to demandants: of whom
Virgil speaks and Servius his Commentator, as also Horace, with his
Interpreters. It Is reported that the Romans going about to deifie Augustus
Caesar, demanded advise of this Sybil, who after three days fast, standing
before the Altar, where the Emperor himself was then present, after many hidden
words miraculo^sly spoken concerning Christ, upon the sudden Heaven opened,
and Caesar saw a beautiful Virgin standing before the Altar, who held as
lovely an infant in her arms, at which apparition Caesar affrighted fell on his
face: and a voice as from Heaven was heard saying this is the Altar of the Son
of God. In which place was after built a Temple dedicated to the Virgin Mary
called Ara Caeli the Altar of heaven. This Policronion affirms, and for the
truth thereof cites S. Augustine. lib 18. cap. 24. She Prophesied of the coming
of Christ, after the recital of the sea. ven wonders of the world to this
purpose. What at these trifles stands the world amazed?
And has on them with admiration gazed?
Then wonder! When the troubled world to appease
He shall descend, who made them that made these.


These things being seen, march toward Rome, and leaving the Road a little on
the left hand, bestow a view on the Elia Tiburtina, which was the Villa of
Hadrianus the Emperor, seated on a little hill, which now at present shows the
countenance of a great ruinated City: the footsteps of so vast edifices
stupifie the beholders, hardly dispensing with any belief that it could ever
have been but one single Villa or princely seat. There may yet be found the
ruins of many Palaces, Houses, Temples, Porticues, Acqueduct^, Bathing houses,
hot baths, Theaters, Amphitheaters, and in sum, of all other kind of Fabrics
whatsoever imaginable for supreme delights and pleasures. Among the rest you will
find a very high wall drawn long-waies against the South two stades in length,
which Wall has always on the one side the shade, and on the other the Sun; so
that it is most comodious for walking by, or for any other exercise either in the
shade or in the Sun, according to the necessity or humor of the person at all
times. The vast ruins of this Villa, speak not alone the immense charge
Hadrianus was at in building the same, but Spartianus also declares it in the
life of Adrian, saying, that he in that his Villa caused draughts or as we may
better say the similitudes of the most celebrious places of the world to be
made, causing them afterward to be called after the proper names of the
imitated places: as among others, the Licenm, Aristotle's School in Athens, the
Academy of Cicero, the Prytaneum or counsel house of Athens, the Temple of
Thessalia, a place wonderfully pleasant having trees and meadows marvellously
delectable, wherein birds of diverse kinds sing continually with excellent
melody: the Canopus of Egypt, a place wherein the God of that name was
worshipped; and the like Fabrics made and nominated in imitation of the true.
He further says, that he there caused to be erected the place or
representation of hell: all which things were undoubtedly accomodated and
adorned with all conveniences and endowments, so that one might well comprehend
at the first view, that, which in it self comprehended every one, that is
Pictures, Statues, Figures, Inscriptions, pourtrayes of men, wherewith every of
those places were illustrated, either with some notable writing, or heroic
action. Which ornaments are all ruinated and dispersed, part by the rage of
war, and part by the incivility of the barbarous people, invading Italy, who
there showed not the least respect. Not long since in the fields of Tivoli,
were found many figures, and statues, taken without doubt from this Villa, and
applied to diverse fabrics in the adjacent Country: many also have been found
among the ruins of the said Villa under ground, and among others some carcases
of men with their names in greek letters, as of Themistocles, Miltiades,
Isocrates, Heraclitus, Carnea^les, Aristogiton, an orator of Athens, who for
his lewd behavior was c^lled Dog, with others, whose tronks or bodies possibly
and credibly Pope Julius the third caused to be got together and conveyed to
Rom^, for beautifying his gardens: being advised of this their accidental
coming to hand by Marcellus Cervinus, Cardinal of Santa Croce, a Lover of the
studious: the which his Sainctety afterward put in good order with great
expense in the Via Flaminia, on the this side the Ponte Milvio.

Being freed from the ruins of the Villa Elia, you travel to Rome by the Via
Tiburtina, along which appear some antiquities worthy observation; and among
others on the Banks of the River Aniene, is a great (...), a grand Fabric
erected for the Scpulehre of the Family of the Pla^i Silv^ni both noble and
ancient, and framed of large square marble stones, near the bridge which
conjoines on the one and other side of the River the ancient Road; and is
vulgarly called the Ponte Lucano, the reason of which name is not facilly
known, but in some speeches it is called Ponte Pla^to* and some suppose that way
was set out and the bridge likewise built by those noble and triumphant
Plau^it, whose names we find engraven on the said Tomb: chiefly for that
Suetonius testifies it was the custom by order of Augustus for the victorious
Captains, to accomodate the Roads with the spoils taken from the enemies, to
which. he ^onnexeth this other conjecture, that is, that in the third elogie of
P. Plinius (of whose memorial or Epitaph, though a part be fallen in his
Mauseolus or Tomb, yet enough remains to satisfy the studio^s in antiquity) we
read among other Titles of honor, that this was not omitted, viz. That by the
command of T. Cl^udius Caesa^, he was elected by the neighborhood Pr^rator for
accomodating the Road, or high wal^s.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE ISLAND OF SICILIA OR SICILY.
Sicilia is an Island of the Mediterranean Sea, seated betwixt Italy and
Afric, but between the South and West it is separated from Italy by a neck of
the sea. Its form resembles a in greek, for that it has three corners, every
one whereof makes a Promontory, which are Peloro, Pachino, Lilibeo, now called
Capo del Faro, Capo Passero, Capo Boco. Peloro looks toward Italy, Pachino
toward Morea, and Li libeo toward the Promontory Mercurio of Africa, and to
speak according to the aspect of the climes, Peloro lies Eastward, Pachino
between South and East, Lilibeo between South and West. On the North this
Island is washed by the Tirrhene Sea, on the East by the Adriatique and Jonian
Sea, on the South by the African Sea, and on the West by that of Sardigna. It
was called Trinacria, either from its three Promontories or from the King
Trinaco, son of Neptune, and Triquetra, or from the three points of the
Triangle; and Sirania from the Sirani, and after that Sicilia from the Siculi,
(descended from the Liguri) who beat out the Sicani. It is in circuit, as by
the moderns is judged (setting aside the diversities of the ancients) six
hundred twenty three miles: from Peloro to Pachino one hundred and sixty miles,
from thence to Lilibeo 183 miles, from Lilibeo to Peloro 211. Its length from
East to west is 150 miles, but its breadth is not equal, though on the Eastern
part it is 160 miles broad, diminishing afterward in breadth by degrees, being
most strait at Lilibeo. The head of all the Island is the Territory Ennese. It
has on the north side ten Islands which lie round it (the Ancients numbered but
7) whose names are Liparce, Vulcania, or Giera, Vulcanello, Lisca-bianca,
Basiluzo, Thermisia, Trongile, Didima, Fenicusa, and Ericusa. Sicilia is
divided into three provinces, which they call Valli or Vales, that is into the
Val di Demino or Demona; the Val de Noto, and the Val di Mazara, the Val di
Demino commenceth from the Promontory Peloro, and is the shore on one side to
the River Terria, and on the other to the River Himera which discharges it
self into the Tirrhene Sea. The Val di No^o, begins at the River Teria, and
with it extending it self inwards, and traversing Enna, it descends with the
river Gela, and ends at the City of Alicata. But the Val di Mazara, comprehends
all the remaining part of Sicily to Lilibeo. This Island was some time
conjoined to Italy, whereof the modern authors as well as ancient render a
large testimony, though there are some who take it for a ridiculous opinion. It
is esteemed for the salubrity of the Air, the abundance of terrene sustenance
and plenty of all things necessary for man's use very excellent, as placed
under the fourth Climate much more benign then all the others, whence it is that
what ever this soil of Sicily affords, either by its own nature or the
Ingenuity of man is accounted next to those which are cried up for the best. It
produces corn in such abundance that in many places it yields 100 for one.
Wild Oats grow there of themselves, as also the Vines, which gave occasion for
the Fable of Ceres and Proserpina. Their wines are most delicate, as is the
oil of Olives whereof they make great quantities. Their Canes too are
admirable, called Ebosia heretofore, now Cannamele, whereof they make Sugars.
Their Be honey is there so good that by the ancients as a proverb it was used the
Hyblean honey of Sicily, which affords great store of wax: the Bees using the
very tronks of trees for their hives, there gathering excellent honey. Their
fruits of all sorts, grow with much plenty and goodness; they gather all sorts
of Plants and medicinal herbs, and their saffron is better then that of Italy,
as are their roots of wild palm trees, which are gustfull to eat. The
mountains AEri are so plentifully furnished with sweet waters, fountains,
fruitful and pleasant trees, that they have many times preserved a great Army
of the Carthaginians, when near famishing. Other mountains produce salt, as
Enna, Nicosia, Camerata and Platanim, where they take out salt stones. There
also are the Caves or Pits for salt made of the Foam of the Sea resting upon
the co^sts, but near I ilibeo, D^epano, Camarino, Macanio, and other places,
they take up the sea water, put it into pits, and thereof make salt. They also
draw salt out of other parts of Sicily from the Lakes, as near Pochino, (a
wonderful thing) what by the rain, and fresh waters falling from other
fountains, the Lake may be increased, in a little time, is dried away by the
Sun. They also make here great plenty of that silk which they draw from their
silk worms. Nor is Sicilia less enriched by her Metals and Mines, having
Minerals of Gold, Silver, Iron, Alum: and on the banks of the River Acate grow
precious stones, as the Emerald and Agat stone, and the clear Bartina, which is
while in circuit, and black spots in the midst, and in forms of several
Creatures, as birds, beasts, men or any other, which they say is an Antidote
against the biting of the spider or Scorpion. So^nus says too, that twill make
the Rivers stop, and that Pirrhus had one stone of this sort in a ring, wherein
was engraven Apollo with his Scepter, and the Chorus of the nine Muses with
their Ensign, at Graterio, they dig the Beril or Sea water stone in great
plenty, and Porphiry stone, red and traversed with white and green strokes.
Here also they take up the jasper stone being red, and varied with several
clear green and white spots, which ennobles the stone. And in the sea of
Messina, and of Drepano, there grows Corrals a sort of sea Plant much
commended and sought after. Sicilia is likewise Famed for the Chase of the Goat
and wild Bore: for the fowling at Partridge and God wit. And all other sorts
of Birds, and fourfooted beasts both for delight and profit are there in great
plenty, beside the Falcon and other Hawks, which there are taken. The Fishing
also is greatly abounding, particularly for the Fish called Tun^y Fish, whereof
they take not only at Pachino (as the Ancients wrote) but also at Palermo and
Drepano, and in all the River which is washed with the Tyrrhene Sea, (this fish
bears a great price in May or June) as also of the sword fish particularly at
Messina, which (it is written) they cannot take unless they speak Greek, and to
say no more both the Seas and the Rivers abound with all sorts of excellent
fish. They have also in diverse places many baths of hot, cool, sulphurous and
other sorts of water, useful and advantageous in several Infirmities, but
those are in the River Sen^ntina, near the Cities Sacra and Himera, are salt
and un wholesome to drink. We will not speak of the Fountains of sweet water
that are found over all Sicilia, and many Rivolets accommodated as well for the
life of Man, as the enriching their Lands by the overflowing. And to speak in
brief, this Island is not at all inferior to any other Province, either for
its fatness or abundance; but somewhat exceeds Italy in the excellency of
their grain, saffron, honey, Beasts skins, and other sustenance for the life of
Man; in so much that Cicero not improperly called it the Granary of the Romans,
and Homer said that all things grew there of their own accord, and therefore
calls it the Isle of the Sun. Sicilia is likewise admirable for the fame of
those things which told, exceed our belief as the Mount Etna, and Mongibello,
who sending forth continual fires from its bowels has not withstanding its
head (on that part where the fire issues) deeply covered in snow to the midst
of Summer. Not far from Agrigento, or Gergento is the Territory Matharuca,
which with assidu al vomiting of diverse veins of waters, sends forth a certain
Ash colored Earth, and at certain times casting out an incredible Mass of that
Earth, the one and the other Fields may be heard to roar.

In Menenino is the Lake Nastia (called by Pliny ^fintia) where in three eddies
you behold boiling water, which always gurgles with an egregious stink, and
sometimes spues up flames of fire: hither anciently resorted all such, as
through their superstition were to be sworn to any thing. It has likewise in
sundry other places diverse other Fountains of admirable Qualities and nature,
for an ample account whereof the reader is referred to Thomaso Fazellio, to the
end we may abridge our relation here. Sicily was inhabited by the Cyclopes,
which is verified (besides what Authors affirm) by the bodies of immense
bigness and height, which in our days are seen in the Grots, or Caves. Those
Cyclopes, being monsters of Men or Giants, whom the Sicani succeeded, and them
the Siculi or Sicilians. Then the Trojans, the Candiots, the Phenici, the
Calcidonians, the Corinthians and other Greeks, the Zanclei, the Guidii, the
Sarasini, the Normans, the Lombards, the Swedes, the Germans, the French the
Arragonians, the Spaniards, the Catalonians, the Genouans, and at length many
Pisans, Lucchesians, Bolognians, and Florentines: all which people at several
times inhabited diverse parts of this Island: until Charles the fifth Emperor
took Corona, and after a little time leaving it to the Turks, all those Greeks
that dwelt there transported themselves into Sicilia. The People are of an
acute and quick wit, noble in their inventions, and industrious by nature, and
said to be of three tongues for their velocity in speech, wherein their
expressions proceed with much grace to facetiousnesse and quickness: they are
held loquacious beyond measure: whence the Ancients borrowed the proverb Gerrae
Siculae, the Sicilian bablings. Ancient writers attribute the following things
to the invention of the Sicilians, the art of Oratory, the Bucolick or pastoral
verse, dyall making, the Catapul^e a warlike engine, the illustrating of
Pictures, the Art of Barbing, the use of skins of wild beasts and Ryme. They
are by nature suspectfull, envious, evil spoken, facil to speak Villainy, and
prone to revenge, but industrious subtle flatterers of Princes, and studious of
Tyranny (as says Orosie,) which at this day does not so generally appear.

They are more covetous of their own commodities or conveniences then of the
publiques, and reflecting on the abundancy of the Country, sloathfull and
without industry. Anciently their tables were so splendidly furnished, that it
became a Proverb among the Greeks, but now they follow the frugality of Italy.
They are valiant in wars, and of uncorruptible faith to their King; beyond the
custo^me of the Greeks, they are patient; but provoked they leap into extreme
fury. They speak the Italian Language, but roughly, and without the least
sweetness, and in their habits and other customs live after the manner of the
Italians.

MESSINA.
THat City of Sicilia that is most illustrious, is Messina, built with the
ruins and relics of the City Zancla: at a thousand paces distance from hence
came Dicearchus the hearer of Aristotle, the most celebrious Peripatetick,
Geometritian, and eloquent Orator, who wrote many books, whereof Fazellius
makes mention, and Ibicus the Historian and the Lyrick Poet, and in the memory
of our Fathers times lived there Cola the Fish, born at Catana, who leaving
human society, consumed the best part of his life among the fish in the sea of
Messina, whence he acquired the nick name of fish. Hence came also Giovanni
Gatto, of the preaching order, a Philosopher, Divine, and famous Mathematician,
who read in Florence, Bologna, and Ferrara, and was afterward elected Bishop
of Catano; and lastly hence came Gio Andrea Mercurio, a most worthy Cardinal of
the holy Church.

Here stood the City Taurominio, which gave birth (according to Pausanias) to
Tisandro Son of Cleocrito, who four times overcame in the Olympic Games and as
many times in the Pythick, and Timeus the historian son of Andromacus, who
wrote of the transactions in Sicilia and Italy and of the Theban wars.

CATANA.
IT has also the City Catana, one part whereof is washed by the Sea and the
other extends it self to the foot of the Mountains where anciently was the
Sepulture or burying place for famous and illustrious persons, as of Stesicorus
the Poet, Himerese, Xenofane the Philosopher, and of two young Brothers Anapia
and Anfinomo: who (the fire of AEtna raging and burning all the Country round)
took up upon their shoulders the one his Father the other his Mother but being
disabled by the weight to proceed with speed, and the fire overtaking them and
at their very feet, yet lost not their magnan imity and courage, but when
almost in despair, the fire on a sudden divided it self before them, and so
they miraculously escaped safe. In this City is a College for all the
sciences, but most particularly they here study the Civil and Canon Laws, and
from her have issued many illustrious persons, as Santa Agatha, (which the
Palermitans will call of their City) a Virgin Martyr, who under Quintiano in
the year of our salvation 152 suffered Martyrdom for Christ, and Carondo the
Philosopher and Legislator, and he that was reputed the great Magus, Diodorus
or Liodorus: Hence came also Nicolo Todisco, called the Abbot, or Panormitano
the great Cnnonist, and Cardinal, who wrote so many books of the Canon Laws,
and was present so much to his glory at the Council of Basilea in the year
1440. It gave birth likewise to Galeozzo, or Galeotto Bardasino, whose vast
body and strength acquired him the title of a Giant, of whose prowess and
noble Acts of Chevalry we have as large relations, as any our Romances
attribute to their Heroes. The City Leontina or Leontio (anciently inhabited by
the Lestrigones) was the birth place of Georgia the Philosopher and Orator, and
Agathone the Tragic Poet: and since the faith of Christ planted there, Alfio,
Filadolfio, Cirino, became Martyrs for it. From the City Megara, came Theo
genes the Poet, and Epicarmo the Comic Poet, and Inventor of Comedies.

SYRACUSA.
Syracusa, (anciently the Metropolis of Sicilia, and enobled by ma ny titles)
gave birth to many eminent men in all the sciences; as to Theocrito the
Bucolick Poet, Filalao the Pythagorean, Filomone the Comic Poet in the days
of Alexander the Great, another Philomene a Comic, who also had a Son of the
same name and profession, Sofrone a Comic in the days of Euripides, Corace
one of the prime Inventors of the Art of Oratory and his Disciple Cesia no
less eminent in Oratory; Dione Siracusano who wrote of the Art of Rhetoric,
Sofane the Tragic Poet, Epicarmo the most learned continued always in
Syracusa, and at his death had a statue erected in honor of him; Fotino the
Comic Poet Carmo the Poet; Menecrates the Physician and Philosopher, Filosseno
the Lyrick, Callimaco who wrote in verse concerning this Island, Mosco the
Grammarian, Jaceta the Pihlosopher, Antioco the Historian, Filisto an Historian
and Father of Dionygio the Tyrant; Callins the Historian, Theodore the
Philosopher who wrote of the Art of War, Archetimus a Philosopher and Histo
rian, Archimede a Philosopher and excelling Mathematician, with many others:
Amongst the holy Martyrs it afforded Lucia the Virgin, and Stefano the third
Pope.

From the County of Nea came Ducetio King of Sicilia, Giovanni Aurispa a famous
writer, Antonio Cassarino a surpassing Orator, Giovanni Martasio a most
celebrated Poet, and here also is the sepulcher of San Corrado the Placentian
to whose merits they Fable many miracles. From Agrigento a famous City issued
the Conqueror in the Olympic games before Diodorus, and Phalaris here
exercised his cruel Tyranny which begot him the surname of Tyrant: hence also
proceeded Creone and Acrone, both Philosophers and Physicians; Polo the Orator,
Dinoloco a Comic, Archino a Tragic Poet, Sofocles and Xenocorate to whom
Pindarus entitled two of his Odes.

In the City Therme now called Sacra, were born Agathocles King of Syracusa,
and Thomaso Fazellio, of the order of San Domenico, who wrote the affairs of
Sicilia in a large volume.

PALERMO.
THe City of Palermo, is the fairest of all the others of this Island, and at
present the Metropolis and Regal Seat: of which much will here be spoken: she
gave birth to Andrea the most ancient and noble Philosopher, who wrote the
Civil history of the Sicilians; but it was much more illustrated for the first
breath it afforded to the Saints Oliva and Nimfa both Martyred for the Faith of
Christ: and Antonio called the Palermitan, of the Knightly Family of Beccatelli
of Bologna, an Orator and a noble Poet, and much e^deared to all the Princes of
his time. When also flourished Pietro Ranzano of the Preaching order, a Divine,
an Orator, and a famous Poet, and at last Bishop of Lucera. It bred also
Monsignior Jacomo Lomellini its ArchBishop, a learned Prelate, and of great
integrity of Life. Sicily nourished also many other famous persons as well
ancient as modern, as Sthenio, Thermitano, the defender of the Cities of
Sicilia, Stesicoro one of the new Lyricks of Greece, Diodoro surnamed Siculo a
famous and renowned Historian, whose life the Author hereof has wrote at large
in another Treatise; Thomaso Caula a Laureat Poet, and many others. Sharp and
long wars were waged for the possession of this Island, between the Romans and
Carthaginians, but the Romans at length remained Conquerours, and reduced her
into a province at the overthrow of Hie rone (by Claudius Marcellus the Consul)
who was the last of those Tyrants under whom she had then tofore been
subjected. Then it was governed by Praetors till it fell into the power of the
Emperors, and Charles the great; in which time the Empire and world being
divided, Sicilia, Calabria and Puglia remained in obedience to the Emperors of
Constantinople, under whom it continued till Niceforus bcame Emperor, in whose
Reign the Saracens possessed it and Puglia, the Mount Saint Angelo, Nocero with
other places in the year DCCCCXIIII. hence they made frequent incursions into
Calabria, and to the very walls of Naples and Garigliano: against whom Pope
John the tenth with Alberico Masalpina his Kinsman great Duke of Tuscany armed
themselves, and with much difficulty and great slaughter drove them into the
Monte Santo Angelo. Which Alberico was Son of Alberto, brother of Guido, grand
Marquess of Tuscany, some of whose medals I have seen with their Test or
Motto, and on the reverse the flourishing Thorn tree (the Arms of that Family)
in the hands of the Marquess Lodovico Masalpina a Gentleman no less facetious
then curious in collections. The Saracini one hundred years after their in road
into Italy were drove out by the Normandi, who were Counts of Sicilia, who for
forty three years increased their Empire with much felicity, till Ruberto Guis
cardo seized Puglia in his own name, and Sicilia in right of his Brother
Ruggieri,; whereupon Pope Nicholas the second conceded to him the Title of
Duke, and created him Feudatory of the Church: which was afterward confirmed
by Gregory the seventh, who by him was freed from the injuries of Harry the
third. After whom, Guglielmo the second was by Innocent the 4th. created the
first King, to whom succeeded Gulielmo the third who deceasing without issue,
the Kingdom was usurped by one Taucredi a bastard of the Family of Guiscardi:
against whom Pope Clement and Celestine the third opposed themselves; and in
the end Celestine gave Costanza the daughter of Ruggier the second (a Nun in
Palermo) for wife to Henry the Son of Frederick the Emperor with the Title and
right claim of the Kingdom: whereupon Henry made war against Tancredi,
besieged and flew him in Naples, and so succeeded in this Kingdom and Empire
of his Father. After whom followed Frederick the second, his Son, then Manfredo
the bastard Son of Frederick got the Kingdom, but was thence drove out by
Charles of Anjou Brother of Saint Lewis King of France, being called in and
invested therein by the Pope; under which Charles the Sicilians (being
complotted with by Pietro d' Arragona, who married Costanza daughter of
Manfredo) at the sound of the Vespers Bell, cut in pieces all the French which
were in Sicilia, by which means Pietro became Lord of the Island, which
happened in the year 1283. By which occasion arose many contests and wars
betwixt the Arragonians and the Anjouans for the possession of that Kingdom,
with diverse fortunes, till at length the Arragonians were wholly driven out of
the Kingdom of Naples by Charles the VIII. But the Arragonians at last regained
the possession by the prowess of Consalvo Ferrando the great Captain, who
drove out the French for Ferrando the Catholic King of Spain; from whom the
Kingdoms of Sicilia and Naples passed by an hereditary succession to Charles
the 5th. Emperor, and from him it descended to Philip the second, who left it
to his Son Philip the third Catholic King, who now injoyes them in quiet
possession.

A Description of the Island of MALTA
BEtween Sicilia, and the River of the one and the other shore of Barbary, are
fixed the two Islands Melita or Malta, and Gaulo or Gozo, the one distant from
the other five miles, but eloigned from Pachino or Capo Passero a Promontory of
Sicilia, (which they look toward) one hundred miles, and from Africa one
hundred and ninety miles. Malta is 60. miles in circumference, being all as it
were a plain though somewhat Rocky, and exposed to the winds, it has many and
secure Ports, but toward the North it is wholly deprived of fresh waters, but on
the western parts are excellent Currance, and it produces most fruitful
trees. Where it is broadest it is 12 miles over, and in the longest part 20 miles,
and in all those seas is there not one Island so great distance from the firm
Land as this is. In more then six places toward Sicilia, it is hollowed, and
has Ports as it were formed by the Sea of Sicilia for receipt of its Pirates
or Rovers on the Sea, but toward Tripolis it is all full of Cliffes and Rocks
affording no manor of Harbor. It Is called Melita in Latin from the Bees which
in Greek are called Melitte for that the abundance and goodness of Flowers
causes in this Isle the production of the most excellent honey, but of late by
corruption of the word we call it Malta. At its first habituation it yielded
obedience to King Battus famous for his riches, and for the friendship and
hospitality of Dido, whence afterward it obeyed the Carthaginians. Whereof the
many Collumnes placed up and down the Country, engraven with ancient
Carthaginian Characters (far different from the Hebrean) give sufficient
testimony. But at the same time when Sicilia was reduced to the Romans, it also
rendered it self and was therefore governed by the same Laws, and the same
Praetor as Sicilia was. Wherewith also coming afterward into the power of the
Saracens, it finally with Gozo in the year 1090. was possessed by Ruggieri
Normanno, Count of Sicilia, till at length it obeyed the Christian Princes. The
Air over all the Island is most healthful, but chiefly to them that inure
themselves to it: It has Fountains and Orchards copiously replenished with
Date Trees, and its soil every where produces plentifully all sorts of Grain
and Corn, Flax, Cotton, Wool, Cummin seeds, and abundance of Roses eminently
sweet favored: here* also they have a kind of little neat white Dogs, which
from their long hair we call shocks, of much delight to the people. The Earth
is sowed all the year with little husbandry, and they reap two harvests and the
trees likewise bear fruit twice in the year. In the winter every thing is green
and flourishes, and in the summer is burnt up with heat, howbeit a certain Dew
falls which exceedingly nourishes the Corn. At the head of a long and strait
point almost opposite to the Capo Passero or Pachino in Sicilia is erected the
Fortezza of Sant Ermo, but on the right hand toward Sicilia are some other
points, and between them and Sant Ermo is a Channel of water upon one of which
points is the Castle Sant Angelo, and the other the Fortezza of San Michael
with their Bourges: between the one and the other of which lie the ship^ and
Galleys in a Channel which is locked at the utmost points with a vast Iron
Chain. Eight miles off which place up the Land stands the City called Malta
famoused by the Relics of very noble Edifices, and by the ancient dignity of
a Bishopric. This Isle has a Pr^montory whereon was built a most ancient and
noble Temple dedicated to Juno, and held in great reverence, and another on the
South to Hercules, whereof at this day huge ruins appear at the Port Euro. The
men of this Island are brown complexioned, and their genius more approaches
that of the Sicilians then any other. The women are beautiful enough but fly
company, go obscured abroad, are kept close at home, yet following the same
manner of life as the Sicilians, and speaking a language more like and near the
Carthaginian then any other language. The people are generally religious and
particularly pay a great devotion to Saint Paul, to whom this Island is
dedicated, for that here he by chance fell into the Sea, and was here
entertained with great humanity: and on that shore where he fell in, is built a
venerable Chapel; for their respect to whom they believe no noisome nor
venomous Creature can grow or live on this Island. And from the Grotto where
that Saint stood are stones by many plucked away, and carried through Italy,
(called the Gratia of Saint Paul,) to health bitings of Scorpions and
Serpents. In our Age this Island had and has great splendor for its Devotion,
and the religious order of the Knights of Sant Giovanni or John of Jerusalem,
the which having lost Rhodes (taken from them in the year 1522. by Soliman the
magnificent the great Tnrk) had this Island given them by Charles the 5th.
Emperor, where they have built the aforenamed Castles and Forts, that they may
there reside with perpetual security. In the year 1565. they valiantly defended
the same against a most potent Armada, which the same Soliman sent thither to
conquer the Island and to drive out those Knights: which in time to come will
not contribute less glory to Malta, then that which they reaped in times past
from the general Council which under Pope Innocent the first was there
celebrated by 214. Bishops against Pelagius the Heretic; among others there
met Saint Austine and Sylvano Bishop of Malta. Soliman sent to this Attempt an
Armada, a Fleet of 200 sayls, under the command o^ Piali Bassa General of the
Sea, a man both valiant and judicious, and of Mustapha, the Bassa General of
the Land, a man very crafty, and much experienced in warlike affairs: who
having disembarked and landed their Army on the 18. of May, besieged and
battered the Castle Sant Ermo, and after many contests and attempts, having
beat down that wall flat to the Earth on the 23d. of June became Masters of the
Fort, and put all the defendors to the Sword and cut them to pieces. There dyed
then on the Turks part Dragut ^ais the famous Pyrat, being wounded under the
ear by the blow of a stone. Then they turned their force upon the two other
Fortezza's of Sant Michael, and Saint Angelo. They planted a fierce battery
against San Michael, which levelled the walls with the bank of the Fosse or
Ditch by their falling therein, but in many and many assaults which they gave
to the Castle, they were always valiantly repelled by the Horse. Giovanni
Valetta a French man the then great Master, a man of singular valor and
prudence, not failing in any thing of conduct or necessary provision, that
might merit the esteem of an excellent Commander. At last Don Garcia de Toledo,
having selected sixty of the most nimble and polite galleys out of those of the
King of Spain; and furnished them with nine thousand six hundred Soldiers
between Spaniards, and Italians, advanced to land them securely on the Island.
Which the Turks understanding forthwith imbarqued their Artillery, and advanced
with 8000 Soldiers to view the Christian Army, who fell upon them with such
ardour and fury, that they immediately most basely run away, and got into their
Galleys, leaving 1800 dead, having killed but only four on the Christians side:
And in this manner were the Turks constrained to abandon the Island to their
^oul shame and confusion, and the great honor of Almighty God, whose hand
strengthening this small number, clearly demonstrated, that by his favor, the
valor of a few can oppose the violence of many.

VERSES composed on the Cities of ITALY translated out of the ITALIAN.
FOR Pomp, and Piety, old Rome is famed,
Venice is rich, the Sage, and Lordly named,
Naples is noble, and of pleasant air,
Florence through all the world reputed fair.
Milan does of her Grandeur justly boast.
Bologna's ^att: Ferrara civil most.
Padoua Learned; subtle Bergamo.
And Genoua's Pride, her stately buildings show.
Worthy Verona, bloody Perugia,
Brescia well-armed; and glorious Mantoua.
Rimini good. Pist^ia barbarous.
Babbling Siena. Lucca industrious.
Forli fantastic. kind, Ravenna's styld.
Singalia with nauseous air is filled
Pisa is pendent: (...), Capua.
Pesaro flowery; and (as all men say)
Ancona far from a good Po^t does s^ray.
Urbin in her fidelity is strong.
Ascoli round, and Recanate long.
Foligno's candied streets most pleasant are.
The Ladies of Fano, so smooth and fair,
That said they are from Heaven sent to be But Modena more happy is then she.
FINIS.

