

Ille ego Sum Vates rabido data proeda dolori,
Qui Supero Sanos Lusibus atque jocis,
Zenonis Soboles, vultu mala far sereno,
Et potuit Cynici libera turba Sophi,
Qui medios inter potuit lusisse dolores
Me proeter toto nullus in orb fuit*
Egid Menagius
SCARRON's NOVELS.

Viz.

The FRUITLESS PRECAUTION.

The HYPOCRITES.

The INNOCENT ADULTERY.

The JUDGE IN HIS OWN CAUSE.

The RIVAL-BROTHERS.

The INVISIBLE MISTRESS.

The CHASTISEMENT OF AVARICE.

Rendered into English, with some Additions, by JOHN DAVIES of Kidwelly.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, at the George in Fleet Street near
Cliffords-Inn. 1665.

To the most ACCOMPLIS'D, THOMAS STANLEY Esquire
AT the first coming abroad of the three former of these Novels in English,
they were addressed to you, partly upon this account, that they were rendered
into that Language at Cumberlow, it being but just you should have the
Patronage, of what had its birth under your roof. The lightness of the Subject
might indeed have deterred me, from presixing before it, a Name, which will
challenge veneration, till that of Philosophy have lost the respect due to it,
and the world be re-involv'd in Ignorance and Barbarism: but my presumption on
the kindnesses you were pleased to have for me, and the earnestness I had to
make some public acknowledgment of my extraordinary obligations to you,
overcame that difficulty.

When the Books of the former Edition were nigh spent, and that I was called
upon, to provide for another, it was again my fortune, after almost two years
retirement in Wales, to come to your House, where I had the opportunity, to
review what was printed, and make what additions I could thereto, out of the
same Author's works. So that the same reason, which I had, at first, to make,
obliges me to continue, the Dedication of these Pieces to you; but with this
advantage now, that I am the less sollicitous of their fate, since the
entertainment, some of them have already found, is such, as has encouraged the
Bookseller to venture at a Second Impression.

But if these were not sufficient, I have several other motives, which would
not suffer me to decline the doing of what I am now upon, but particularly one,
whence I derive the greatest satisfaction imaginable, which is, that, by this
Address, all those who love, that is, all who know you, will be assured, of
your having o'rcome a Sickness, which begat a general report of your death.

And this reflection, methinks, may well dispense a little, with my retreat
into the style of the ancient Dedicatories, which were commonly concluded with
wishes and prayers. Mine are, at the present, that, for some time yet, we may
not have the occasion to bemoan the loss of so precious a life as yours; That
the Health you have so happily recovered may have an uninterrupted continuance
for many years; And when you are cloyed with the enjoyments and happiness of
this world, (which, as you are wont to express it, consist in these three
words, Wife, Children, Friends) you may, by the attendance of those Learned
men, whose Labors all subsequent Ages will be obliged to, be conveyed into the
joys and bliss of another. And I doubt not of my having, after so long
acquaintance, so much credit with you, as that, when I am devour, you will
believe me sincere, and, consequently, that these are the hearty wishes of,

HONORED SIR, Your most humble and most obliged Servant, J. DAVIES.

THE PREFACE, Giving an Account of the Author of these Novels, some of his
other Works, and his Person.
THE three former of these Novels were printed here some four or five years
since, and so well received, that the scarcity of them s^on called upon the
Bookseller for a second Impression. This kind entertainment thereof put me
upon an enquiry, what there might be more, of the same kind, written by the
same Author, and I have made a shift to pick up four, out of several parts of
his Works, printed together, since his Death, in six small Volumes in 12^. of
which I have only this short account to give.

Of the Six, there are only two Volumes in Prose, whereof one, he entitles Le
Roman Comique, or, The Comical Romance. It is a description of the Lives of
certain Country- Comedians, and other people, of several Conditions; but done,
with such a natural smartness, as very few Authors have been so happy as to
arrive to, and he does not bring any upon the Stage, to whom there happen not
some very pleasant adventures. To this it may be added, that it is written in a
style particular to this Author, whose inclination to raillery is so much the
more remarkable, in that he could not forbear it, even in those rela^ions,
wherein he was himself concerned.

I am informed, that, some years since, a Person of Quality made it his
recreation, to render part of that divertive Romance into English, translating
not only the Work, but also the Scene, out of France into England: and no
doubt but the design would have taken infinitely well, had it been prosecuted.
But ere he had completed his Work, the Scene of our English Affairs was
miraculously changed, from Anarchy to Monarchy, and that Person being highly
engaged in the Transactions happening upon his Majesty's happy Restoration,
there was such a stop put to what he had done therein, that it has remained
imperfect ever since: whence it may well be ghess'd, there is somewhat in it so
far transcending ordinary Translation, that no other Hand durst attempt it.

Out of this Romance, whereof there are now two parts extant in French, I have
taken three of the Newly-printed Novels; to wit, The Judge in his own Cause;
The Rival-Brothers; and
The Invisible Mistress.


It Is a thousand pitties, that the Author has, prevented by Death, left the
Work imperfect; so that we are, and ever shall be, at a loss, to know, what
period he might bring so many noble Adventures to. Had he completed it, we
should have found, whether he could have given his principal Hero a more
honorable Exit, than to make it, on a Gibbet, at Pontoise, as he was wont to
say himself, and may be seen in a Dedicatory of his to the Abbot Menagius, and
Monsieur Sarrazin, before a little Piece in Verse, entitled, A true Relation
of what happened between the Poets and the Destinies, upon the Death of
Monsieur de Voiture.

His other Works, in Prose, are only these NOVELS, and some LETTERS, which
being but few, and those so particular about his own occasions and necessities,
there will not be much worth the Translation into English. Among these was
found the last Novel; to wit,

The Chastisement of Avarice.

All the rest of his Works are Poetry, in four Volumes; two, of Plays,
Fragments of Plays, Epistles, etc. One, of Poems, upon several occasions; and
the last, containing eight Books of the Aeneids, in Burlesque, under the title
of, Le Virgile Travesty; in which kind of Writing lay his chiefest excellency:
but all together may justly secure him the title of the smartest, and most
pleasant Writer of this last Age.

As to his Person, the account we have to give of it, is derived, partly from
what he has delivered himself, and partly from the Character given him by his
Friends. What we have from himself happened upon this occasion. The
forementioned Piece dedicated to Menagius and Sarrazin, being in the Press,
there chanced to be some vacant Pages, whereupon the Bookseller entreating
Monsieur Scarron, to bethink himself of some thing to fill them up, (for the
humor of doing it with Catalogues of other Books, it seems, was not much in
vogue in France) he gave him the ensuing Description of himself, at the
beginning whereof, there was a Brass-cut, wherein he was represented sitting in
a great Chair; with his back toward the Beholders, and five Women on the one
side, and four on the other, as it were to represent the nine Muses. I shall
here give the said Description, just as if I had the same occasion to do it as
my Author had.

TO THE READER, Who never saw me.
REader, who never saw me, and happily are not much troubled at it, out of
conceit, that there is little to be gotten by the sight of such a person as I
am, know, that, for my part, I should have been as indifferent, as thou art,
whether I were seen by thee or not, if I had not been informed, that some, very
ingenious Persons, make my misery their sport, and give a d^scription of me
quite different from what I am. Some say, that, if I could be capable of any
motion, it would not be much unlike that of those exemplary Cripples, who go on
their Hands and Britch; others affirm I have no Thighs, and that, being set on
the Table in a Box, purposely made for me, I there fall a prating like an
one-ey'd Parrat: And others yet are so pleasant, as to say, that, my Hat being
tied to the end of a Cord, which runs through a Pully fastened to the Roof of
my Chamber, I, having the other end of the said Cord in my hands (which it
seems I must not be able to lift up to my head) make a shift, to raise up, and
let it fall, to salute those who come to visit me.

I conceive my self therefore obliged in conscience, to give a check to these
calumnies, that the World may at length be undeceived, and to that end, have I
caused the Plate, which thou may see at the beginning of this Preface, to be
graven. I doubt not, Reader, but thou will grumble, (for grumbling is very
natural to all Readers, and I am inclined to it my self, as well as others,
when I am a Reader) thou will grumble, I say, and quarrel at me, that thou have
not a sight of my forepart. To satisfy thee, know, that it is not out of any
irreverence, or want of civility, that I turn my backside to the Company, but
for this reason, that the convexity of my Back is fitter to receive an
inscription, than the concavity of my Breast, which is over-shadow'd by the
pendency of my Head, and that by that side, as well as the other, a Man may
take a survey of the Site, or rather, the irregular platform of my Person.
Without any imagination, that the world should think it self obliged by such a
Present (for, by the Nine Gentle-Lasses that stand about me, I never hoped my
Head would ever become the Original of a Medal) I would have had my Picture
drawn, if any Painter durst have attempted it. For want of that, take this
account of my Person.

I am somewhat above thirty years of age, as thou may see by the back of my
chair. If I live to forty, I shall make a great addition of miseries, to those
I have already suffered, within these eight or nine years. I was of a passable
stature, though somewhat below the middle size; but my diseases have shortened
it by a foot and better. My head is somewhat of the biggest, considering my
stature. My face is pretty full, and plump, compared to the Skeleton I am
thence downwards. I am so well furnished with hair, that I need wear no
Periwig, and much of it is turned gray, in spite of the Proverb. My sight is
good enough, though my eyes somewhat larger than they should be: they are blew,
and one of them more sunk into my head than the other. My nose stands well
enough. My teeth, sometimes so many pearls, are now of a color between black
and blew. I have lost one and a half on the left side, and two and a half on
the right, and I have two a little broken. My legs and thighs made at first an
obtuse, then an equal, and at last, an acute angle. My thighs and my body
making another, and my head hanging down over my breast, I am a certain
representative or Hieroglyphick of the Letter Z. My arms are contracted as well
as my legs, and my fingers as well as my arms. In a word, I am a certain
contraction or Epitome of humane misery.

Thus much as to my figure; and since I am so far in my way, I will give thee a
slight touch of my humor. It Is more than I promised; but, to deal freely with
thee, Reader, take notice, that this Preface is designed only to swell the
Book, upon the importunity of the Seller, whose fear it was, he should not save
himself by the Impression. Were it not for that, it would be to as little
purpose as many others are. But this is not the first time, that some people
show themselves fools, out of compliance with others, besides the fooleries
they are guilty of upon their own account.

As to my humor then; I am to confess, that I am somewhat choleric, a lover
of good meat, and inclined to sloth. I often call my Man fool or coxcomb, and
presently after, Sir, and Monsieur. I have no body, God grant others have the
same kindness for me. I am very glad when I have money, and would be much more,
if I had my health. I am merry enough in company, and not much unsatisfi'd,
when I am alone. I endure my miseries patiently enough. And now I think my
Preface is long enough, and that it is time I should make an and of it.

So far the Author's description of himself, upon the occasion before
mentioned. What we have from his friends is before his Virgil Travesty,
consisting of certain Papers of Verses before that Piece, whereof some being in
French, some in Latin, we shall cull out only the Latin Copies, as more
particularly describing his Person and Indispositions.

In Gallicam Scarronis Aeneidem ludicro carmine scriptam.
DEbile Scarronis corpus, contractaque membra,
Indomitus vexat nocte dieque dolor.
Hinc caput obliqua pronum cervice fatiscit,
Nec licet obtutus tollere ad astra suos.
Utque manus premit innocuas cruciatque chiragra,
Sicsecat immeritos saeva podagra pedes.
Et male nodosos macies depascitur artus,
Tabidaque arescens vix tegit ossa cutis.
Torqueris levius volvendo, Sisyphe, saxo;
Quique renascenti pectore pascis avem.
Et tamen in mediis ridere doloribus audet,
Nec miserum laeti deseruere joci.
Riciculum Aeneam, Troas, Danaosque facetus,
Insolita Gallis art, Poeta facit.
Oblectant animos, non jam naufragia terrent,
Itala que finxit, Vate Marone, Clio.
Festive ventique ruunt, atque aequora versant,
Jucunde Phrygias and quatit unda rates.
Et supplex precibus superos dicacibus orat
Naufragus, and grato cum sale nauta perit.
Nec flenda ingentis modo sunt incendia Trojae;
Haec possint Priamo sic placuisse seni.
Ipsa quoque in Teucros joculares concipit iras
Altisoni conjux, Juno, sororque Jovis.
Tam been qui ludit, dum toto corpore, languens,
Deficit, innumeris obruiturque malis:
Vel certe humana Deus est sub imagine Scarro,
Ingenio pollet vel propiore Dei.
C. FERAMUS.
In Aeneida Mimicam and jocosam Pauli Scarronis.
COrpore Scarro aeger, sed cui ridere decorum,
Phoebus, Amor, Charites, and Venus ipsa dedit.
Gratum opus urbanis, Urbanae Aeneidos Author,
Transtulit in lepidos Arma Virumque jocos.
ATTICUS SECUNDUS.
SCARRONI ex Patre Nepoti.
SI punctum omne tulit, qui miscuit utile dulci,
Ludendo scribens seria quid meruit?
Virgilii miranda legens ridere jubetur;
Hoc debet, Scarro, Gallica Musa, tibi.
Urb. Scarron Patruus.
The Titles of the several Novels.
NOV. I. The Fruitless Precaution. NOV. II. The Hypocrites. NOV. III. The
Innocent Adultery. NOV. IV. The Judge in his own Cause. NOV. V. The
Rival-Brothers. NOV. VI. The Invisible Mistress. NOV. VII. The Chastisement of
Avarice.
SCARRON's NOVELS.
THE FRUITLESS PRECAUTION.
The First Novel.
A Gentleman of Granada, whose true name I shall forbear to discover, and on
whom I will bestow that of Don Pedro of Casteel, Aragon, and Toledo, or what
you please, since that a glorious name in a Romance costs no more than another,
(which is happily the reason that the Spaniards, not content with their own, ever
give themselves of the most illustrious, nay hardly sit down with one:) this
Gentleman, I say, (now Don Pedro) being arrived at the twentieth year of his
age, lost both Father and Mother, and by their death came to a very great
estare: all which happening to the same person contributes very much to his
miscarriage if he be born a fool; but, if nature has been more indulgent to
him, puts him int^^ capacity of improving himself to some esteem in the world.
During the year of his mourning, he very prudently weaned himself from most
part of the divertisements, which persons of his age are ordinarily addicted
to, and busied himself in looking into the posture of his estate, and putting
his affairs into a good order. He was a very graceful person, of an excellent
wit, and behaved himself, in his youth, with a prudence and conduct such as
might have become gray hairs. There was not in Granada any Lady who would not
gladly have had him to her husband, nor any Father so prepossessed with the
deserts of his daughter, as not to wish him his Son-in-law. Of the Beauties in
Granada, which stood in competition for the Monarchy of hearts, one only there
was able to captivate that of Don Pedro. Her name was Seraphina, beautiful
indeed as a Seraphin, young, rich, well descended, and, in a word, though of a
fortune somewhat below that of Don Pedro's, yet a person as well accomplished
to make a wife, as he a husband. He made no question, but that upon the first
proposal of marriage made to her Friends, he should obtain their consent to
become her Servant: but he chose rather to gain her by his own worth and
desert, than their compliance, and resolved to court her with all the passion,
submissions, and services imaginable, so to make a conquest of her heart,
before he became possessor of her person.

His design was noble, and might accordingly have proved more successful, if
Fortune, who is, many times, maliciously pleased to disturb things managed with
the greatest conduct and circumspection, had not raised him a Rival, who was
become Master of the place he would have taken, while he was but yet making his
first approaches. His name we have here little to do with, he was much about
the age of Don Pedro, perhaps as lovely as he, and without doubt much more
beloved.

It was not long ere Don Pedro perceived he had a Competitor, and was not much
troubled at it, as having the advantage of him in point of estate. He was at
the charge of Music in the street where his Mistress lived; his Rival had the
pleasure of it in her Chamber, and happily received more than ordinary kindnesses
from her, while poor Don Pedro's teeth shattered in his head. At last he grew
weary of hunting the bats, I mean, of the charge and inconveniences of that
kind of Courtship, without making any progress in his business: Yet so as this
ill success caused not any remission of his Love, but only made him quit the
design he had to be too prodigal of his addresses to his Mistress, before he
had obtained her of her Friends. He therefore went and demanded her of them,
and they very liberally g^ve their consent he should have her, without ever
advising with, or communicating the business to, their daughter; out of an
excess of joy, to be entreated, to do what they earnestly desired, and indeed
durst hardly hope. They soon after acquainted Seraphina with the good fortune
that came to court her, and prepared her to entertain the addresses of Don
Pedro, and; within a few days, to marry him. The news, which she should have
received with joy, raised in her no small disturbance; insomuch, that, not able
to smother the loss she was at, she hardly made a shift to conceal the occasion
thereof from them, by persuading them it proceeded from the affliction, it
would be to her, to part with those, for whom she had so dutiful an affection.
She acted her part so handsomely, that, out of pure tenderness, the old people
could not forbear tears, nor commending the good nature of their daughter. She
used all the entreaties she could to persuade them to put off the marriage for
four or five months, representing to them, that the decay of her health was
visible in her countenance; and pressing, that, if ever she married, it might
not be till she had recovered her perfect health, to the end she might be in a
better disposition to please her husband, lest he might take any occasion to be
dissatisfied with her, in the dawning of their marriage, and repent of his
choice.

Now whereas it was indeed true, that for some time before she seemed not to
have her health as she was wont, her Friends were well satisfied with what she
had said to them, and gave an account of it to Don Pedro, who also had nothing
to except against it, as conceiving it argued the discretion of his Mistress.
Nevertheless, they thought it not amiss to put things in order, as to the
contract of marriage, and the settlement to be made thereupon.

But though things were brought to this pass, the amoro^s Don Pedro omitted not
any of those Expressions of Gallantry and Courtship, expect^d in the carrying
on of a Match with consent of all parties. He sent his Mistress many presents,
and writ to her every day. She on the other side returned him such answers as
were at least very civil, thouh they betrayed much less of passion than was
visible in his Letters. But she would not by any means be seen in the day time,
excusing her self by reason of her indisposition; nay in the evenings was
seldom seen at her window, which raised in Don Pedro a great admiration of her
reserv'dness. He was better conceited of his own worth than any way to question
the success of his applications, or doubt his being deeply in the favor of his
Mistress, when he should be better known to her than he was, even though she
might have had an aversion for him before she knew him.

His affairs hitherto went on smoothly without any rub; but, on a sudden, it
happened that he could not get a sight of his Mistress in four or five days. He
was extremely troubled at it, or at le^st pretended it; he writ verses upon
that occasion, or, it may be, hired, or bought some, and caused them to be sung
under her window: but notwithstanding these great attempts of a most passionate
Love^, all he could do was to speak with one of the Chamber-maids, who told
him, that his Mistress was much sicker than she had been. His Poetic vein
swelled at this account of her, or, if not his, that of his mercenary Poet must
breathe and bleed for it: for I could never be truly informed whether he
himself had any gift in rhiming. Having got what he had, set to some doleful
tune, and laden, besides his offensive and defensive arms, with a Guitarrhe,
(which I am apt to believe was the best the City could afford) he took his way
very boisterously toward his Mistress's, either to move her to compassion, or
to set the dogs thereabouts a barking. It Is not unlikely he should have done
one of the two, or both together, and yet it so happened he did neither.

Being come within fifty paces short of the blessed mansion of his Divinity, he
perceives the door open, and a woman coming out, who seemed much like his
almost-invisible Angel. He could not imagine what should oblige a Woman, all
alone, and at such a time of the night, to enter, of set purpose, into a great
desolate building, destroyed not long before by a fire that had happened. To
find out what the matter should be, he walked round about those ruins, into
which there were several ways to get in, so, with as much convenience as he
could, to get near the person whom he had followed in thither. It came into his
imagination, that it might be his Mistress who had appointed his Rival a
meeting in that strange place, as not daring to be seen at her house, and happily
unwilling to have any third person privy to an action, which it concerned him
so much to be kept secret; and if what he did as yet but only suspect, should
prove tru^, his inviolable resolution was to be the death of his Rival, and to
be revenged of Seraphina, by loading her with the greatest reproaches he could
think on. He thereupon crawled along with as little noise as he could, till he
came to a place whence he saw her (for it was she) sitting upon the ground,
bemoaning her self, as a person ready to give up the ghost, or what signifies
little less (to give it you in a word) in Labor, and with inexpressible pain,
upon the delivery of a little creature, in the making whereof she had happily
taken a great deal of pleasure. She no sooner saw her self disburthen'd, but
deriving strength from her courage, she returned the same way she came, without
taking any further thought, what should become of the Child she had brought
into the world.

I leave you to judge what astonishment Don Pedro was in at this strange
accident. Now was he satisfied what was the true cause of his Mistress's
sickness: he was a little frighted at the danger he was likely to have fallen
into, and made his acknowledgment to Heaven, that he had escaped it. And being
of a noble and generous disposition, he would not be revenged of one that had
put such a treacherous trick upon him, to the dishonor of an illustrious
Family, nor in his just resentment suffer the innocent little creature to
perish, which he saw at his feet exposed to the mercy of the first dog or swine
that had come that way. He took it up in his handkerchief, for want of
something else to wrap it in, and, with as much haste as he could, went to a
Midwife of his acquaintance, to whose care he recommended the Child he put into
her hands, and gave her money to buy all things necessary for it. The Midwife,
well paid, did what might have been expected from her, insomuch that the very
next day, the Child was put out to nurse, christened, and (proving a girl) named
Laura.

In the interim, Don Pedro went to see a certain Kinswoman of his, one in whom
he reposed very much confidence: he told her that he had changed the design he
had of marrying so young into that of traveling, entreated her to take upon
her the management of his estate, and to entertain into her house a little
Girl, whom he made her believe was his own, to be very liberal in what
concerned her education, and, for certain reasons, which she should one day
know, as soon as she were three years old, to put her into a Nunnery, and above
all things to take order that she should have no acquaintance with the things
of this world. He gave his kinswoman Letters of Attorney, and what else was
necessary for her management of his estate, furnished himself with money and
jewels; got a trusty servant; and, before he left Granada, writ a Letter to
Seraphina. She received it much about the time that she was acquainting her
Friends, that her sickness would not any longer delay her marriage: but Don
Pedro's Letter, wherein he discovered what he knew of her condition, filled her
with other thoughts. And those were wholly directed toward God, insomuch that,
not long after, she went into a Nunnery, never to come out again, it being not
in the power of her Friends, with all their entreaties and tears, to divert her
from that resolution, which they thought so much the more strange, the more
they were to seek what the motives of it should be.

But we will leave them bewailing their daughter, now turned Nun: Her, on the
other side, bewailing her own miscarriage; the little Laura g^owing up, and
blooming forth; and overtake Don Pedro upon his way to Sevil, not able to
divert his thoughts from running upon the adventure that had happened to him,
and thereupon entertaining a cruel aversion against marriage, after his having
so great a desire to taste of it. All the women he meets he is frightened at,
and without any reflection that, as well as men, there are some good, some bad
among them, he concludes with himself, that a man must ever be distrustful of
them, and much more of those who pretend to wit, than the simple; being apt
enough to embrace their opinion, who hold that a woman knows more than she
ought, if she knows any thing beyond what belongs to Housekeeping, and the
bringing up of her Children.

Embracing these Heresies with some persuasion, he enters Sevil, and went to
the house of Don John -- (His name is quite out of my head) a rich man, and a
person of quality, who was not only his Kinsman, but much his Friend, and so
kind as that he would not suffer him to lodge any where else. The pleasantness
of Sevil raised in him an inclination to make a longer stay there than he
thought to have done: which his Cousin Don John perceiving, and wishing his
divertisement yet greater than it was, spent some time in showing him whatever
that place afforded that were any thing rare or considerable.

One day, as they were riding through one of the principal Streets of the City,
they saw, in a Coach that went into a great persons house, a young Lady,
habited like a Widow; but so handsome, so attractive, that Don Pedro was
surprised at her beauty, and made Don John laugh to hear the exclamations and
oaths he made, that he had never seen any thing comparable to her in his Life.
This angelical Widow reconciled to his favor all those of the female Sex, whom
Seraphina had made abominable in his apprehension. He entreated Don John to
ride once more through the same Street, and acknowledged to him, that ever so
little more sight of her had really wounded him. It Is more than needed, replied
Don John; for, if I am not much mistaken, you are so far wounded as requires
some remedy. Ah, Cousin, says Don Pedro to him, I think I may confidently tell
you, that I should esteem my self very happy, might I pass away my days with so
excellent a person. Nay, if you take that course, replies Don John, and make
such haste as you do, you may soon come to your journeys end, and be master of
the happiness you propose to your self. Not but that such an enterprise must
needs be difficult, Elvira is a person of quality, and very rich, her beauty is
such as you have observed it, her virtue not inferior, and for the space of
two years that she has been a Widow, the wealthiest fortunes in Andaluzia have
not raised in her any motions to change her condition. But a person of your
endowments and excellencies may conquer that which others have not been able to
stand against. She is a Kinswoman of my Wives, and I sometimes visit her. I
shall, if you please, acquaint her with your inclinations, and I am the more
apt to hope my negotiation may prove effectual, in regard I have the honor to
see her in her Balcony which is over against us, a favor not ordinary from a
Lady so reserved, since she might as well shut up her own jealousies and her
windows together, and so make us be laughed at after all our gallantry.

With which words both the Cavaliers made each of them an obeisance to the
Spanish Lady, which it cost them no small pains to acquit themselves well of.
But particularly Don Pedro did his with such contorsion and violence to his
whole body, that a little more he had injured his reins. The Lady in the
Balcony returned them one not much to be found fault with, which engaged Don
Pedro and his companion to revy it with two others; But seeing the Sun from the
Balcony was gone,
They thought it full time to depart,
One went away well, and as sound as a Bell,
But the other was struck to the heart.


Ah! Cousin, says Don Pedro to Don John, what probability is there that a
stranger should storm a heart that has stood out the assaults of all the best
and noblest Champions as to quality and desert that Sevil affords? But,
continued he, since the little hope I have of obtaining her favor is enough to
occasion my death, it will come but all to one, if I hazard my Life upon her
denials and disdains. Let me therefore, dear Cousin, entreat you to speak to
her, as soon as possibly you can, and press not to her so much the greatness of
my quality or estate, as the violence of my passion.

Don Pedro was so over head and ears in love, that he could not speak of any
thing else, in so much, that his Cousin perceived the greatest kindness he
could do him, was, to speak with the soonest to Elvira. He did it, and that
with good success. The fair Widow entertained so kindly the Proposition he made
on the behalf of his Friend, that she discovered rather a satisfaction, than
any displeasure thereat. But, in Answer thereto, she told him, that having made
a vow she would not hear of any addresses in order to a second Marriage till
three years were expired after her former Husband's death, no consideration in
the world should prevail with her to break it. She added further, that out of
an exact observance of what she had promised the memory of her late Husband,
she had till then behaved her self inflexibly toward all those that had made
their addresses to her; and that if Don Pedro had so much command of himself as
to continue his devotions to her for the space of one whole year, during which
time they might become better acquainted one with another, she would promise
never to be any man's Wife but his.

Don John, upon his return, gave Don Pedro an account of his negotiation, and
rendered him the most satisfied and most amorous man in the world. The long
time he was to expect troubled him not at all, resolving to employ it in all
manner of courtships, worthy atchievments, and adventures, befitting a spruce
Lover. He bought a Coach and Horses, took a House, and entertained Servants,
set the Embroiderers and Tailors of Sevil a sewing, and the Musicians a
singing. He would have presented Elvira with some things; but she would by no
means permit it. Her Maids were much more easily entreated, and received his
Presents as willingly as he bestowed them. In a short time, Elvira's Servants
were more at his devotion than at hers, they causing her to show her self in
the Balcony, though much against her humor, as often as Don Pedro was singing
in the Street; in which employment, as I have been told, he was grown to be a
Crafts-master, not making use of his lips and tongue to quaver out the notes as
many good Singers do.

Six Months were already past since Don Pedro had laid a Siege to the
affections of Elvira, yet had not the least private Parley with her; which
added daily more and more to the esteem and devotion he had for her. At last,
upon an importunity of Prayers and Presents, one of her Gentlewomen, better
stored with confidence than any of the rest, or rather better bribed, promised
to bring him in the nightime to her Lady's Lodgings, and so to dispose of him
as that he should see her put off her clothes before she went to bed, walking
in her Smock about the chamber for coolness, and singing and playing upon the
Lute, which she did admirably well.

This took Don Pedro so highly, that he gave his Intelligencer much beyond what
he had promised her; so that, night being come, the bold Granadine, according
to the Gentlewoman's directions, comes into Elvira's house, slunk into her
lodgings, and there, from a little ascent, which was over against her
chamber door, he saw her sitting on a couch, reading in a Prayer Book, how
attentively I know not, while her women were undressing her. She had only a
thin loose coat about her, and was upon getting into bed when Don Pedro's
Pension-Gentlewoman, desirous to give him cause to be as much satisfied with
her as she with him, entreats her Mistress to sing. To here is, her Companions
added their entreaties; yet Elvira put them off a long time, telling them, she
was melancholy, nay, assuring them she had some reason to be so: but the
Gentlewoman who was so much at the devotion of Don Pedro, having put a Lute
into her Mistress's hands, Elvira had the compliance to sing, and did it with
so much excellency and delight, that Don Pedro could hardly forbear casting
himself at her feet, there to act the part of the ecstatick Lover. She sung not
long, but went to bed: her Women withdrew into their chambers, and Don Pedro,
who would gladly have gotten into the Street, was at a cruel loss what to do
when he found the great Gate fast. There was no other course to be taken, than
to expect till it were day. He sat down on the brink of a Well which was at
one corner of the Court, in no small disturbance, by reason of the fear he was
in of being discovered, and to incur the displeasure of his Mistress, for his
presumption.

While he was thus engaged, his thoughts running upon thousands of designs, and
those attended by so many fruitless wishes, he perceives a Door opening that
belonged to some part of Elvira's Lodgings. He turned toward that side on which
he heard the noise, and was much at a loss to see coming into the Court the
fair Widow whom he thought fast asleep. By the light of a small Wax-candle she
had in her hand, he perceived her night-cloaths were very neat about her head;
that she was bare-neck'd, had an excellent Neck-lace of Pearl on, and that upon
her Smock, about which was abundance of Lace, she had only a long rich Mantle.
She had in her hand a Silver-plate covered with Jelly, Sweetmeats, and
Conserves; and in that strange posture she was so full of charm and attraction,
that Don Pedro was once in a mind to satisfy himself with the enjoyment of
looking on her, though he should thereby draw on himself all the displeasure,
which a presumption so great might justly deserve. But upon better thoughts he
hid himself behind the Well, yet so as that he still observed his Mistress,
flattering himself sometimes with an imagination, that he was the person she
sought after. She went on toward the Stable, whither Don Pedro, at a distance,
followed her, and saw her go into a little Chamber. The first apprehension he
had, was, that his Mistress, out of an excess of pious charity, went to visit
some servant of the House that was sick, though, without any prejudice to her
charitable inclinations, she might have put that employment upon some one of
her women. He hid himself behind a horse, which stood not far from the door of
the Chamber, and thence observing his dear Widow, he saw her set down, on a
little Table, the Candlestick, the Plate, and whatever else she had brought
that was burdensome to her Ivory hands; and perceived, in a bed which took up
almost all the Chamber, a Blackamore that was sick, who seemed to be about
thirty years of age, but so deformed, and of so dreadful a look, that he was in
a manner frightened at the sight of him. His meagre countenance, and the painful
emission of his breath argued him very sick and much spent. Don Pedro could not
but admire the unparalled goodness of the fair Elvira, who took up the
Negro's coverlet, and having thrust up his head, sat down by the sick person,
and put her hand on his forehead, all wet, happily with the sweats and pains of
approaching death. The Negro beheld, with a ghastly look, the charitable Angel
that came to comfort him, and who still viewed him with tears in her eyes. Don
Pedro knew not what he should think of a charity so transcendent, and having
for a while admired it, he began to think it excessive: but as yet he had not
seen any thing.

At last, the fair Widow breaking forth into discourse, yet weeping as if it
had been at the taking of a final farewell, she asked the Negro, How he did* My
dear Anthony, said she to him with a voice interrupted by sobbs, Art thou then
resolved to die, and, with thy own, to be my death too? Thou speak not to me,
my dearest; take heart, my soul, take heart, if thou desire I should live,
and eat a little of this jelly, for my sake. Thou do not vouchsafe so much as
to look on me, cruel man; not on me, who love thee, who adore thee; kiss me, my
Angel, kiss me, and recover thy health, if thou would not have my company to
Death, after I had so much loved thee whilst thou had any Life.

To this effect were her expostulations, joining her angelical face to the
diabolical countenance of the Moor, which she bedewed with her tears. I am apt
to imagine that who ever had seen such a Vision, would have taken it for an
Angel embracing a Devil. As for our Don Pedro, he began to think his fair
Elvira as ugly as her Negro, who at last casting his eyes on his importunate
Mistress, whom he had not till then vouchsafed a look, and with his scraggy
hand removing her face from his own, said to her, with a hollow voice; What
would you have of me, Madam, and why will you not let me die in quiet? Do you
not think it enough that you have reduced me to the condition I am in? or do
you expect I should, at the point of death, sacrifice the few minutes I have
left, to the satisfaction of your insatiable inclinations? Take a Husband,
Madam, take a Husband, and expect no more from me. I shall not see you any
more, nor taste of what you have brought me; all my business now is only to
die, since I am not good for any thing but the grave.

Having so said, he slunk down into the bed, so suddenly, that the unfortunate
Elvira could not get a word from him by way of return, notwithstanding all the
kindnesses both of words and gestures she used toward him; whether it were
that he was already dead, or obstinately resolved, not to speak to a person
whom he thought the occasion of his death. Elvira, melted into tears, and in a
manner out of her self, to see what a sad condition she left her dear Negro in,
and most of all to consider his inhumanity toward her, took up all she had
brought with her, and returned to her chamber, with so much sadness and
affliction in her countenance, that it was much to her loss, she had not been
seen in that posture by her apostate Lover, Don Pedro.

He in the mean time lay close and undiscovered, in the most obscure part of
the stable, so astonished as that he had not been half as much, when he was
present at the happy delivery of Seraphina. He saw the counterfeit Matron
returning to her chamber, disconsolate as a Widow at the Funeral of a Husband
she dearly loved; and, not long after, finding the great gate open, he got into
the street, not much sollicitous whether he were seen or not, as not esteeming
the reputation of Elvira worthy the least tenderness or respect. Yet even in
that did he follow the dictates of his own virtue, so far as that he discovered
not what he had seen even to his Friend. He passed by Elvira's door the next
day just as the Moor was carried out to his burial. Her Woman told him, that
she was sick, and for the space of four or five days that he passed to and fro
that way, she was not to be seen at her window, so incapable was she of any
consolation upon the death of the African. Don Pedro was much desirous to hear
from her. One day as he was in discourse with Don John, a slave of Elvira's
brought him a Letter from her Mistress. He opened it with some impatience, and
read in it what you are like to do, if you please.

A LETTER.
TWo persons, between whom there is a mutual affection in order to marriage,
need no third person to solicit the business between them. You would have me
believe, that you think me not unhandsome, and I cannot but acknowledge I am so
far taken with you, as that I am willing to grant you immediately, what I had
not promised till a year were expired. My Person and Estate are at your
disposal, when you please to command them; and I am to desire you to believe,
that though I cannot be too circumspect in a business of this nature, yet your
merit and my own affection shall be my security, and enable me to overcome what
difficulties soever I may meet with therein.

ELVIRA.




Don Pedro read over the Letter twice or thrice, so much ado had he to believe
what he read. He considered with himself that he had been twice in danger to
have been as unfortunately married as any man in Spain, and sent up his hearty
thanks to Heaven which had enabled him to escape it, by discovering to him two
secrets of so great importance. The resolution of marrying suddenly, which the
Negro's death had put Elvira upon, raised in Don Pedro a quite contrary, which
was, that of getting from her as soon as he could. He therefore told Don John,
that it concerned both his life and honor, that he should be out of Sevil
within an hour, and that he would take along with him only that servant whom
he had brought from Granada. He entreated him to sell his Coach and Horses, and
with the money to discharge his Servants; but above all things he desired him
not to make any enquiry after the occasion of so sudden a change, and so
unexpected a departure, promising to give him an account in writing from the
first place he should make any stay at. He writ to Elvira, while some were gone
to take up two Mules for him; he delivered his Letter to the slave, and, the
Mules being come, took his way toward Madrid, confirmed, more than ever, in
his former opinion, of being distrustful of all women of more than ordinary
wit, nay indeed to have a horror of them. While he is spurring on his Mule,
Elvira opens his Letter, and finds in it these words.

A LETTER.
HOw violent soever the affection I had for you might have been, yet have I
ever preferred the desire of preserving your honor, before the pleasure of
enjoying your person. Thence you might have perceived with what discretion all
my Courtships and addresses were attended. I am naturally a person of a very
nice conscience, and therefore cannot without some remorse answer your proposal
of marriage, you being a Widow but since yesterday. You are much more obliged
to the memory of the poor Negro, who has lost his life in your service, and
can bestow no less than a year in bewailing the miscarriage of a person, whose
performances you thought so extraordinary. In the interim, we shall both of us
have time to consider what we have to do.

DON PEDRO.




Elvira was almost out of her self at the reading of this Letter; the
affliction she conceived thereat made her more sick, than she had been upon the
loss of her Lover of Guinny. But bethinking her self that Don Pedro had left
Sevil, and another person, whom she thought furnished for her turn, making his
addresses to her in order to marriage, she took him at his word, and
entertained him, to supply the place of the Negro. Not but that there were
other Negroes choice enough; but she had heard say that there were several
sorts of Negroes, and that they are not so far Devils as they seem black.

By this time was Don Pedro got to Madrid, where he alighted at an Uncle's of
his, who entertained him very kindly. This Uncle was a Gentleman of a very
great estate, had only one son, destined in marriage for a Cousin of his, an
Heiress, one that being but ten years of age was kept in a Monastery, till such
time as she were ripe for the enjoyments of her Cousin. This Cousin's name was
Don Rodrigues, a person as lovely as could be looked on, every way so
accomplished, that Don Pedro entered into a friendship with him much beyond what
a man has for a kinsman, whom yet he may love very well; for they are not
always of his kindred that a man loves best.

Don Rodrigues had many times his thoughts so taken up with some reflections
unknown to any but himself, that he minded not much what he did, or what
company he was in, and these fits were often accompanied with certain
agitations and disturbances. Don Pedro, having observed it, acquainted him with
his adventures, to oblige him, by that confidence, to give him an account of
his, and, in case there were any thing wherein he might serve him, to assure
him of his being much more his Friend than his Kinsman. Whereupon he to^d him
how he h^d taken notice of his sadness and disquiet, and entreated him to
discover the occasion of it; or otherwise, that he should think his friendship
not answerable to his own.

Don Rodrigues desired nothing so much, hoping to be disburthen'd of his grief,
when he had communicated it. He thereupon told Don Pedro, that he was
passionately fallen in love with a Gentlewoman at Madrid, designed in marriage
to a Cousin of hers whom she expected from the Indies, and whom she had never
seen, much after the same manner as he was made sure to a Cousin of his whom he
staid for till she were of age to be married, and whom he had but little
acquaintance with.

But not unwilling to make a full discovery of himself; This conformity of
Adventures, said he to Don Pedro, very much heightened the mutual love we had
for one another, though it still kept us both within the limits of civility and
our duty, when ever our passion would have advised us to prefer our
satisfaction before the engagements wherein we were involved upon the account
of our Families. Hitherto had my love had the success I could have wished my
self, I mean, so as not to obtain the final reward of it, which she put off
till after the arrival of her Husband, that is, when the cloak of Marriage
might cover all the inconveniences likely to ensue upon an appointment which
supposes somewhat more then a private conversation. I shall not tell you any
thing of the beauty of Virginia, but only that it is impossible to say too
much of it, and that I could say as much of it as would happily puzzle your faith
to believe. I shall forbear, till you have seen her, and her Cousin Violanta,
who lives with her, which when you have, it will happily force an acknowledgment
from you, that Spain can hardly afford any thing fairer than these two
incomparable Cousins, and, when you come to discourse with them, that you never
met with any Women more witty.

Ah! that is it makes me the more to pity you, replies Don Pedro. And why so,
says Don Rodrigues? Because a subtle Woman, replies Don Pedro, will be sure,
sooner or later, to put a trick upon you. You know by the Relation I have given
you of my adventures, how I had been like to be trapann'd by them; and I am to
assure you that were I but in hopes to find a Woman as simple, as I know there
are witty, I would court her in the highest manner imaginable, and prefer her
before prudence it self, if she would entertain me to be her Servant. Sure, you
do not speak seriously, replies Don Rodrigues; for I never knew any
understanding man, but thought it the most insupportable thing in the world,
nay, a certain torment, to be but a quarter of an hour in company with a Woman
that is little better than a natural Fool. 'Twere most irrational, that, while
our eyes, our hands, in a word, our whole body, finds something of diversion,
our souls, our noblest part, should be upon the rack of a tedious conversation,
such as must needs be that of persons that have nothing in them. Let Us have no
more disputing, says Don Pedro to him, since there is but too much to be said
upon this subject; be it your business to bring me as soon as you can to a
sight of this admirable Lady, as also of her Cousin, to the end, if she suit
with my humor, I may have something to trifle away the time withal while I
stay at Madrid. I believe you will find them much otherwise than you expect,
when you do, says Don Rodrigues. And why, I pray, replies Don Pedro. Because,
says Don Rodrigues, the person you would see is at the greatest distance with
simplicity of any I know. I shall comply with time and circumstances, replies
Don Pedro. To be real with you, added Don Rodrigues, I know not well how Madam
Virginia will entertain us, it is above eight days since that she has treated
me with all possible rigor and aversion, returned my Letters without ever
opening them, and sent me word she would never see me, because not long since
she found me in the Church, speaking to a young Lady, with whom she saw me the
same day in a Coach, and upon this occasion it was that you saw me so sad and
melancholy. It matters not, says Don Pedro, let us go and see them however, and
take it from me, you will sooner satisfy her by vindicating your self in her
presence, than with all the Letters the whole Academy of Eloquence could
furnish you with.

Hereupon the two men-Cousins went to see the two women-Cousins; and the fair
Virginia permitted Don Rodrigues to vindicate himself, which he found it no
hard matter to do. Don Pedro thought them both handsomer than any he had seen
of the sex before, not excepting the imprudent Seraphina, nor the counterfeit
Matron Elvira. Violanta, who had dressed her self that day richer than
ordinary, in order to have her Picture drawn, dazzled the eyes of Don Pedro so
far, that he immediately broke the resolution he had taken, never to love any
Woman unless she were a Fool. For his part, Violanta was no less taken with
him, it being his fortune to speak things so obliging upon her Picture, among
which some infinitely witty and smart, that they wrought in her an admiration
of his excellent parts, and no small satisfaction at the first sallies of his
courtships.

But here I cannot avoid making a little digression, though it be only to tell
those who know not so much, that your set-speeches to Gentlewomen, and your
serious Students in the Academy of Complements, are a sort of people that would
be good at the putting off of whipped Cream and Syllibubs, and are charged
with, nay, convicted of, an aerie fl^tuous eloquence by persons of good
understanding and judgment. If this word of advertisement be well considered by
the public, some would find the conveniences of it equal to those of a good
receipt against the Flies in Summer, and against stinking Breaths all the year
long. Don Pedro, who had solemnly sworn never to marry unless he met with a
Woman the next degree removed from an Idiot, made it appear that the Oaths of
Gamesters and Lovers are not obligatory, though the late Casuists had not been
so indulgent as to dispense with them. He was so infinitely taken, as with the
beauty, so with the wit of Violanta, that despairing to obtain any favor of
her but what might be granted without any prejudice to her honor, he was
resolved to marry her, if she had no aversion for that kind of life. He many
times gave her occasion to make some discovery of her thoughts, as to that
particular; but either she understood him not, or at least would not, whether
it were that she loved her freedom, or could not entertain any thoughts of
Marriage.

All went hitherto very prosperously on with these four Lovers; but misfortune
comes ever when it is least expected. One day it happened, that the two young
Gentlemen having tired their Tailors, Barbers, Millaners, Shoomakers,
Sempsters, and all those other Trades which young Gallants put upon the rack
when they would dazzle their eyes whom they pretend to adore, or to say all in a
word, made themselves as fine as Castor and Pollux, and not making the least
doubt to become Masters of the outworks at least of the places they besieged,
there comes an unlucky Scrich-owl, I mean an old Servant-maid, to acquaint the
two Cousins, that the Indian Spark, Husband to the fair Castilian, was come to
Madrid, without so much as sending a Letter before him from Sevil, where the
Ship came in; that the two fair Cousins knew not what he meant by his
surprising them in that manner, and entreated the Gallants to have patience
till such time as Virginia had made such discovery of the humors of her
Indian, as to know how to deal with him, and that they should not only forbear
visiting them, but even appearing before their Windows, till further order.

Thus was all the trimming, scouring and poudring of that day clearly lost,
nay, as if upon this account of their Mistresses they had a remorse for their
vanity, for two days after, they had no more care of themselves than if they
had been irreprievable Malefactors. They understood from common report about
the Town, that the Indian and Virginia had been privately married; that he ^as
naturally jealous, a person of experience, as being turned of forty years of
age, and had taken such order in his house, and was so vigilant over the
actions of his Wife, that her Gallants, if she had any, could not hope so much
as a sight of her at her Window. The further order they had been promised came
not, and they thought long to expect it. They made their appearance in the
Street where their Mistresses lived, and rode up and down, as they were wont,
before their doors, yet could never see, either going in or coming out, any
face they knew, or meet with any Boy or Maid they had any acquaintance with.
They one day saw the Husband go in accompanied by his Brother, a person
handsome enough, and so young that he was then a young Student in the
University. All this did but add to their affliction, and heighten the trouble
they were in. They went forth betimes in the morning, they came not home till
'twere very late, and spent both time and pains to no purpose. At last one
Holiday, being upon the Sentry, they saw coming out, at the Break of Day, one
of Violenta's Maids to go to Mass. They made her stand at the Church-door, and
through the persuasion of a many Presents Don Rodrigues prevailed with her to
carry a Letter to her Mistress. The business of it was this.

THE LETTER.
Madam,
I Find a greater unkindness in your oblivion of me, than I feel torment in my
own jealousy, since there is no remedy for this latter, now that you are at
the disposal of a Husband. However you are not to think your self beyond the
reach of my importunities, though you have discharged me your remembrance. I
beg of you, as the last favor I am to expect, to let me know whether I have
yet any ground to hope, or must resolve not to live any longer,

Yours, etc. DON RODRIGUES.




They followed the Maid at a distance; she delivered the Letter as she had
promised them, and having made a sign to them to come near the house, she
dropped out at the Window the Answer you are like to read.

THE LETTER.
A Jealous man, that has not been married long, is but little from his Wife,
and cannot so soon think himself dispensed from the duty he conceives lies upon
him, to express his tenderness over her and observe her actions. There is some
talk of taking a journey to Vailladolid, without my company, which if it
happen, I shall vindicate my self, satisfy my engagements, and pay my debts.




This Letter, which they both with a certain emulation kissed a hundred and a
hundred times, revived their decaying hopes, and nourished them for some days:
but at last, not hearing any thing from their forgetful Mistresses, they
renewed their marches and countermarches before their windows, spent whole
nights there; and could not see any going to and fro, no more than if the house
had been haunted and no body lived in it.

But one day it happened, that, these two despairing Lovers being in the
Church, comes in Mistress Bride; Don Rodrigues went and kneeled down close by
her, as it were to outface an old Gentleman Usher that had brought her thither.
He in few words made his complaints to her; she in as few excused her self, and
at last she told Don Rodrigues, that her husband was not yet gone to
Vailladolid, though he talked of going every day: that her impatience to have a
private meeting with him was no less than his; and that she knew but one way to
satisfy his desires, which absolutely depended on Don Pedro. My husband, said
she, is a man, whom, when once fallen asleep, the shooting off of great Guns
would hardly awake, and it is four or five days since we spoke one to another,
by reason of a little difference that is happened between us, which is not yet
ripened to a^ overtures of reconciliation. I have been at m^ Cousin Violanta to
supply my place in the Bed but she is not well, and in regard she and D^^ Pedro
are the only persons that are privy t^ our Loves, and that I am unwilling
there should be any more, though it concerned my life, w^ must make use of him
in her stead, and, if he loves you so well as to do it, prevail with him t^ go
into bed to my husband after he is fallen asleep. There seems at first to be
something o^ hazard in such an enterprise; but it being considered withal that
my husband and I are at ^ distance, and that he is not easily awaked, doub^ not
but all may prove well enough as I imagine to my self; and this is the utmost I
can do for you.

This happy stratageme of Love, which Do^ Rodrigues was so hot to understand,
upon the first proposal of it, proved a cooler to his desires when he had heard
it; for he was not only in doubt whether his Cousin would act the dangerous
part which was imposed upon him in that extravagant adventure, but was in
suspense, whether he should so much as propose it to him. His Mistress
continued firm to her resolution, and, as she parted with her dissatisfied
Gallant, assured him, that if the proposition she made to him were not well
entertained and put in execution, as she had directed, there were never any
thing to be hoped from her, nay she gave him leave to forget her, though a time
had been she would sooner have signed the sentence of her own death.

The time and place broke off the discourse between Don Rodrigues and his Lady;
she returned home, he to his Camrade, who could not get a word from him, so
much was he troubled that he must either make a request to him which he thought
so unreasonable, or live without a happiness which is ever much more valued
before the enjoyment than afterward. At last, being gotten together into a
private Chamber, Don Rodrigues having done himself all possible violence, made
the extravagant proposition to Don Pedro, allaying it what he could with those
circumstances which might render it the more entertainable. Don Pedro could not
at first imagine but all was in jest, but his Cousin on the contrary protesting
he spoke seriously, so far as to confirm it with such Oaths as convinced him he
was in earnest, he would needs make some sport at it, telling him, he was very
much obliged to his Mistress, for providing him an entertainment with so sweet
a Gentlewoman, and that no doubt it was an expression of Violanta's gratitude
toward him, who being not, by reason of her indisposition, in a capacity to
requite the services he had done her, and thinking her engagement a burden,
turned him over for the payment of it to her Cousin's husband, with whom he
must expect a very pleasant night's lodging.

Thus did he endeavor to divert both his Friend and himself with witty
descants on so odd an adventure, but Don Rodrigues was in such a distraction
of thought as that he minded them but little, and was so cast down, that his
Cousin could no less than pity him, and was somewhat in fear how dangerous the
consequences of his despair might be. Don Pedro was a person naturally daring
enough, one that had run through many adventures, and durst undertake any thing
thoug^ never so extravagant; he had also a great love for Don Rodrigues, so
that, all put together, he was content to supply the place of the fair
Virginia, thoug^ with the hazard of what mischief he might receive from an
exasperated and jealous husband. Being therefore fixed in his resolution, he
embraced his Cousin, and raised him to Life again by telling him what hazard he
would run, to procure him the enjoyment of his Mistress. You shall not be, said
he to him, so extremely obliged to me as you imagine for what I shall do for
you, I find my self inclined to undertake it as an action of honor, wherein I
pretend to as much reputation as if I had behaved my self ever so gallantly at
the storming of some strong place.

Things thus concluded, word was sent to Virginia, that her proposition was
accepted; she appointed the time that very night; the two Cousins came
according to appointment, were conducted into the house with as little noise as
might be; and Don Pedro was forced, in the presence of the fair Lady, to put
off his clothes, as being desirous her orders should be observed with the
greatest exactness. Don Pedro being thus stripped to his linen, she brought him,
as softly as if his way had been paved with eggs, and with the greatest caution
imaginable, to the dangerous bedside, and, having drawn the curtains, and
turned down the clothes as easily as might be, held the daring Don Pedro by the
arms, while he gingerly laid himself down in the bed, who happily now began to
repent him of his confidence, and no doubt contented himself with such a part
of the bed as that he came not near the middle.

Having thus disposed of him, she went her ways, locked the chamber door
without ever minding the noise she made in doing it, which Don Pedro was
troubled most of all at. Her business now was to get to Don Rodrigues, whom I
am apt to believe she paid, like a gallant good natured woman, what ever she
was in his debt, at least as much as he would take of it.

Don Pedro in the mean time was in a condition much different from that of his
Cousin's, who no doubt was over head and ears in the embraces of a fair Lady
that was a bed with him, while this overcharitable Kinsman lay in fear of
nothing so much as of those of a sordid man, who, to his great misfortune, was
a very troublesome bedfellow. Then did he begin to reflect, but too late, on
his foolish presumption, that being what he should have done before he engaged
himself in such a design; he blamed himself, called himself fool, and
acknowledged that the injury he did a husband was one of those that are
unpardonable, if he himself were to pass his sentence upon it.

But it was not long ere these sad reflections were interrupted, and his just
fears heightened by his Bed-fellow's turning to him, and casting his burdensome
arm about his neck, as if he would have embraced his wife. Don Pedro somewhat
frightened at those unwelcome caresses, the more happily because accompanied with
certain words imperfectly uttered, made a shift to disburthen himself of the
arm which he thought more weighty than a far heavier burden, and slipped his
neck from under it, taking great care not to do him any hurt; and having so
done, he got to the bedside, with his body so far over, that he had much ado
to keep in the bed, wishing his life fairly at an end, and blaming only
himself for running so great a hazard to comply with the passion of two
indiscreet Lovers. He had hardly time to breathe, and recover his spirits ever
so little, ere the unquiet Bedfellow thrust in his legs between his; which
last action, added to the foregoing persecutions, made him look pale as death
it self. At last, whilst one came still nearer, and the other removed, day
comes on, very expectedly to Don Pedro, who was not able to stand out any
longer against his Adversary, who had thrust him as far as he could go.

He got out of bed as gently as he could, and went to open the door, which he
found very carefully double locked, a misfortune as indigestible as any of the
precedent. As he was trying, to little purpose, to thrust back the lock, it
flew open of a sudden, and the door had almost taken him over the face.
Virginia comes into the room as it were in much haste, and asked him loud
enough, Whither he made such haste? Don Pedro entreating her with a low voice
to speak more gently, asked her whether she were mad to hazard in that manner
the waking of her husband, and desired her she would let him out. How! go out?
replies the Lady with a loud voice. No, I would have my husband see what
bedfellow he has had to night, that he may see the fruits of his own
jealousy, and what I am able to do.

Having so said, bold as a Lioness she took Don Pedro by the arm; then, in such
disturbance as that he had not the strength to get from her, opened the
shutters of the windows, without letting go her prize, and dragging him to the
bedside, drew the curtains, saying aloud, See, Mr. Jealous-brains, whom you
have had to your bedfellow! Don Pedro was not so scared, but that he had the
confidence to look into that dreadful bed, where, instead of the imagined
Satyr, he found his amiable Violanta, who had lain with him, and not
Virginia's husband, who was gone into the Country eight days before. The two
fair Cousins jeered him most unmercifully, never had a witty man such a task to
vindicate himself, or betrayed a greater confusion. Violanta, who was extremely
a lover of mirth, and spoke things handsomely and ingeniously, made her Cousin
almost burst with laughing when she related what frights she had put Don Pedro
to, whenever, pretending to be between sleeping and waking, she got any t^ing
near him.

This baiting put Don Pedro, who was still in his shirt, almost out of
countenance; so that it was a long time ere he could recover himself out of the
confusion he was in. At last Virginia took pity of him, and left him and her
Cousin to themselves, to make up the accounts that were between them, which
were of some consequence, for it took up their time from morning till it was
noon. From that time, while the Husband was in the Country, the two he-Cousins
and the two she-Cousins had frequent meetings, and made their advantages of the
opportunity. The Indian being returned, only Don Rodrigues fared the worse for
it; for Don Pedro, by the assistance of the Servants whom his Presents had
brought to his Lure, made a shift, for two or three months, to spend most
flights with Violanta, who was at her own disposal, and, since her Cousin's
marriage, lodged in a part of the house whereof she had the command, and which
had a backdoor that opened into another street. He was so deeply in love with
her, that he earnestly wished himself married to her, but when he made any
Proposal of that nature to her, she so handsomely put off the discourse, that
he knew not whether it were out of design, or that she minded not much what he
said to her. At last, to confirm the general opinion, that this world is a
Stage of perpetual changes, Violanta began to remit much of her passion, and by
little and little grew to that coldness toward Don Pedro, that he could not
forbear complaining of it, and, not knowing what to quarrel at, charged her
with infidelity, reproaching her, that she had entertained some other Gallant
into her favor.

But instead of recovering himself by this means into that place in her
affections which he had formerly possessed, it made him so insupportable to
Violanta, that she did not only forbear the kindnesses she did him in the
night, but could not endure his company in the day time. Yet was he not a jot
cast down at it. He, by the charms of a many Presents, prevailed so far with
one of the Gentlewomen, treacherous enough of her own inclination, as that she
discovered to him, that her Mistress was extremely taken with her Cousin's
Brother-in-law, who was then just come from the University; that he was a very
handsome young man, and no less in love with Violanta, than Violanta was with
him. To act something notorious for the perfidiousness of it, this wicked Wench
advised him to pretend himself sick, to send his Mistress notice of it,
complaining as if she were the cause of his indisposition, which, by reason of
the likelihood of it, might be credited; and, in a word, to pretend it so
seriously, that her Mistress might not be so vigilant, nor stand so much upon
her guard, as she had ever done, since she broke off her correspondence with
him. Don Pedro played his part as well as if he had been an old Actor at it.
Violanta perceived not the Mist that was cast before her eyes, and the
perfidious Author of the Plot, had no sooner brought her Mistress's new Adonis
into that chamber, but she went to open the gate to the jealous Don Pedro.

He comes all fury into Violanta's chamber, and surprises her already in bed,
and her young Exerciser putting off his clothes to lay himself by her. He went
with his sword drawn straight to his Rival, happily to frighten him a little. The
young man had his wits about him, so that taking up one of his shoes, and
holding it out as one would do a pocket-pistol, aimed at Don Pedro's face, so
confidently, that Don Pedro, who mistrusted no such thing, and doubted not but
that he would have shot at him, slunk down and turned of one side, in which
interval the young man got out at the door. Violanta, who was resolved to make
an absolute rupture with Don Pedro, broke out into a laughter, and jear'd at
his fear of being pistoll'd with a shoe. He took her abuses so heinously, that
he fell a boxing of her; she had him by the hair; it came to a bloody scuffle,
insomuch, that at last, the hard-hearted Granadin, having used her so
unmercifully, that she was forced to cry out Murder, made his escape into the
street, just as Virginia, her husband, and all the servants, armed, as it were
to engage an enemy, that had beat up their quarters, came into Violanta's
chamber.

In the mean time Don Pedro gave Don Rodrigues an account of what had passed,
and, not losing any time, went and proffered his service to the Duke of
Ossonne, who was to depart the next day to be Viceroy of Naples. Don Pedro
expected him at the Port, where they were to embark, leaving his dear Cousin
extremely troubled both at his departure and the occasion of it. He continued
six or seven years at Naples, much respected by the Viceroy, who allowed him
very considerable pensions. He received also no small sums out of Spain, so
that there was not any person in Naples lived at ^ higher rate than he did,
which made him more considerable in Italy than most of your Spaniards, who go
thither as much out of a design to grow rich, as the French do to spend their
money. He traveled to Sicily, made some stay in the more eminent Cities, and,
being returned into Italy, spent two or three years at Rome, as many at Venice,
visited all the places he thought worth it; and, at last, having been fourteen
or fifteen years out of Spain, ever in love, or, if you will, ever making it
his main business to satisfy his lust, still engaged in some adventure or
other, and more and more confirmed in his opinion, that a man could not be
safely married to a witty woman, an humor took him to put a period to all his
extravagant courses, and to return to GRANADA, to see all the friends he had
left there.

But the greatest motive of his departure out of Italy, was, that his returns
of money failed him, through the disappointment of his correspondents; or, at
least, his Exchequer was grown so low, that he had hardly so much as carried
him to Barcelona. There he sold what clothes he could spare, to buy him a Mule,
and keeping only the best he had for his journey, he took his way toward his
dear Country, without any retinue at all, the servant whom he had brought with
him out of Spain being, in all probability, dead of the Neapolitan disease, and
his stock so small, as would not happily defray the charges of another.

He left Barcelona at the break of day, to avoid the heat, and the importunity
of the flies, which in August are very troublesome, so that by nine of the
clock he was gotten four or five leagues in his way. He rode through the middle
of a pretty large country village, where a certain Duke of Cataloniae passed
away part of the Summer, as having in that place a fair Castle that stood upon
the road. The Duke was an ancient man, and had to his Lady a woman of an
excellent humor, a great both lover and maker of sport, and about twenty years
of age. He was that day gone abroad upon some hunting-meeting, and was not to
return till the next. The young Duchess standing in a Balcony of the Castle
cast her eye on our Adventurer of Granada. His goodly presence and the state of
his riding raised in her a desire to have a sight of him nearer hand; besides,
that she was of an inquisitive nature, and suffered few strangers to pass
through the Town without sending for them. Though he had resolved to bait some
leagues off the place where he then was, yet could he not civilly answer a
request made to him from the Duchess with a denial, amounting to no more than
his waiting on her only as long as the urgency of his occasions would permit.
She was beautiful as an Angel, and the Granadin was one that felt a certain
warmth diffuse it self through his whole body, at the sight of such beauties,
though they were not Dutchesses. He, on the other side, was a person every way
graceful, and the Duchess took much pleasure to see men of his making; to
redeem, in some measure, the time she misspent with her husband, who, to her
great misfortune, thought her so handsome, and was so infinitely taken with the
pleasantness of her behavior, that he imagined he never saw her enough, though
she were seldom out of his sight.

Don Pedro, being a person of excellent parts and good judgment, found the
Duchess much diversion by giving her a relation of his Travels, and soon
observed her to be of a nature much inclined to mirth and a pleasant passing
away of the time. She inquired particularly concerning the Gallantry at Naples,
would needs know whether the Women there have much freedom, and whether the
Gallants of Italy were comparable to those of Spain. In fine, Don Pedro was
confirmed by the questions she put to him, that if she were not very well read
in the business of Courtship and Gallantry, it was not for want of good will.
She would needs entertain him at dinner to both their mutual satisfaction: soon
after dinner he would have taken his leave of her, but she would not by any
means permit it telling him her Lord would not return that day, that he must
needs be her guest, and very obligingly adoing, that persons of his worth being
very rare in Catalonia, they were not to be parted with till some extraordinary
necessity forced them away, and consequently the happiness of their company was
to be improved to the utmost.

She thereupon led him into a Closet, which by reason of its spaciousness was
very cool, adorned with Pictures, Porcelane, and other Rarities, and furnished,
besides all things suitable to the greatness of the person, with a sumptuous
Couch, covered with a Satin quilt. Having seated him on it, he related to her
his adventures at Granada, Sevil, and Madrid, as also those he had met with in
Italy, which are not come to my knowledge. The Duchess heard him with much
attention, and he told her at last, that he was resolved to marry, if he could
but meet with a woman simple enough to secure him, as to those inconveniences
which witty women run their husbands into. An Estate I have, continued he,
plentiful enough, and though she I shall marry have no fortune at all, so she
be well brought up, and not over-deformed, I shall not scruple to marry her;
though, to be sincere with you, I should rather make choice of one that were
unhandsome, so she were simple, than a handsome one that were not. Ah how
strangely do you misapprehend things in my judgment, says the Duchess to him,
or, what do you mean, when you say, well brought up? I mean a virtuous woman
and of good reputation, replies he. And how is it possible a woman that is
little better than a natural fool can be virtuous, says the fair Lady, since
she knows not what Virtue is, nay is not in a capacity to learn? How do you
imagine a fool can have any affection for you, having not the apprehension to
know you? She will be wanting to her duty, yet not be sensible of it; whereas a
woman of understanding, in case she should be distrustful of her own virtue,
will make a shift to avoid the occasions which may endanger the loss of it.

Their contestation took up much longer time, the Granadine maintaining, that a
woman should aspire to no greater knowledge than that of loving her husband,
being faithful to him, and careful of the government of her house and children;
and the Duchess on the other side desirous to convince him, that a simple
woman was not able to do any thing of all this; nay that, though she were
handsome, it would not be long ever she would be thought troublesome* They were
both satisfied of one another's wit and judgment, and the mutual good opinion
they had conceived one of another was soon heightened into an affection, nay, I
may say, something yet greater. There was not only a difference between the
Granadine and the Duke, as to age, understanding, and person, but the former
was of such an exact composure as the world happily afforded but few like him;
and if he was thought such by his Duchess, he in requital thought her the
handsomest woman he had ever seen. He was bold as a Lion, and never had the
opportunity to be alone with a woman, but he made proffer of his service to
her. If it were accepted, he did the best he could; if offense were taken, he
cast himself on his knees, and calling himself first the presumptuous Ixion, he
craved pardon so ingenuously and with such exquisite hypocrisy, that either
his offense was pardoned, or happily it would not have been taken amiss if he
offended again. I never thought, said he to the Magnetic Duchess, to have met
with a person able to force me out of an opinion wherein so many experiences
had confirmed me: but I must withal confess, I never was before opposed in it
by a person extraordinary as you are, whose soul alone, without making any
advantage of your beauty (which yet defies the world to parallel it) may
exercise what jurisdiction it pleases over all those who have apprehension
enough to acknowledge, that your excellencies are greater than those of all
other women put together. You have cured me of one error, but suffer me to
groan under something else which is so much the more dangerous, and hard to be
cured, by how much I take greater pleasure in my sickness, and satisfy, by
enduring it, the noblest ambition man can be capable of.

I have now forgot what other hyperboles he drew up together, to engage the
Dutchess's virtuous inclinations; as also what reserves of pathetical
impertinences he was forced to make use of; for, he was upon a very hot and
dangerous service of Courtship. Nor could I ever learn with what countenance
the Duchess entertained a Forlorn of Love and Gallantry so confidently brought
up; whether she received the amorous charge suitably to the fierceness of it;
or made the weaker resistance out of hope of better quarter. These particulars,
though much desirous of it, I could never have any account of, and only have
it from one of the Dutchess's Gentlewomen, since dead in France of the King's
Evil, that the Closet-door was locked upon them at two of the Clock, and that
they were there together till Supper-time; and besides what the Gentlewoman
said, I know my self by experience, that Opportunity makes the Thief. Night
came on, the indulgent Deity of stolen Loves* but Don Pedro and the Duchess
were prejudiced rather than obliged by it, for out of a regard to Civility, and
to keep the Servants from talking, (whose jealousies ever magnify things to
the great prejudice of Truth, a Virtue they are professed enemies to) they
called for lights, which, being brought, were darkened by the two bright eyes
Heaven had bestowed on the Duchess, and which then out-vy'd the Stars with
their lively sparkling. Her complexion, which now had doubled the hue of its
native carnation, appeared brighter to Don Pedro than the Sun in a Summers day,
and his face too had a little touch of the violent inclining to red.

But as they were beholding one another with much confidence and satisfaction,
an alarm came to the Duchess, that the Duke her husband was come into the
Court. All she could do upon so sudden notice, was, to dispose her much
astonished Gallant into a Closet where she kept her perfumed waters, and,
having locked him in, to cast her self on a Bed. The Duke, who was a man of
threescore years of age at least, comes into his Lady's Closet, and finds her
fresh as a rose upon the bush. He told her, that a Letter he had received from
the Viceroy had occasioned his return sooner than he expected. He was grown
very hungry, ordered to be brought him into the Closet what there was ready,
and the Duchess, though she had no great stomach to eat any thing with him,
while her Gallant shook, or happily did something else, for fear, yet took a
Chair and sat near the Table. She was of a disposition extremely inclined to
make sport, and so divertive, as that it, in a manner, retriv'd her old husband
into youth again, so much was he pleased at every thing she did. It was an
ordinary thing between them to lay extravagant wagers, and that most commonly
when she had some occasion or humor to get money out of him, which the simple
man took great delight to loose, as one that inexpressibly doted on so
excellent a woman.

He never admired her so much as at this time; She, to heighten his admiration,
told him a hundred pleasant stories; at which the good Duke was ready to burst
with Laughing; for eating with a good stomach, and at the same time laughing
very heartily, he was two or three times so near choking, that they were
forced to give him such thumps in the back, as he would have taken very
unkindly at another time: but through God's mercy, he got no hurt, only a crum
or two missed their way down his throat. At last, the Duchess, who had a
malicious humor to make sport at any thing, would needs divert her self at the
cost of her imprisoned Gallant. She told the Duke, that it seemed a long time
to her since they had laid any wager; and that she would gladly lay a hundred
Pistols with him, upon such a match and terms as they should agree upon. The
Duke told her he was at her service, and expected what she would propose. The
Duchess made many proposals to him, which she was confident he would not
accept; and at last she asked him, whether he would lay any wager, that he
named all those things, requisite about a house, that were made of iron. The
Duke took her up, though he thought the wager very extravagant, and having
called for pen, ink, and paper, as soon as they had taken away, and his Almoner
said Grace (for the Duke was a man of good example) he writ down the names of
all the Iron things he could think on; But such was the Dutchess's good
fortune, as that he forgot to set down Keys. She caused him diverse times to
read over what he had writ, and having asked him whether he had any thing to
add, she folded up the paper, and told him she would take time to examine it,
and in the interim acquaint him with an adventure had happened to her, one of
the most pleasant he had ever heard of.

I was gotten, continued she, presently after your departure, to one of the
Balconies of the Castle which look toward the Road, where I had not been long,
ere I spied passing by, mounted on a Mule, a man of a goodly and graceful
presence, who, by the rate of his riding, seemed to be employed upon some
business that required more than ordinary expedition. I was very desirous to
know what might be the occasion of his haste, and thereupon sent a Page after
him to bring him to me. I must needs acknowledge, I never saw a handsomer Man,
nor one more likely to make the gravest Matron, or strictest Nun, break their
vows of chastity. I asked him, Whence he traveled and What he was? He gave me
an account of himself with so much gallantry and ingenuity, that he enflamed me
with a desire of more of his conversation. I prevailed with him so far as that
he was willing to stay the remainder of the day in the Castle, and give me a
relation of his Adventures, which must needs have been very remarkable, and
consequently very pleasant in the relation. He acquitted himself answerably to
my expectation, and I must confess, I was never better pleased with any story
in my life; and I shall not think it much to let you participate of the
pleasantness of it.

She thereupon acquainted the Duke what had happened to Don Pedro at Granada,
Sevil, and Madrid, whereat the good man, who made as much sport at a foolish
story as any Duke within a hundred miles of him, spent his spleen in such
violent and immoderate Laughters, as occasioned those as well of the Duchess,
as the chiefest of the Duke's Menial Servants, with whom he innocently lived in
great intimacy and familiarity. She afterward acquainted him what had happened
to her Gallant in Italy, which was also very pleasant, as I have been told, but
the particulars I could never learn. Only this I know, that the Duke laughed
so heartily thereat, that Don Pedro himself, locked up as he was, could hardly
forbear. She told him what an ill opinion he had of all women that pretended to
any thing of wit, the reasons which he alleged to maintain it, and those which
she had urged in opposition thereto.

At last, having found her husband, and all that were present, nay Don Pedro
himself so much sport that they were weary of it, she told the Duke, that the
Gallant of Granada, after the relation of his adventures, grew so presumptuous
as to make his applications to her, and had done it with so much address, that,
not knowing how to take it am^ from a stranger, that he was so confident in ^
Courtship, as to aim at her enjoyments, she ^ so taken with him that it was no
hard matter w^^ him to perceive it. To be short, to what e^^ should I detain
you longer, continued the Duchess, such a person may attempt any thing, an^
not be thought too confident. We spent mo^^ part of the day together, to our
mutual satisfaction, and would have been together still, had you not come upon
us when I least expected you* I shall not dissemble with you, I was both
troubled and surpised at your return. My lovely stranger seemed to be more
astonished than I was; I with much precipitation got him into my Closet of
perfumed waters, whence he hea^s me if he be not dead out of fear: but
confiden^ in the influence I have over you, and being of my own nature,
unwilling to dissemble, even in those things wherein the freedom of my humor
might prove prejudicial to me, I would needs find you matter of d^^ersion at
the cost of that poor Gentleman, whom I will set at liberty as soon as you are
departed to your Chamber, and dismiss him that he may return to Granada, where,
he says, he goes to find out a woman simple enough to be his wife.

The Duchess accompanied her relation with so much ingenuity, freedom, and
likelihood, that the Duke began to quit his mirth and to take things in good
earnest. He grew pale; was afraid his Lady had said no more than what was true;
nay, could not forbear asking her for the Key of the Closet, where she said the
Granadine was locked up. She fell to some other discourse, and thereby
heightened both his jealousies and his fear; he asked her a second time for the
key of the closet; she denied to give it him. He would needs have it, and
started out of his chair in a great fury. Not so fast, my Lord, not so fast,
says the Duchess to him; before you ask for keys so hastily, pray have the
patience, leisurely to read the Inventory you have given me; you have forgotten
to set down, keys, you cannot deny they are usually made of iron, and that you
have lost your hundred Pistols, which I accordingly expect to be immediately
paid me; and know withal, that it was only to convince you that you had lost,
as also to put you into so good an humor as that you might part the more
freely with your money, that I have entertained you with so pleasant a story.
Take heed another time you be not so easy of belief, as to receive for true
what is pure fiction and Romance. There Is no probability, that so many
extraordinary adventures should happen to the same man, and much less, that I
should have related such a story, if it were true.

The Duchess spoke this with such a confident indifference, that the Duke was
more easily induced to believe all she had said was fabulous, than he had been
to think it true. He laughed at all, as if he had been little better than out
of his wits; he admired the miraculous ingenuity of his wife, and obliged all
his domestics that were present to a like admiration, who were happily as
credulous fools as their Master. Do but see, for God's sake, said he, breaking
forth into loud exclamations and laughter, do but see, with what artifices she
has satisfied me that I had lost my wager. The Duchess was ready to burst
with laughing, her Gentlewomen were not much behind. Don Pedro in the closet
was forced to add to the Dutchess's perfumed waters, the better to smother his
joy. At last having given his Steward order to deliver his Lady the hundred
Pistols, he took his leave of her and went to his own lodgings, often telling
her, one while, that she was a female Devil, another, that she had a wit and
invention beyond the Devil. The servants repeated the same thing after their
Master, so that till he was abed and asleep, nothing was talked of about the
house, but the damnable wit of the Duchess.

In the mean time, the Duchess being paid the hundred Pistols by the Steward,
caused the chamber door to be locked; and having brought Don Pedro out of his
imprisonment, not fully recovered of the fear she had put him into, she pressed
him to acknowledge, that a witty and discreet woman may, without prejudice to
her honor, salve a misfortune, whereof the very thought would make a simple
one die for fear. She would needs have him eat of what her Women had brought up
for her self. He entreated her to excuse him, and to dismiss him as soon as
might be. She gave him the hundred Pistols she had got of her Husband, with a
Gold-chain, and her own Picture, which amounted to as much, and desired him to
remember her, and to give her an account of his further Adventures.

Having thereupon embraced him with much affection, she recommended him to the
conduct of her Women, who put him and his Mule secretly out at a backdoor. He
thought it no prudence to lodge in that place, but to ride forward two Leagues,
to the Town where he thought to have dined the day before, when the Duchess
retained him.

As he rid along, what had happened to him with the amorous Duchess was
perpetually present to his thoughts. He could not sufficiently admire, at least
as he then thought, the readiness wherewith at first sight she entertained his
affection, even before she knew him; her confidence to make so strange and
pleasant a story to the Duke, which yet was but too true; and lastly, her
subtilty in salving all by applying it to the Wager. He could not also but
admire the easy nature and simplicity of the Duke; he pitied him, and, after
all accidents and circumstances weighed, was confirmed more than ever in the
opinion, that a witty Woman was of a difficult keeping; and thence inferred,
that, if the Duchess had not been over-confident of her own wit, she would not
so easily have executed what she had been so desirous to do, nor have been
guilty of a presumption so incredible as to declare it to her Husband.

In fine, from all the Adventures he had run through, and all the experiences
he had of mankind, he derived a certain confidence, that he should never run
the hazard of being unfortunately married, either by not taking any Wife at
all, or marrying one so simple, as knew no difference between love and aversion.

Amidst these reflections he arrived at Madrid, where he found his Cousin Don
Rodrigues possessed of his Father's estate, and married to his Cousin. He
understood from him, that Violanta was married; and that the fair Virginia was
gone to the Indies with her Husband. From Madrid he took his journey for
Granada. He alighted at his Aunt's, who entertained him with inexpressible
kindness, and acquainted him that Seraphina led a Saint's life in the Nunnery,
and that her beloved Servant was dead, out of pure grief and indignation that
he had not prevailed with her, to quit the holy life she had obliged her self
to, and marry him.

The next day he went along with his Aunt to see young Laura, Seraphina's
daughter, she had been put into a Convent at four years of age, and might then
be about sixteen or seventeen. He thought her beautiful as all the Angels
together, and withal simple beyond all the Nuns that came into the wo^ld
without wit, and were taken out of it ere they got any. He viewed her very
seriously, and was extremely taken with her beauty. He obliged her to speak,
and could not but admire her simplicity and her innocence. He doubted not but
that he had found out what he sought; and what made him have a greater
inclination for Laura, was, that he had had a great love for Seraphina, and
perceived her daughter to be much like her, though incomparably more handsome.
He acquainted his Aunt that she was not his daughter, and how that he had some
intentions to marry her: His Aunt encouraged him in his design, and acquainted
Laura therewith, who expressed not any either satisfaction or dissatisfaction
thereat. Don Pedro took order for the furnishing of his house, hearkened out for
such Menservants as were in some measure remarkable for their sottishness,
laid out for Maids as simple as the Mistress that was to govern them, and had
much ado to find any. He made her clothes as rich and sumptuous as any could be
had in Granada. All the persons of quality about the City were at the Wedding,
and were no less satisfied with Laura's beauty, than dissatisfied with her want
of understanding. The ceremonies of the wedding were over in very good time, so
that the new married couple were left alone. Don Pedro ordered his Servants to
go to their beds, and having sent away his wife's maids, after they had
undressed her, locked the chamber door.

Having thus ordered things, Don Pedro, out of a transcendency of prudence,
which was the greatest madness in the world, put in execution the most
fantastic design that could fall into the imagination of a man, who had all
his life been accounted a person of understanding. Being more fool than his
wife was simple, he would needs try how far he might trust her simplicity. He
set himself in a chair, caused his wife to stand before him, and said these
words to her, or others happily no less impertinent; You are now my wife, a
happiness for which I hope I shall have cause to bless God as long as we live
together. Let it sink very deeply into your mind, what I am going to tell you,
and observe it exactly as long as you live, both for fear of offending God, and
displeasing me. At all these hony'd words, the innocent Laura made very low
courtzies, whether seasonably, or not, is no great matter, and looked on her
Husband as timerously as a Boy newly sent to School would on an imperious
Pedant. Do you know, continued Don Pedro, what kind of life persons that are
married do lead? I know nothing of it, replies Laura, making a courtzie lower
than any before; but if you will teach it me, I shall be as perfect in it as in
my Ave-mary, and then another courtzie. Don Pedro was the most satisfied man in
the world, to find his wife much more simple than he could well have expected.
He drew out of a closet that was in the chamber a suit of Armor, very rich and
very light, which he had sometime worn at a magnificent reception, which the
City had made for the King of Spain. He put his idiot-wife into them, he put on
her head a little gilt Headpiece covered with a plume of feathers, girt a
short Sword to her side, and having put a Lance into her hand, told her, that
the duty of such married Women as would be accounted virtuous, was, to watch
their Husbands while they slept, armed all over as she then was. She made him
no answer; but with her ordinary reverences, which had not happily been at an end
a good while, if he had not commanded her to take two or three turns about the
chamber* which she did by chance with so much Majesty, (her natural beauty, and
Pallas-like accoutrements contributing much thereto) that the over-subtil
Granadin was in a manner out of himself for joy to see it. He went to bed, and
Laura continued in the posture he had left her in, till five in the morning.

The most prudent and most circumspect of all the Husbands that ever were, at
least who thought himself no less, got up, put on his clothes, disarmed his
wife, helped her to put off her clothes, and having disposed her into the bed
out of which he rose, kissed her over and over, and wept out of pure joy that
he had found, as he thought, what he looked for. He ordered her to lie a bed
till it were very late, and having commanded the Maids not to disturb her, he
went to Mass, and thence about his occasions; for I had forgot to tell you,
that he had bought an Office at Granada, such as might be that of a perpetual
Major or Sheriff.

The first night of the Nuptials was spent in the manner you heard, and the
Husband was such a Coxcomb as to make no better use of the second. But Heaven
punished him according to the use he made of his Talent. There happened a
business, which obliged him, all excuses laid aside, to take post the same day,
and make all the expedition he could to Court. He had no more time allowed him
than to shift himself, to put on other clothes, and to take leave of his wife,
whom he commanded, upon pain of God's displeasure and his own, exactly to
observe, in his absence, the life that married women were to lead.

Those who have any thing to do at Court, are uncertain how long it may be, ere
they are dispatched. Don Pedro thought not to have staid abroad above five or
six days, but his business kept him there like a Burre, now sticking to one
Courtier, anon to another, for four or five months; in the mean time, the
simple Laura neglected not her duty, spent the nights according to her
Husband's order, in armor, and the days that succeeded them in such works as
she had learned among the Nuns.

Much about this time came a Gentleman of Corduba to prosecute a Lawsuit at
Granada. He was, as to his internals, no fool; as to his externals, handsome
enough. He often saw Laura in her Balcony, and thought her very handsome: he
often passed and repassed by her windows, a kind of Courtship ordinary in
Spain: and Laura, on the other side, so let him go to and fro, without either
knowing what it meant, or indeed having any desire to know. A Citizen's wife,
of mean quality, who lived over against Don Pedro's house, being of a nature
extremely charitable, and concerning her self much in the exigencies of any she
saw distressed, soon took notice both of the affection of the Stranger, and the
insensibility of her fair Neighbor thereof. She was a woman could manage a
business with abundance of conduct and circumspection, and the principal
quality she professed, was that of making Matches, and soliciting venereal
causes, whether they were just or unjust it mattered not, so they brought in
something to make the pot boil. And this employment Nature seemed to have
designed her for, as having furnished her with all the accomplishments
requisite in such as would be eminent therein; for she had some skill in making
of Periwigs, she had a pension from all Chamber-maids, and Waiting-Gentlewomen,
to sell their Lady's cast clothes and their own, and other things which your
meaner sort of Gentlewomen make a great show with; she distilled several sorts
of Waters, she had some secrets for the beautifying of the body, and above all,
she had confidence enough to pretend to some skill in Chiromancy and Astrology,
and upon that account, lay under some suspicion of being a Witch. She so
constantly saluted the Gentleman of Corduba every time he passed by her
Neighbor's door, that he could not but imagine it done out of some design. He
returned her Salutation, went to her, and with the fame labor became
acquainted with her, and improved that acquaintance into Friendship; he made
her privy to his Love, and promised her a very good reward if she proved a
successful sollicitress on his behalf to her Neighbor.

Upon this encouragement (instructions she needed not any) the old piece of
Brokery bestirs her self immediately; she soon prevailed with the simple
Servants to let her in to the Mistress, under pretense of showing her some
rarities which she had to sell; She commended her beauty, bemoaned her being
deprived so soon of her Husband's company; and, being left alone with her,
brought in some discourse of the gallant Gentleman who passed by her doors so
often. She told her that he loved her beyond his own life, and was p^ssionately
desirous to become her servant, if so be she would permit him. Truly, truly, I
am very much obliged to him, replies the innocent Laura, and should gladly
entertain him into my service; but the house is now full of servants, and till
some one of them be dismissed, I dare not entertain any in my husband's
absence. I will write to him about it, if this Gentleman be desirous I should,
and doubt not but he will do any thing I shall press him to.

The tempting Gypsy needed not so great a discovery to be satisfied, that
Laura was little removed from simplicity it self. She therefore made her
apprehend, as well as she could, after what manner the Gentleman was desirous
to serve her; told her he was a person of as great an estate as her husband,
and that if she were desirous to make any trial of it, she would bring her, as
a present from him, Jewels of great value, and what else she should desire.
Alas, Madam! says Laura, I have so much of what you speak of, that I know not
what to do with them. Nay, if it be so, replied the Satanical Ambassadress, and
that you do not much care whether he make you any presents, do him but the
favor as that he may give you a visit. That he may do when he pleases, says
Laura, there is no body hinders him. That will do very well, replies the Old
one, but it were better, if none of your Servants knew of it. That Is no hard
matter, replies Laura, for my Women lie not in my own Chamber, and I go to Bed
without their assistance, and that very late. Take this key, which opens any
lock about the house, and, about eleaven at night, he may come in at the
Garden-gate, where there is a little pair of stairs that lead to my Chamber.

The old Crone upon that took her by the hands, and kissed them over and over,
telling her she would go and revive that poor Gentleman, whom she had left half
dead. How comes he to be in that condition, cries Laura not a little frightened?
It Is you are the occasion of his death, replies the old tremptress. Laura grew
pale, as if she had been convicted of a murder, and would have made
protestations of her innocence, if the wicked Agent, who thought not fit to
make any further trial of her ignorance, had not cast her arms about her neck,
and, assuring her the sick party would not dye, taken leave of her.

It may be well imagined she was not so neglectful as to leave behind her that
miraculous Key, which opened all doors. There may happily be some body, who* upon
reading what is here said of that Key, will think he has played the Critic
rarely, when he shall say, that it was enchanted, and that this passage betrays
something of fable: but whoever he be, let him know thus much from his most
humble Servant, that the M^sters of Families in Spain have such Keys, which
they call Mistress-keys, and accordingly take heed another time, how he carps
at what he understands not. But now I think on it, let him take what falls
within his narrow apprehension which way he pleases: may I be thought as
impertinent as he, if ever I trouble my head with it.

Nor shall I care a jot if he think this very digression impertinent; let him
make a Parenthesis of it if he will. I know he is impatient to know what the
old woman does. She is just gone to the amorous Gentleman, who is at her house
entertaining a Daughter of hers; one her Mother designs to be her successor in
the Discipline of advancing the enjoyments and accommodations of Mankind.
Knocking as hard as she could at the door, the Gentleman began to suspect he
might be betrayed; but the Daughter understood it to signify the happy success
of her Mother's intercession, as having learnt from her, and she from the
common proverb, that, Who brings good news is not afraid to knock at the door.
She comes into the room with an infernal smile in her countenance, and gave him
that account of her furtherance of the business, as made him ready to leap out
at the windows for joy. He rewarded her very liberally, and expected night with
much impatience. It comes at l^st, though never the sooner for his expectation.
He gets into the Garden, and with as little noise as might be to Laura's
Chamber Door, while she was walking very seriously up and down the Chamber, all
in Armor and a Lance in her hand, according to the wise instructions of her
extravagant Husband* There was one small light, and that placed in a remote
corner of the Chamber, the Door being wide open to receive the Gallant she
expected; but he seeing the glimpse of a person all in Armor, made no doubt
but there was some treachery in the business. His fear at that time
over-master'd his love, how violent soever it might be, so that h^ made more
haste to be gone than he had to come thither, imagining he could hardly get
soon enough into the Street. He went to his Proxey, and acquainted her what
danger he had been in. She, to vindicate the sincerity of her procedure, went
the next day to Laura, who presently asked her, Whether the Gentleman were
still sick, and why he came not according to appointment? He is neither sick,
nor has failed to come, replied Satan, but finding a man all in Armor walking
up and down your Chamber, it frightened him away* Laura at this burst out into a
laughter, she could not recover her self out of for a good while, which the Old
one knew not how to interpret. At last, not able to laugh any longer, and
making a shift to speak, she told her Neighbor, that it must needs be the
Gentleman was never married, and that it was she her self who walked up and
down the Chamber in Armor.

The old woman was still to seek what Laura should mean by that, and for a good
while could not believe she was well in her wits; but after abundance of
questions and answers, she apprehended what she could never have believed, as
well, of the simplicity of a young Maid of sixteen years of age, that should
know any thing almost; as the extravagant precaution her Husband had bethought
him of to secure his Wives honor. She thought it her best course to let Laura
continue in her error till she were undeceived by her expected Gallant, and so,
in stead of betraying her surprise at the strangeness of the thing, she joined
with Laura in laughing at the fright she had put the Gentleman into. Another
appointment was made that he should give his personal appearance at her Chamber
that night. The old woman satisfied the Gallant, and both admired the
sottishness as well of the Husband as the Wife.

Night came on, he gets into the Garden, thence up the private stairs, and
found his Lady all in Armor, upon duty, as she used to be. He embraced her
though all clad in Iron, and she entertained him, as if she had known him from
the longest day she could remember. At last he asked her, Why she was all in
Armor? She made answer, smiling, that she might not put them off, nor pass
away the night in any other posture, and told him, since he seemed not to know
so much, that it was the life of married women, and that to fail in the
observance thereof was a very great sin. The crafty Cordu^se had all the
trouble in the world to undeceive her, and to persuade her that she was abused,
and that the Life of married persons was quite another thing.

At last he prevailed with her so far as that she was content he should disarm
her, and to learn of him another way of exercising Marriage much more
commodious and pleasant than that which her Husband made her practice, which
Laura acknowledged to be very inconvenient and wearisome. He was not sloathful
in disarming her, he helped also to undress her, as not finding her ready
enough at it, and having soon put off his own Clothes he laid himself by her,
and made her confess there was a vast difference between his Precepts of
Marriage and those her Husband had given her; he read her all the Lectures he
could upon that subject, and she was so far apprehensive of hi^ instructions,
as that she grew not weary of learning, plying it very hard as long as her
Husband continued at the Court. At last she received a Letter from him, which
acquainted her that he was upon his return, and that he had dispatched his
business at Court, and the Corduba-blade having also dispatched his at Granada,
the crafty Companion returned home, without so much as taking his leave of
Laura, and I think without the least regret for the loss of her company,
nothing being so frail as the Love a Man has for a Woman that is little better
than a natural Fool.

Nor was Laura on the other side less indifferent, but received her Husband
with so much satisfaction, and betrayed so little resentment for the loss of
her Gallant, as if she had never seen him. Don Pedro and his Wife supped
together to the great satisfaction of both. Bedtime came on. Don Pedro went
into Bed as he was wont to do, and was much astonished to see his Wife in her
Smock coming to ly down by him. He asked her in a great fury, why she was not
in Armor? So I should indeed, said she to him, had not another Husband taught
me a more pleasant way for a Woman to pass away the Night with her Husband. It
seems then you have another Husband, replies Don Pedro? Yea, that I have, says
she to him, so pretty a man, and so handsome, that you will be ravished to see
him; and yet I know nor when we shall see him, for since I received the last
Letter you sent, I could never set Eyes on him.

Don Pedro, smothering the trouble of his thoughts, asked her, Who it was? She
could not give any further account concerning him, but in requital proffered
Don Pedro to show him what the other Husband had taught her. The unhappy man
pretended himself sick, and it is not unlikely he was so, at least in his mind.
He thereupon turned from her, and bethinking himself that he had made choice of
an Idiot to his Wife, who had not only done what blemished his Reputation, but
thought her self not obliged to conceal it, he called to mind the wholesome
advice of the Duchess, who no doubt would have been pleased with the account
of this last Adventure of his. He thereupon detested his Error, and was
satisfied, though too late; That a virtuous and discreet Woman knows how to
observe the Laws of Honor; and if, out of frailty, she chance to break them,
that she can conceal her miscarriage.

At last, taking heart, he resolved to submit with patience to a misfortune
that was not to be remedied. He continued for a time his pretense of being
indisposed, to see whether the Lectures of his Lieutenant had done any thing
besides reaching his Wife what he had done better to have taught her himself.
They lived together some years afterward; he had always an eye over her
Actions, and, before he died, (having had no Children by her) he left her his
whole Estate, upon condition she would become a Nun, and go into the same
Convent where Seraphina was, whom he acquainted that Laura was her Daughter. He
writ to Madrid, to his Cousin Don Rodrigues, and sent him the History of his
Life and Adventures, and acknowledged that his embracing of so erroneous an
opinion had reduced him to that misfortune which he feared most of any, and
against which he thought he had used the greatest precaution.

He died; Laura was neither troubled at it, not glad of it; she went into the
Nunnery where her Mother was, who finding the Estate left by Don Pedro to her
Daughter to be very great, founded a Convent, and became the first Abbess of
it. The History of Don Pedro was divulged after his death, and served to
satisfy those that made any doubt of it. That, without wit, Virtue cannot be
perfect; That a witty Woman may be Virtuous of her self; And that a simple
Woman cannot be such, without the assistance and good directions of some other.

THE HYPOCRITES.
The Second Novel.
THE most delightful season of the year was putting the Fields and Trees into a
verdant Livery, when a certain Woman came into Toledo; a City, which, as well
for its antiquity, as its eminence, takes place of any in Spain. The woman was
handsome, young, subtle, and such a professed enemy to Truth, that for whole
years together, that Virtue came not so much as once into her mouth, and what
is yet much more to be admired, is, that Truth was never the worse for it, at
least never complained of it. She had either the artifice, or the good fortune
to be ever very successful in her lies; and there is not any thing more
certain, than that a fiction of her dressing has sometimes met with
approbation of the severest enemies of Falsehood. This was a S^^^nce she was so
great a professor in, as that her Dictates would have furnished the best
custom'd Astrolog^rs, the Poets, and the Mountebanks: in a word, this natural
endowment was such in her, that the conjunction of it with the beauty of her
countenance, in a short time, got her pieces of Gold answerably to her
insinuations and the crafty designs she carried on. Her eyes were black, sweet,
sprightly, full of gallantry, and yet unmerciful Hectors, that had been
convicted of four or five murders, and stood charged with the suspicion of
above fifty, which could not be fully proved against them; but as for the
unfortunate wretches whom they had wounded, it is hard to ghess, nay indeed to
imagine, the number of them. For matter of dressing, she had an excellency and
happiness in it beyond any of her sex, insomuch that the least pin fastened by
her hand wanted not its particular grace. For what especially related to her
head, she never troubled any for either advice or assistance; as making her
Looking-glass, at the same time, her Council of State, her Council of War, and
her Exchequer. How fatal must it be for any man to see such a Woman! since that
if he saw her, he could not forbear falling in love with her, and if he loved
her he could not do it long, and be withal long without trouble.

This Lady, accomplished as I have described her, came into Toledo just in the
close of the evening, much about the time that all the young Gentlemen of
quality in the City were preparing for a Mask to be represented at the Nuptial
solemnity of a strange Lord, who was to be married to a Lady of one of the best
Families in the Country. The Windows were become a kind of Firmament, by reason
of the Torches which were placed in them, but much more in respect of the
Ladies who looked out at them; the great number of lights having restored to
the streets that day which the night had deprived them of. The Ladies of meaner
quality clad in their mantles, discovered to those who beheld them, no more
than what they thought most worth the looking on. Many Bravoes, or rather (to
use the modern word) Trapanners, Blades, and Hectors, were hunting after some
prize, a sort of people that great Cities ever were and will be pestered with,
who trouble themselves not much whether their good fortunes be real, provided
they be thought such, or at least doubted of; who never set upon any, but in
considerable numbers, and that with insolence enough; and who, upon their good
faces and a short hanger within their breeches, assume to themselves a
jurisdiction over the lives of others, and think to make all the women die for
love, and the men for fear. O what work would this day have found the
soft-headed Complementers and Cajollers of Womankind, and what low and pitiful
equivocations were there used!

But among the rest, a young man, who, of a Scholar, was not long before
turned Page, was so prodigal of his Rhetorical fooleries before our Lady
errant, as if he had thought beyond all language to express how highly he
admired her. He had seen her alight out of the Hackney Coach that brought her,
and was so dazzled at the sight of her, that, not content with that, he had
followed her to the house where she had taken a chamber, and thence up and down
to all those places whither she went out of a desire to see something. At last
the strange Lady, having seated her self in a place she thought convenient to
see the Maskers go by, the eloquent Page, dressed that day all in linen, much
finer than ordinary, had soon fastened on some discourse with her, he being not
the first man she had ever seen. Of all the women in the world, she had the
best faculty to engage a young conceited fool upon many impertinencies, and
that with the greatest insinuation and most unsuspected malice that could be.
Imagine then, if finding this Page a Talker beyond all confidence, whether she
engaged him not to speak much more than he knew. She besotted him with
flatteries and commendations, and afterward did what she would with him. She
learned of him, that he served an old Gentleman of Andaluzia, Uncle to him who
was upon marriage, and upon whose account the whole City was in solemnity; that
he was one of the wealthiest men there of his quality; and that he h^d not any
to make his heir but that Nephew, whom he had a great tenderness for, though he
were one of the most dissolute young men in all Spain, one that fell in love
with all the women he saw, and, besides the common Slugs, and such as he could
command upon the account of his Gallantry or his Presents, had sometimes
exercised his satirical violences upon Maids, without any regard of their
qualities and conditions. To this he added, that his riots and extravagances
had made him a dear Nephew to his Uncle, and out of that reflection was he the
more inclined to see him married, to try, if upon a change of his condition
there would ensue a change of manners.

While the Page was revealing all the secrets and concernments of his Master to
her, she still by her soothing and admiring interruptions egged him on to
further di^coveries, making her remarks to those of her company, with what
grace and pleasingness he spoke handsome things: and, in fine, omitting nothing
that might contribute ought to the undoing of a young man, who had already
conceived but too good an opinion of himself. Commendations and applauses
coming from a handsome woman that has some design in it, are dangerous and
much to be feared. The poor Page had no sooner acquainted Helenilla that he was
born at Vailladolid, but she presently breaks forth into praises of that City
and the Inhabitants of it, insomuch that having run her self out of breath in
the commendations of them, even to hyperboles, she told the befooled Page, that
of all she had known of that Country, she had not seen any so handsome and
accomplished as himself. After this last touch of her flattery there needed no
more to make an absolute fool of him. She invited him to see her at her
lodging, and it is not to be questioned, whether she gave him her hand rather
than any other. He felt in himself such agitations of joy, as made him ever and
anon do such things as some would have thought him a little crack-brain'd, and
he was fully satisfied, that a man should never despair of a good fortune how
miserable soever he were.

The Lady being come to her chamber caused the best Chair to be presented to
the Page. He was so besotted with his imaginary happiness, that going to sit
down before he had well looked about him, he fell short of the Chair, his
britch took acquaintance with the ground, he scattered his cloak, hat, and
gloves about the room, and had like to have fallen upon a dagger he had, which
in his fall got out of the sheath. Helenilla run to help him up, making as much
stir as a Tygress robbed of her young ones: She took up the dagger, and told
him, that she could not endure he should wear it any more that day, after the
mischief it was like to have done him. The Page got up all he had let fall, and
made many pitiful complements suitable to the occasion and the accident.

In the mean time, Helenilla made as if she could not recover her self out of
the fright she had been put into, and began to admire the neatness of the
dagger. The Page told her it came from his old Master, who had sometimes given
it to his Nephew, together with a sword and all things belonging thereto, and
that he had made choice of it that day before many others that were in his
Master's wardrobe, to wear upon some extraordinary occasion. Helenilla proposed
to the Page whether she might not go disguised to see after what manner persons
of quality were married at Toledo. The Page told her, the ceremony would not be
till midnight, and invited her to a Collation in the Steward's chamber, who was
very much his friend. He thereupon took occasion to curse his misfortune, and
that he was obliged to exchange the most pleasant company in the world for that
of his old Master, whom the indisposition incident to age confined to his bed.
He added that being extremely troubled with the Gout he would not be at the
wedding, which was kept at a house in the City far from that of the Count of
Fuen^alide where the old Marquess his Master lived. Being upon taking his
leave, he was pumping for some handsome complement, when some body knocked at
the door in as much haste as if they had come for a Midwife. Helenilla seemed a
little troubled thereat, and desit'd the Page to go into a little closet, where
she locked him up for a longer time than he thought of. He who knocked so
confidently at the door was a Gallant of Helenilla's, who to blind the world
she made people believe was her Brother. He was privy to all her leudnesses,
and the ordinary instrument of her sleighter pleasures. She immediately gave
him an account of the Page who was locked up in the closet, and the design she
had conceived within her self to squeeze some pieces of Gold out of his old
Master, such a design as whereof the execution required no less diligence than
subtilty.

Having resolved how all things should be carried, the Coachman was called and
ordered with all expedition to make ready his Coach, though the poor Beasts
which had brought them thither from Madrid were sufficiently tired. All being
in readiness, Helenilla and her retinue (which consisted of the dreadful
Montufar, an old woman called Mendez, venerable for a weighty pair of Beads,
and a Matronlike carriage and countenance, and a little pigmey of a Lacquey)
embarked themselves in that shattered Vessel, and gave command to drive into
the street, where live the Modern Christians, whose Faith is of a newer fashion
than the clothes they sell. The Maskers were still about the streets, insomuch
that it happened the Bridegroom, disguised as the rest, met the Coach wherein
Helenilla was, and saw that dangerous Stranger, who seemed to him a Venus in
triumph* or, to speak a little more hyperbolically, the Sun it self in a
Progress. He had such a temptation to her, that a small matter would have put
all thoughts of his wedding out of his head, to go and endeavor the conquest
of that unknown Beauty; but for that time he had so much command of himself, as
that he smoothe^'d a desire violent enough though it were but just sprung in
him. He followed the Maskers, and the Hackney-Coach kept on its way toward the
Brokery, where in a trice, and without two words to the bargain, Helenilla
bought her a suit of Mourning from head to foot, and put the old woman Mendez,
her Gallant Montufar, and her little Lacquey into the like, and taking Coach
again alighted at the house of the Count of Fuensalide. The little Lacquey went
in, inquired out the lodgings of the Marquess of Villefagnan, and demanded
audience of him for a strange Lady come from the Mountains of Leon, who had
some business with him of great consequence. The good man was much surpised at
the visit of such a Lady, and at such an unseasonable hour. He settled himself
in the bed the best he could; ordered his rumpled band, and caused to be thrust
under his back two cushions more than he had before, to receive so important a
visit with greater ceremony.

This posture was he in, having his Eyes fastened on the Chamber Door, when he
perceives, not without the great admitation of his eyes, nor less disturbance
of his heart, the disconsolate Montufar, in Mourning down to the ground,
accompanied by two Women in the same dress, whereof the younger, whom he led by
the hand, and who had some part of her face covered by a thin Hood, seemed to
be the most sad, and the more considerable of the two. A Lacquey bore up her
Train after her, which had so much stuff in it, as that being held out with
advantage, it took up the best part of the Chamber. As soon as they were come
within the Chamber Door, they saluted the old Marquess who lay sick a-bed, and
gave him a volley of three low reverences, not counting that of the little
Lacquey, whose congey was not worth the remembering. Being come to the midst of
the Chamber they made three reverences more, all at the same time, and
afterward three more ere they took seats, which were brought them by a young
Page, Camerade to him whom Helenilla had locked up in her Chamber: but these
three last reverences were such, as if the former had been forgotten. The
softer, I mean the kinder, part of the old Man's soul was strangely moved there
it; the Ladies sat down, and Montufar and the little Lacquey withdrew,
bare-headed, to the Chamber Door.

The old Man all this while put himself to no small torment to requite their
complements, and was much troubled for their being in Mourning, before he knew
the occasion of it, which he entreated them to acquaint him with, as also upon
what account they honored him with a visit at a time so unseasonable for
persons of their quality. Helenilla, who but too well knew, what compassion a
weeping Beauty raises in the beholders, opens the sluices of her fair eyes to
let out the tears they seemed to be burdened with, and accompanied them with
sighs sometimes loud, sometimes low, as she thought fit, taking occasion ever
and anon to put out her Ivory hand to wipe her face, which she also thought it
not amiss to discover, to show it was as troubled, as beautiful.

The old Man expected with much impatience that she should speak, and began to
conceive some hopes of it; for the torrent of tears which had broke forth at
her eyes, was already so far fallen and dried up, that the Lillies and Roses it
had oreflown were to be seen, when the old Mendez, who thought it became her to
go on with the doleful part where the other had left, beset her self to weep
and sob with so much earnestness, that it was some shame to Helenilla to be
outdone by a thing that seemed not to have so much moisture in her as the
tears she spilt amounted to. Nay, the old Woman thought not that enough, but to
have the advantage of Helenilla, beyond all dispute, she conceived a handful or
two of hair might do well, and prevail much upon the Auditory. No sooner
thought than done; she made a fearful devastation upon her head; but the troth
on it is, she spoiled nothing of her own, nor meddled with so much as a hair that
ever grew there.

Helenilla and Mendez were lamenting in this manner, as if it had been upon a
wager, when Montufar and the Lacquey, upon a signal agreed betwixt them, were
heard at the Chamber Door sighing and weeping, though not so violently as those
by the Bedside, who yet upon that new Consort, took occasion to renew their
Lamentations. The old Marquess was out of himself to see so much weeping, and
not know the occasion of it. He wept too, as well as he could make a shift to
do it; sobb'd as vigorously as any in the company, and entreated the distressed
Ladies, for Heaven's sake, and all in it, to moderate their affliction, and to
acquaint him with the occasion thereof, assuring them his life should be the
least thing he would hazard and sacrifice to serve them, and regretting his
past youth, as being now incapable to give them effectual demonstrations of the
sincerity of his good intentions.

They were a little appeased at these words, their countenances appeared more
pleasant, and they thought they had wept enough, because they could not,
without some violence to themselves, weep any more. Besides, they were thrifty
of their time, as knowing they had not any to lose. So that the old Woman
uncovering her Head, to the end her venerable and Matron-like countenance might
give her all the credit she stood in need of, began her declamation in this
manner. May it please God, out of his omnipotence, to preserve the Right
Honorable the Marquess of Ville-fagnan, and afford him all the Health he
stands in need of; though, to say truth, what we come to acquaint him withal be
such news, as from which he will derive but little joy, which is indeed the
flower of Health: but the misfortune of our misfortune is such, that we must
communicate it to others. The Marquess gave himself a thump on the breast with
his fist, which at the same time discharged it self of a deep sigh: May it be
the pleasure of Heaven that I am mistaken, cries he, but I fear me, this is
some new pranck, or rather some extravagance of my Nephew's, that I am like to
hear of. Go on, Madam, go on, and pardon me for interrupting you. The old
Woman, instead of making any answer began to weep afresh, so that Helenilla was
forced to go on with the discourse. Since you know by experience, said she,
that your Nephew is a person, that, of any man, has least command of his
passions, and that you have been often troubled to smother the reports of his
violences, you will be the more easily induced to credit that which he has
done me. Being at Leon the last Spring, whither I conceive you had sent him, he
meets with me in a Church, and upon the first sight told me such things, as,
had they been true, we should both have continued still in that Church to avoid
the Hands of Justice, I as a Murderess, he as the dead man I had killed and
made ready to be put into the ground. He told me a hundred times that my eyes
had murdered him, nay, he omitted not the least of those flatteries and
insinuations which are ordinary among Lovers, who would abuse their simplicity
upon whom they have some design. He followed me to my Lodging, rode every day
up and down before my Windows, and every night importuned all the
Neighborhood with the Music he intended only for me. At last, perceiving
that all his amorous addresses prevailed nothing, he with Presents corrupted a
Negro-slave that I had, and, through her treachery and advice, surprised me in
a Garden we had in the Suburbs. I had no body with me but the perfidious slave;
he had in company with him a man as lewd as himself, and had given money to the
Gardener to go an Errand for him to the other end of the Town, upon pretense of
some important business. What need I make many words, he set his Dagger to my
Throat, and finding nevertheless that I had a greater value for my Honor than
my Life, with the assistance of his Complice, he did that by violence, which
all his courtship and importunities should never have obtained. The Slave made
no small stir, and the better to disguise her perdiousness, got a slight wound
in one of her hands, and presently after fell into a feigned swound. The
Gardener returns: Your Nephew frightened at the thought of his crime got away
over the Garden-wall, with so much precipitation that he let fall his Dagger,
which I took up. Yet needed not the insolent young man have been in such fear;
for being not in a capacity to cause him to be staid, I might have had that
command of my self as to put a good countenance on it, and dissemble the horrid
misfortune that had happened to me. I did what I could, not to appear more sad
than I was wont to do. The wicked slave not long after run quite away. I lost
my Mother, and I may say, I had with her lost all, if my Aunt, who is here come
along with me, had not had the goodness to give me entertainment, which she
does so nobly, as that I have the same treatment with her own two excellent
Daughters. In her house it was that I heard, your Nephew is so far from
thinking of any reparation for the wrong he has done me, that he is upon
Marriage in this City. I have made the greatest haste I could hither, to the
end that before I go out of your Chamber, you should give me in money or jewels
two thousand Crowns, to put my self into a Nunnery: for knowing as much as I do
by experience of the disposition of your Nephew, I could never fancy to marry
him, though he and all the Friends he has should use all the proffers and
entreaties that may be to persuade me to it. I know he is to be married this
night, but I Will break off the match if I can, at least make a disturbance he
shall hear of while he lives, if you do not take that course to prevent it
which I propose to you. And that you may be satisfied, added she, that there
cannot be any thing more true, than what I tell you, of the violence your
Nephew has done me, behold the very Dagger he set to my Throat! I wish, God
had so pleased he had done somewhat more than threatened me with it.

Having given over speaking, she beset her self to weeping afresh. Mendez kept
still a note above her, and the musical consort at the door, whereof the little
Lacquey made the treble and Montufar the base, was no less ambitious to be
heard.

The old Marquess, who had already given but too much credit to what had been
said to him, by the craftiest of all Womankind, no sooner cast his Eye on the
Dagger, but he immediately knew it to be the same he had sometime given his
Nephew. All therefore his thoughts ran upon was to prevent the disturbance
which might happen at his Nephew's wedding. He would gladly have sent for him,
but he was afraid some body might be so inquisitive as to ask what should be
the occasion of his so doing; and, as it happens our fears are extraordinary
when our desires are such, he no sooner perceived the afflicted Ladies making
as if they would go and break off the match, which it had cost him abundance of
trouble to bring to the posture it was in, but he commands one of the Pages to
bring a certain Cabinet, and to take out of it two thousand Crowns in pieces of
Gold of four Pistols. Montufar received them, and told them very exactly one
after another; whereupon the old Marquess, having made them promise to give him
a visit the next day, made a thousand excuses to the Ladies, that he was not in
a condition to wait on them to their Coach. They got into it very well
satisfied with their visit, and made the Coachman drive back again toward
Madrid, bethinking themselves that if they were pursued, it would be toward
Leon. Their Hostess in the mean time, seeing her guests were vanished, goes
into the Chamber: She finds the Page in the Closet, who could not imagine what
reason they had to lock him in there; she suffered him to go his ways because
she knew him, or rather because she found all things as should be in the
Chamber. Those, who make it their profession to steal, and think of no other
way of livelihood, stand in little fear of God, and therefore are so much the
more afraid of Men. They are of all Countries, and yet are not of any, and
never have any settled habitation. As soon as they have set foot in a place,
they make their advantages, and then shift into another. This unhappy
profession, which is learnt with so much pains and diligence is different from
others: for people quit those out of age, or for want of strength; but a man
seldom quits that of stelling unless it be in his youth, and for want of
longer life. It must needs be that those, who follow it so closely, find a
strange pleasure in it, since, for that, they hazard a great number of years,
which, sooner or later, the Executioner cuts them short of.

But alas! Helenilla, Mendez, and Montufar, were little troubled with such
reflections as these their thoughts were wholly set upon the cruel fear they
were in of being pursued. They gave the Coachman double the rate he demanded,
that he might make the greater haste; which he honestly did, answerably to his
hire; so that it may be imagined that never did hackney Coach make such speed
upon the Road to Madrid. They had no inclination to sleep, though the night
were far spent* Montufar was much troubled in mind, and, by his frequent
sighing, discovered more remorse than satisfaction. Helenilla, who saw into his
very thoughts, would needs divert him with a relation of the particulars of her
life, which till then she had kept from him as a great secret. Since I see thou
art somewhat out of order, said she to him, I will now satisfy the desire thou
have ever had to know who I am, and to be informed of the Adventures that
happened to me before our acquaintance. 'Twere easy for me to tell the^ that I
am well descended, and give my self an illustrious name, as most do: but I will
observe that sincerity toward thee, as that I will discover to thee even the
most inconsiderable imperfections of those that brought me into the world.

Thou art then to know, that my Father was born in Galicia, by profession a
Lacquey, or, to speak more honorably of him, a Serving-man. He had a great
veneration for the memory of the Patriarch Noah, for his excellent invention of
the Vine, and indeed, abating the inclination he had to the juice of that noble
Plant, it may be said of him, that he cared not much for the temporal goods of
this world. My Mother was of Granada, by condition, (to be free with you) a
Slave: but there is no contesting with the Stars. She answered to the name of
Mary, which her Masters had given her, and it was indeed the name she received
at her Baptism, but she would have taken it more kindly if one called her Zara,
which was her name before she was converted from the Turkish Religion; for
(since I must tell you all) she was a Christian only out of compliance, and
conformity, but in heart a Moor. Yet would she often go to Confession, but
rather to discover the sins of her Masters, than her own; and whereas she
entertained her Confessor much more with the hardships and inconveniences of
her Services, than her own imperfections, and made him believe miracles of her
patience; He, being a very holy man, and measuring others by himself, took all
for true that she said, and, instead of reproving, commended her, so that who
should have been near my Mother at Confession, would have heard nothing but
commendations of all sides. You are happily desirous to know how I came to
discover so great a secret, and you may well think, I have it not from my
Mother; but I am naturally much inclined to pry into things, and young as I
was, my Mother never went to Confession but I got as near her as I could to
overhear what she said. Though she were swarthy, or rather black, yet was there
in her countenance and making, somewhat that was not unhandsome, and above six
Knights, Commanders of white and red Crosses, have courted her favor. She was
so charitable, that she divided amongst them all, what was so much desired by
every one in particular, and she was of a nature so full of acknowledgment
toward her Masters, that, to requite, in some measure, the trouble they had
been at in her education from her infancy, she did all that lay in her power to
bring them every year a little Slave male or female; but Heaven was not pleased
to further her good intentions, for all the little half-Negroes died presently
after they were born. She was much more fortunate in bringing up the children
of others. Her Masters, who lost all their own as soon as they came into the
world, made her Nurse to a Child given over by the Physicians, who yet in a
short time, through my Mother's tenderness of it, and the goodness of her Milk,
discovered signs of perfect health, and hopes of a long life. In requital of
this service, my Mother's Mistress g^ve her her liberty when she died. My
Mother is now a freewoman; she turns Laundress, and proves so excellent at it,
that in a short time, there was not a Courtier in Madrid who thought his Linen
well done unless it came from the Turkish Laundress. Now had she leisure and
opportunities to put in practice the Lectures which her Mother had sometime
read to her, about a familiarity with the people of the other world. She had
desisted from that tempting Profession, more out of modesty, and as wearied
with the commendations people gave her of being excellent in her Art, than out
of any fear of the Magistrate. But now she made it her principal Employment,
only to oblige and pleasure her Friends, and in a short time, she made such
considerable acquaintances, and raised her self to such credit in the Court of
Darkness, that to be a Devil of any reputation there was a necessity of holding
a correspondence with her. I speak not this out of any vanity, for I never tell
a Lie, added Helenilla, and would not give my Mother the commendations of those
excellencies which were not in her; but indeed I could do no less than give
this testimony to her virtue. The secrets she sold, those she revealed, and her
Oracular faculty in answering questions (for all which she was pointed at as
she went along the Streets) were but ordinary talents among those of her
Nation, in comparison of her experience in the business of Maiden-heads. A
cracked Wench, after she had been under her hands, went for a better Maid than
she was before the Miscarriage, and her Maidenhead sold at a higher rate the
second time than the first. She might be about forty years of age when she was
married to my Father, honest Rodrigues. 'Twas the wonder of the whole Quarter,
that a Man who loved Wine so well would take a Woman that drunk not any, as
observing the Law of Mahomet, and one that had her hands perpetually in the
Water, as being a Laundress: but my Father made answer, There would be the more
Wine for himself, and that Love made all things pleasant. Not long after, he
made a shift to get her with child, and, when the time came, she was brought to
bed of Me. This joy continued not long in our house. For when I was about six
years old, a certain Prince would needs put a hundred Lacqueys into Liveries to
run down a m^d Bull. My Father being one of those that were made choice of, he
drunk that day without any discretion, and going in the valor of his drink to
oppose the passage of the furious Bull, he was by him tossed into several
pieces. I remember there were Songs made of him, and that it was said upon
occasion of my Father's death, that no body cared for those of his Profession.
It was a good while after ere I apprehended it to be a jear put upon him, as if
he wore Horns as well as the Bull; but ill tongues will be wagging, nay, to
forbid people to be abusive would but make them the more such. My Mother was
grieved at my Father's death, I also was grieved at it; she took heart and
forgot it, I did the like. Not long after, my Beauty began to make people talk
of me. There was no small emulation at Madrid, who should take me abroad in a
Coach, c^rry me to Plays, and entertain me with Coll^tions upon the Banks of
the Masanares. My Mother was as watchful over me as an Argus, which I took very
heinously; but it was not long, ere I was convinced it was for my advantage.
Her severity, and the high rate she set on me, made the commodity the more
valuable, and raised an emulation among those whose teeth watered at me. I was
to be his that bid most; yet every one thought he had had me before his Rival;
and every one imagined he found that which was gone long before. A rich Geneva
Merchant, whose addresses were only in private, dazzled my prudent Mother's
eyes with so much Gold, and discovered so much sincerity in his procedure, that
she answered his good intentions as he expected. He had the precedence of all
others in my favor, but it cost him dearly. There was a faithfulness observed
toward him, as long as he was distrustful of us; but as soon as he seemed
persuaded of our faith, we immediately broke it. My Mother had too great a
sympathy for the sufferings of others not to be moved at the continual
complaints of my Gallants, all persons of quality about the Court, and all very
rich. It Is true, they squandered not their Gold away as my Geneva man did; but
my Mother knew how to esteem great gains, and yet slighted not the small;
besides, she was very obliging out of a principle rather of charity than
interest. The Geneva Blade broke, I know not whether we were the cause of it.
There happened to be some quarrels upon my account; the Magistrates visited us,
rather out of civility than otherwise: but my Mother indeed had an aversion for
young Lawyers and Scholars, and hated no less the Hectors and self-conceited
Gallantillo's, who began to haunt us. She therefore thought it her best course
to remove to Sevil, made money of all her Goods, and took a returned Hackney
Coach for her self and me. We were basely betrayed by the Coachman, robbed of
all we had, and my Mother so unmercifully beaten, because she would not
over-readily part with what she had, but opposed the Villains as much as her
strength would permit, that before we could get to a wretched Inn she fairly
died at the foot of a Rock. I plucked up a good heart, though I were yet but
very young. I felt all about the folds of my Mother's clothes; but there was
nothing to be expected after the exact Searchers that had been there before me.
I left her to the mercy of those that passed by, not a doubting but that in a
great Road, such as that between Madrid and Sevil, there would come by, some
people so charitable as to bestow Burial on her. I returned back again to
Madrid; my Gallants heard of my misfortune, made a contribution to set me up
again, so that in a short time I was got into Clothes, and a House very well
furnished. About this time was it that I saw thee at a Friend's of mine of the
same Profession, and was immediately taken with thy good endowments. I need not
give thee any further account of my Life, since that we have ever since lived
together. We came to Toledo; we leave it all in haste; and so well furnished
with Money, that if thou had as much courage as I thought thou had had,
thou would be more cheerful than thou art. And since the relation I have made
to thee has had the virtue to make thee sleepy, as I perceive by thy
reiterated yawnings and noddings of the head, lay it in my lap, and take thy
rest. But know, that what ever there may be good and profitable in Fear, before
the committing of a crime, proves very base, and very dangerous when it is once
committed. Fear ever distracts the mind of the guilty person; so that instead
of avoiding his pursuer, he many times casts himself into his hands.

Montufar fell asleep, and the morning broke forth so pleasant and gay, that
the birds, the flowers, and the fountains saluted her, each according to their
mode; the birds in singing, the flowers in perfuming the air, and the fountains
in laughing or making a noise, which you please; one's as good as the other.

In the mean time the Marquess of Villefagnan's Nephew, the sensual Don Sancho,
was thinking to get up from his new Bride, much wearied, and happily already
cloyed with the enjoyments of marriage. His imagination was full of the
beautiful stranger, the dangerous Helenilla, whom he had seen in the
Hackney-coach; and represented her to him wholly admirable: doing thereby a
very great injustice to his Wife who was a Lady so handsome and so
accomplished, that there were not a few in Toledo that sighed for her, while
she sighed to think on the unkindness of her Husband; and he, fickle Man as he
was, wished himself in the embraces of an infamous Strumpet, who communicated
her self for a small matter to any that had a mind to her. What a strange
irregularity is this of our Appetite! A man that has a handsome wife of his
own, has a greater inclination to one of his maids. A Noble man, who has his
Table ordinarily furnished with Bisques and Pheasants, looks on them with
disdain, and calls for a mess of Broth, and the plain Piece of Beef provided
for the Servants. Most People are depraved in their taste as to many things,
and your great Lords more than any. For having greater Estates than they know
what to do withal, and being inclined still to seek after what they have not,
they are drawn in, to do that which is evil, purely out of diversion: and, to
compass their enjoyments, they care not much what pains they are at, nor what
time and money they spend, nor think it much to be guilty of base importunities
to some scornful Wench to obtain that of her, which she sometimes bestows on
others without so much as being entreated to do it.

All this happens through the just permission of Heaven, to punish Men's
inclinations to evil by the very inconveniences of the evil. Ah unfortunate Don
Sancho! Heaven has been pleased to bless thee with those two things, which, of
ought this world affords, can most contribute to thy felicity, wealth in
abundance, and a lovely person to thy wife; wealth, to supply those who
deserve, yet have it not; and, because they have it not, are many times engaged
in those unworthy courses to which poverty reduces the most generous spirits:
and a wife, equal to thee as to quality and estate, accomplished as to both
mind and body, beautiful even in thy eyes, and much more in those of others,
who see more clearly in the affairs of other people than they do in their own,
and, in a word, reserved, modest, and virtuous. What do thou look for abroad?
Have thou not in thy own house thy second self, a Woman, whose ingenious
conversation will delight thee, whose body is absolutely at thy devotion, who
is tender of thy honor, careful in manageing thy house, prudent to improve thy
estate, furnishes thee with Children, who divert thee in their youth, and will
relieve thee in thy age? What, I say, can thou look for abroad? I Will tell thee
in few words, what will be thy fortune; thou will ruin thy self, both as to
estate and reputation, thou will lose the respect of thy friends, and wilt
raise thy self many powerful enemies. Do thou think thy honor secure because
thou have a virtuous woman to thy wife? Alas! what little experience have thou
of the things of this world, and how little reflect on humane frailty? The
surest horse of his feet in the world, and the most at command, slips under an
unskilful Rider, and happily gives him a fall. A woman may resist such and such a
temptation to do something that is unhandsome; and happily transgress in the
highest degree, when she thinks her self most secure. One miscarriage is a
trap-door to let in several others after it; and the distance which is between
Virtue and Vice, is sometimes but a short day's journey.

But to what end are we troubled with all these moral truths, and of what
benefit are they, will some body say? And why does that some body trouble his
head so much? let him make use of them or let them alone, as his convenience
shall advise him, however, he may think himself obliged to the person who gives
them for nothing.

Don Sancho was thinking to get up from his wife, when his Uncle's steward
brought him a Letter, giving him an account of the strange Lady, who he could
not but think had trapann'd him, because she was not to be heard of in any of
the Inns about Toledo, where he had caused inquiry to be made after her, and in
the same Letter entreating him to let him have one of his men to send after the
Slut toward Madrid, which way he thought she might be gone, for that he had
sent people to all the other great Roads that went to the Towns about Toledo,
that only to Madrid excepted. Don Sancho was out of all patience at this news:
he found himself assaulted in that part of his soul which was least able to
resist, and was elevated to a strange height, to find himself unjustly charged
with one weakness, though he had been convicted of many. The loss of the money,
and the cheat put upon his Uncle, he was equally enraged at. He made a relation
of the business to his wife, and some of his kindred, who were come to visit
him the next morning after his marriage; and persisting in the resolution he
had taken to do what he intended, notwithstanding the entreaties of his wife
and friends, he slips on his clothes, eats something, then runs to his Uncle's,
and thence after he had learned of the Page who had brought the Ladies into the
old Marquess's chamber, what kind of Coach they were in, how many in company,
and by what marks they might be known, he took post for Madrid, attended by two
servants, in whose courage he reposed much confidence. He rode on four or five
Stages with so much speed, that he had not the least thought of the beautiful
stranger: but his choler being a little evaporated by so violent agitation of
his body, Helenilla reassumed her former place in his imagination, so
beautiful, and attractive, that he was several times in a mind to return to
Toledo, to find her out. He was a hundred times angry with himself that he had
been so far transported upon the trick put upon his Uncle, and often called
himself an undiscreet person, and an enemy to his own enjoyments, for bruising
his body in that manner by riding post, instead of bestowing his time better
in seeking after a happiness, the possession whereof would, in his opinion,
raise him to the highest pitch of felicity.

While he was in his amorous reflections, he often spoke to himself, as one
distracted, and that so loud, that his servants, who were a pretty distance
before him, making a sudden stop, would turn about, and in much haste ride back
to know what he would have. What reason is there, would he cry sometimes, I
should leave the place where I saw her? Must I not be the most unhappy man in
the world, if this Stranger have left Toledo before I get back again thither?
'Twere no more than my desert, for offering to turn Constable, and running with
a Hue and Cry after I know not whom. But if I return to Tol^do, continued he,
without doing any thing, what will they say of me, who would have diverted me
from such an enterprise? Or must I let a sort of trapanning Rogues go
unpunished, after such an unheard of affront put upon my Uncle, and my own
reputation so treacherously wounded.

The dissolute young Spark was thus ballancing of things, when, coming near
Xetaffa, his servants discovered Helenilla's Coach by the marks that had been
given thereof. They presently cried out to their Master, that they had taken
the Thieves, and not staying till he came up to them, rode full speed after the
Coach with their swords drawn. The Coachman stopped extremely frightened;
Montufar was no less. Helenilla caused him to remove out of the Boot, and sat
there her self, to see what might be done to remedy so great a misfortune. She
saw Don Sancho coming toward her with his sword drawn, and could perceive
nothing in his countenance whence she might promise her self any favor: but
the amorous Gentleman had no sooner fastened his eyes on her who had already so
deeply wounded him, but he was immediately persuaded that his servants were
mistaken: For it is natural for a man to have a good opinion of what he loves,
and thereupon, as if he had known Helenilla from his infancy for a Lady not to
be charged with any thing unhandsome, he run upon his servants striking at them
as hard as he could with the flat of his sword. You Rascals, said he to them,
have I not given you sufficient warning to take heed you were not mistaken? and
do you not deserve I should break your arms and legs for so unmannerly stopping
a Lady's Coach whose very presence might have forced you to more respect? The
poor Slaves, who had not been so forward but upon the marks given them by the
Page, and saw they had to do with a woman extremely handsome, an object that
raises submissions and respects in the most unciviliz'd souls, avoided, by
getting out of the way, the fury of their Master, and thought he had reason to
be angry, and that it was an excess of his kindness that he had not
sufficiently loaded them with blows.

Don Sancho, having thus disengaged his servants, craved pardon of Helenilla,
and told her upon what ground his presumptuous servants were like to have done
her some violence, which she knew as well as himself. He entreated her to
consider how apt a person blinded with choler is to be mistaken. Do but see, I
beseech you, said he, into what inconveniences servants may engage their
Masters? Had I not been with these Villains that came along with me, they had
upon very uncertain appearances put the whole Country into an Allarm, and
having the power in their own hands, would have brought you to Toledo, as a
Thief. Not indeed but that you are such, added he, composing himself to
mildness, but the Robberies you are guilty of are rather those of hearts than
any thing else. Helenilla acknowledged the indulgence of Heaven toward her, in
bestowing on her a face which pleaded her exemption from punishment,
notwithstanding the many leudnesses she was ordinarily guilty of, and assuming
a confidence which banished the fear she had been in, she answered Don Sancho
with much modesty and in few words, as knowing that for one to be over-earnest
in disclaiming a thing laid to his charge increases the suspicion of his guilt.
Don Sancho could not but admire he should meet with what he sought, after so
strange a manner; and, besotted as he was, thought Heaven prosper'd his
designs, since it had prevented him from returning to Toledo, as he had several
times thought to have done: which no doubt had been to avoid that good which he
sought after with so much earnestness. He asked Helenilla her name, and the
place of her abode at Madrid, and entreated her not to take it amiss if he
waited on her thither, to confirm the proffers he had made her of his services.
Helenilla gave him such an account of both as he was for the pr^sent satisfied
with, and told him she should think her self very happy to receive his visits.
He proffered to wait on her all along the way, but she would by no means permit
it, representing to him that she was married, and that her Husband was to meet
her in a Coach, and whispered him in the ear, that she was somewhat distrustful
of her own servants, but above all stood in fear of the displeasure of her
Husband.

This slight expression of confidence raised in Don Sancho an imagination that
she had some kindness for him. He took leave of her, and, carried more upon his
own hopes than the Post-horse he had under him, (if I may so say) he set
forward toward Madrid. He was no sooner arrived but he made enquiry after
Helenilla and her habitation, according to the directions she had given him.
His servants were tired to find her out, and the endeavors of his friends were
not spared, yet all to no purpose. Helenilla, Montufar, and the venerable
Mendez, were no sooner got to Madrid but they were thinking which way to get
out of it. They were sensible they could not avoid the Cavalier of Toledo, if
they staid there, and that if they gave him a more particular account of their
persons and quality, they should find him as dangerous an Enemy, as they
thought him then their passionate Servant. Helenilla put all the goods she had
into a sure hand, and the very next day after her arrival, putting her self and
her train into the habit of Pilgrims, she took her way toward Burgos, the
place where Mendez was born, and where she had still a sister living, of the
same profession with her self.

In the mean time, Don Sancho out of all hopes of meeting with Helenilla,
returns to Toledo, with so much shame and confusion, that from his departure
out of Madrid till he came to his own house, he was not heard to speak one
word. After he had saluted his wife, who entertained him with thousands of
caresses and kindnesses, she gave him some Letters from his Brother, wherein he
found that he lay very sick at one of the chiefest Cities of Spain, where he
possessed the greatest dignities of the Cathedral Church, and was one of the
richest Clergymen in that Country. He stayed but one night at Toledo, and the
next morning took Post, to go and see his Brother recovered, or possess
himself of what he left if he di'd.

While Don Sancho is upon his way to his Brother, Helenilla is upon hers to
Burgos, having conceived a dissatisfaction of Montufar greater than the love
she had sometimes born him. He had expressed so little resolution, when Don
Sancho and his servants stopped the Coach, that she made no doubt but he was an
arrant coward. Out of this reflection was he become so odious to her, that it
was with some violence to her self that she could endure the sight of him,
insomuch that her thoughts were wholly taken up to find out some way to be rid
of this domestic Tyrant: and till it were done comforted her self with the
hope of seeing her self ere long at liberty and her own disposal. This advice
was given her by Mendez, which prevailed the more upon her, for that it was
fortified with all the reasons which her prudence could suggest. She could not
endure, that in a house, where she was to live, there should be any Montufar to
command her, who should have the Mistress of it, at his devotion; and, not
doing any thing toward it, spend what they both had much ado to get. She
perpetually represented to Helenilla the wretchedness of her condition,
comparing it to that of the Slaves emploi'd in the Mines, who to enrich their
Masters with the Gold which they take so much pains to force out of the earth,
and instead of being better treated for their endeavors, are many times
rewarded with blows. She would be always telling her, that Beauty is a flower,
and consequently of no long continuance, and that her Looking-glass, which then
represented to her but what was most amiable, and ever spoke to her advantage,
would soon, entertain her with objects she should be little satisfied with, and
tell her such news as she should not be well pleased at. Assure your self,
Madam, said she to her, that a woman once turned of thirty, loses something
particular of beauty every six months, and makes new discoveries every day,
either in her body or face, of some spot, or some wrinckle. It Is the malice of
Time to make young Women old, and to make old Women wrinkled. If a Woman that is
grown rich, at the cost of her modesty and reputation, meets nevertheless with
the contempt and reproaches of the world; what horror must she needs raise in
people, who through want of conduct is reduced to both poverty and infamy? upon
what ground can she hope to be relieved in her misery? If with the wealth you
have made a shift to get, by such courses as are not approved of by all the
world, you raised the fortunes of some deserving virtuous person, who would in
requital marry you, it were an action acceptable in the sight of God and Men,
and the end of your Life would expiate the beginning of it: but to cast your
self away as you do, by being at the diposal of a Raskal, as lewd as cowardly,
one whose great achievements consists in the trappanning of Women, who yet are
never gained by him but with Threats, nor kept but by Tyranny, is, methinks,
the direct way to bring your self to the greatest extremities imaginable, and
to be the Author of your own ruin.

With these and the like arguments did the judicious Mendez, who was much
better at speaking than doing, endeavor to exasperate Helenilla against
Montufar, whom she still loved, though rather because she was accustomed to it
than that she could give any reason for it; as indeed having too long
experience of his manners, not to have found out of her self all the specious
inducements laid down to her by her old Remembrancer. Yet did they not prove
ineffectual. Helenilla took them in very good part, and the more readily for
that Mendez advised her to things which she her self would be not a little the
better for, if she should put them in execution; so that perceiving Montufar
coming up to them, being to go together to Guadarrama, where they were to dine
that day, they put it off to another time to consider of the course they should
take to be rid of him, so as never to have a sight of him again.

All Dinnertime he seemed to be indisposed, having no stomach at all to any
thing, and as he rose from table, he was taken with a shivering, and not long
after with a violent fever, which stuck close to him the rest of that day and
all night; and the violence of it being augmented toward the morning, put
Helenilla and Mendez into good hope^ the fever would do them a courtesy,
though 'twere only to free them from further trouble how to shake him off.
Montufar finding himself so weak as that he was not able to stand, told the
Ladies they must not stir from Guadarrama; that a Physician must be had, what
ever it cost; and that all imaginable care should be taken of him. This was
said with so much imperiousness and authority, as if he had spoken to Slaves,
and that their Lives and all things else were absolutely at his disposal. His
Body in the mean time became more and more weak of the Feavour, which had
reduced him to such a condition, as that, had it not been for his often calling
for drink, he might have been given over for a Dead man.

There was no small stir about the Inn, that a Confessor was not all this while
brought to him, that he might, as a good Christian, discharge his Conscience in
this world, before he took his journey for the next. At last, while the Good
man was gone for, Helenilla and Mendez, making no doubt but the Feavour would
carry him away, came to him, and sitting down on both sides of his bed,
Helenilla broke her mind to him in these terms.

If thou have so much memory left, dearest Montufar, as to remember after what
manner thou have ever lived with me, that is, how thou have behaved thy self
toward one who had laid the greatest obligations imaginable upon thee, as
also toward Mendez, a person venerable upon the account of her Sex, her Age,
and her Virtue, thou will not be so fond as to imagine, I should importune God
Almighty for the recovery of thy health: but though I were as desirous of it,
as I have reason to wish thy destruction, yet is there a necessity we poor
mortals should comply with his holy disposal of us and ours, and that I should
offer up, my self, what sometime I had most doated on, and had been most dear
to me. But to deal freely with thee, we begin to be so weary of thy Tyranny,
that our separation was unavoidable, and, if God had not brought things to this
pass, we should have had that consideration of our own happiness as to have
endeavored it otherwise. Thou art going with all expedition to the other
world, we envy thee not the good entertainment thou will find there: but, had
thou been ordained to make any longer stay here, we should, to avoid thy
insupportable company and behavior, have removed into some part of SPAIN,
where we should have thought no more of thee, than if there never had been any
such thing as thou art in the world. Thou think life sweet, but if thou
consider well how thou have lived, thou have much reason to take thy death
kindly, since Heaven, for reasons unknown to men, sends it thee in a more
honorable way than thou have deserved, permitting a Fever to do that, which
the Executioner does to persons less wicked than thou have been, or Fear to
such white-liver'd cowardly Raskals as thou art. But, my dear Montufar, before
our final separation, speak to me sincerely once in thy life. Is it true, that
thou did really expect I should stay here to look to thee and nurse thee up?
Alas, suffer not these vanities to come into thy mind, so near thy death. So
little regard have I of thy welfare, that were it to restore thy whole Race, I
would not stay a quarter of an hour here. Make friends, and get into the
Hospital, if thy Disease do not dispatch thee the sooner; and since all the
advice I ever gave thee has been for thy good, do not slight the last I am
like to give thee. It Is this, my poor Montufar; Not to trouble thy self to send
for any Physician, as knowing, he will forbid thee the drinking of Wine, which,
without any Fever, is enough to make an end of thee in four and twenty hours.

While Helenilla was making this Funeral Sermon to her once much beloved
Montufar, the charitable Mendez ever and anon felt his Pulse, and laid her hand
on his forehead; and perceiving her Mistress had given over speaking, she would
needs also give him a departing Lecture. Your Lordship's head, said she to him,
burns extremely, and I am much in fear this unhappy accident will be the
occasion of your marching off to see your friends in the other world, without
affording you the time to come to your self again. Take therefore this pair of
Beads, added she, and fall devoutly to your prayers till such time as the
Confessor comes. You will be so far in your way as to the discharge of your
Conscience. But if credit may be given to the Historiographers of the Prison
for Malefactors at Madrid, who have so often had occasion to spend their Pens
in setting down your achievements, your Lordship's exemplary life may well
exempt you from much Penance; besides that, God, who is very merciful, will no
doubt put to your account in Heaven, the glorious progress you made
bare-shoulder'd through the principal Streets of Sevil, in the sight of so many
people, and guarded by Beadles, and other Officers of the Garrison of common
Rogues, Cut-purses, and House-breakers. You may also produce as an acquittance
for your further discharge, the Voyage you made by Sea, during which, viz. for
the space of six years, you did many things not unpleasing to God, taking much
pains, eating little, and being still in danger, and consequently the more
devout; but what is more considerable, is, that you were hardly twenty years of
age, when, to the great edification of your Neighbor you began that holy
Pilgrimage. Moreover, it is very probable you will be well recompensed in the
other world for another thing, which is, your care, that the Women who have had
any dependence on you, should not be idle or want something to do, making them
work, and live, not only by the labor of their hands, but that of their whole
body. To this I may add, that if you dye in your Bed, you will put a pleasant
trick upon the Judge of Murcia, who has solemnly sworn, he would sentence you
to dye upon the Wheel, who expects the satisfaction to see it; and who must
needs be enraged when it shall be told him, that you died of your self, without
the assistance of any third person. But I trifle away the day here in talking,
and never think it is time to set forward on the journey we have a desire to
make. Farewell, dear Friend that has been, receive this last Hugg as heartily
as I bestow it on you, for I think we shall never see one another again. With
which words Mendez casting her arms about his neck embraced him with so much
kindness, as that, had she used a little more, it had stifled him: Helenilla
did the like, and with that Complement left the Chamber, and, without calling
for any account, soon after, the Inn also.

Montufar, who was used to their Abuses, who had also the faculty to return
them as good as they brought, and who fondly imagined all they had said to him,
was only for his diversion, looked on them as they departed from him, without
the least suspicion, more inclined to conceive they went to give order for his
Broths. He soon after, out of pure security, fell into a little Drowsiness,
which held him so long as that the two Gentlewomen might well be gotten a
League or better in their way, before he was perfectly awake. He asked the
Hostess for them, who told him they were gone abroad, and had given order he
should not be disturbed, for that he wanted sleep very much, having not closed
his Eyes all the night before.

Upon this account of them, Montufar began to believe, the Ladies had spoken to
him in good earnest. He swore at such a rate as would have made some think the
Earth might open and swallow down the Inn and all in it; he threatened even to
the very way they traveled on, and the Sun that lighted them. He would needs
get up to put on his Clothes, and had almost broke his Neck in attempting it,
such was his weakness. The Hostess endeavored to excuse the Ladies, and did it
the best she could, but with such impertinent Reasons that the sick man was the
more enraged, and fell out with her. He was so incensed that for four and
twenty hours nothing went down his throat, and that diet with abundance of rage
and fury proved so effectual, that after the taking of a certain Broth, he
found himself strong enough to pursue his fugitive Slaves. They were got as far
before him as they were able to travel in two days; but two Hackney Mules, he
fortunately met with upon their return to Burgos, contributed as much to his
design as it proved fatal to that of the two counterfeit Pilgrims. He overtook
them within six or seven Leagues of Burgos. They grew pale, and then blushed
when they saw him, and excused themselves, if any such thing could be done.
Montufar smothered his anger, for very joy that he had found them, which he
could not forbear expressing in his very countenance. He first broke forth into
a Laughter at the trick they had put upon him, and raised them to such
security, that they thought him the veriest Sot they had ever met with. He
thereupon made them believe they were out of the way to Burgos, and having (to
bring them into it) led them among Rocks and Precipices, such places as he knew
no man traveled through, he drew a long Dagger, an Instrument for which they
had ever had a great respect; and commanded them very imperiously to make
present delivery of what Gold, Silver, and Jewels they had. They thought at
first with their tears to have pacified him so far as to bring the business to
some composition. Helenilla was very prodigal of them for her part, casting
withal her arms about his Neck; but the unmerciful Hector grew so insolent
upon their submissions, that he would not hear of any thing by way of treaty,
and once more gave them the peremptory word of command, allowing them but half
a quarter of an hour to resolve whether they would deliver or no. There was no
way but to sacrifice their Purses to the safety of their Persons, so that with
much regret they parted with what was dearer to them than their very entrails.
Yet was not Montufar's revenge satisfied with that. He pulled out of his Pocket
a parcel of Whip-cord which he had bought on purpose for such an execution, and
having tied them to several Trees one against the other, he told them, with a
treacherous smile, that, out of a certain knowledge he had of their negligence
in doing Penance from time to time for their sins, he would, for the good of
their souls, give them a little discipline with his own hands, that they might
remember him in their Prayers. The Sentence pronounced was immediately put in
execution, with branches of green Broom that grew thereabouts in abundance, he
having so much mercy in his justice as not to do it with the Whip-cord, whereof
he had had himself experience both of the weight and smart, notwithstanding the
grave reproaches of Mendez not long before to that purpose.

Having disciplined them till he grew weary, at the cost of their poor skins,
he sat him down between the two Patients, and turning himself to Helenilla,
entertained her somewhat to this effect. My dearest Helenilla, said he, be not
so much displeased with me, for what has happened between us, till thou have
considered my good intention in it, and thereupon reflected, that every one is
obliged in conscience to follow his vocation: it is thine to commit lewd
actions and to be mischievous; it is mine (the world consisting of good and
evil) to punish leudness and mischief where I meet with them. Thou know
better than any one, whether I discharge my duty as an honest man should, and
thou art to assure thy self, since I chastise thee so heartily, that I love
thee no less. Were it not that it is more pardonable in me to be tender of my
duty, than inclined to compassion, I should not leave a Gentlewoman so well
descended, and so virtuous, stark naked ti'd to a Tree at the mercy of the
first that passes by. Thy illustrious birth, which thou not long since gave
me an account of, deserves another destiny; but be ingenuous, and acknowledge
thou would do no less thy self, if thou were in my place. What will prove thy
greatest misfortune, is, that, having been so common as thou have, it will not
be long ere thou art known, and then it is to be feared, that out of a Maxim of
Policy, to the perpetual terror of public sinners, order will be given for
the burning of this mischievous Tree, whereto thou art as it were incorporated,
together with the wicked fruit that grows on it: but in recompense, if thou
have only a fear of all the evils thou bring on thy self, thou will one day
make very pleasant relations of thy adventures, and have this to add, that, by
the patient suffering of one hard night, thou shall have acquired an
excellency, which will be much talked of amongst the many other thou art
Mistress of already; and that is, my dear quondam-acquaintance, the knack of
being able to sleep standing.

But the charitable Mendez might justly quarrel at my incivility, if I should
continue my discourse any longer to thee, without so much as turning my face
toward her, who was so free of her advice and assistance in my sickness: and I
should be much wanting as to the duty I owe my Neighbor, if I should not out
of a like motive of charity give her some advice suitable to the present
posture of her affairs. They are indeed, added he, turning toward Mendez, in a
much worse condition than you happily imagine; recommend your self therefore
earnestly to the goodness of God, though it be the first time you ever did it:
let your many wrinkles be as many remembrancers of the decays of your
Microcosm, and your inability to overcome this days persecution; were it the
pleasure of Heaven you might have a Confessor as easily as it is certain you
stand in need of one. Not but that you may derive much quiet of thought and
conscience from the exemplary life you have led; since you have always been so
excessively charitable, that, instead of repining at the imperfections and
miscarriages of others, you have repaired those of an infinite number of young
Maids. Besides, shall there be no account made for the pains you have taken in
studying the most occult Science^? It Is true, the Inquisition loved you never
the better for it, nay, bestowed on you some public marks of its disaffection;
but you know, it consists of knowing men, and that there is ever an envy and
emulation between persons of the same profession. Nay, they do much more, that
is, they are far from any confidence of your salvation; but it matters not,
Custom makes all things tolerable, even in Hell it self, where it cannot be but
that you must expect much kindness from the Inhabitants of the place, as having
held a great correspondence with them during your living here. I have but a
word more to tell you, which is, that I might have chastis'd you much after
another manner; but it came into my thoughts, that it is ordinary with old
people to become children again; that you are old enough to be returned to your
first state of innocence, and consequently that a Rod was a more proper
instrument to punish you for the raskally childish trick you put upon me, than
any other: and so I take my leave, recommending the care of your persons to
your own dear selves.

Having thus had the satisfaction to return their abuses, he went his ways, and
left them rather dead than living, not so much through the grievousness of the
chastisement they had received, as that he had carried with him all they had,
and left them alone, bound to their good behavior in a place, where, for ought
they knew, they might become food for the Wolves.

They were very mournfully looking one upon the other, without saying any
thing, when there passes by between them a Hare, which had not gone far ere
they perceived a Dog in pursuit of her, and at some distance after the Dog, a
Gentleman on Horseback, and that no other than Don Sancho of Villefagnan, who
was come to Burgos, to see his Brother, whom he heard to have lien sick, and
with whom he then sojourned at a Country house he had not far off thence,
whither he was come to take the air. He thought it a strange spectacle to see
two Women bound in that manner to Trees, and was much surpised when he finds
in the countenance of one of them, that of the beautiful Stranger he had seen
at Toledo, whom he had made so much enquiry after at Madrid, and who was
perpetually present to his imagination. But whereas he had, upon the first
sight of her, conceived a strong impression that she was a Woman of quality and
married, he continued for a while in some doubt whether it were she, as finding
it a hard matter to be convinced, that she durst presume to come so far in so
poor an equipage, as he might perceive by her clothes: but the countenance of
Helenilla, which, though cast down and betraying a certain fright, had lost
nothing of its beauty, satisfied him at length that he had found what had cost
him so many desires and disturbances. He lifted himself up upon the stirrups,
and looked all about him to see if he were all alone, and he was simple enough
to fear it was some diabolical illusion (God so permitting it) sent to punish
him for his debauches and sensuality. Helenilla for her part had a reflection
that was not much better, and was no less in fear, that Heaven had made choice
of that day, to bring about her all those who had any thing to call her to an
account for. Don Sancho beheld Helenilla with much astonishment; she him with
much distraction, each of them expecting the other should first speak; and Don
Sancho was at last going to fall into some discourse with her, when he
perceives one of the Pages coming in full speed toward him, whereupon
advancing to know what the matter was, the other told him, that the young
Gentlemen, his Cousins, were together by the ears ready to kill one another. He
made all the haste he could, followed by the Page, to the place where he had
left his company, and finds four or five of them in the heat of their drink
railing one at another with their swords drawn, and, at some distance,
employing their drunken valor in cuts and slashes, which cost some of the
adjacent Trees the loss of many a fair and hopeful branch.

Don Sancho, enraged at his being deprived the pleasant vision he had lost,
upon so frivolous an occasion, did what he could to appease those
irreconcilable, yet not very dreadful, enemies; but his arguments, his
entreaties, and his menaces had prevailed but little with them, if the
weariness they were in, and the wine which disturbed their brains had not laid
them so often on the ground, as at last to fasten them to it, and set them a
snoring as peaceably as they had at first with too much violence fallen out.

Leaving them so quieted of themselves, Don Sancho took his way back again
toward the happy Tree, unto which he had left the Idol of his heart in a
manner metamorphos'd; but his astonishment not to find there what he sought
for, was greater than it had been upon the sight of her before. He rode about
it several times to see if with earnest looking he might find what was not
there; and not satisfied with that, looked all about him, yet could discover
nothing but a sad Wilderness* he rode up and down to all the places
thereabouts, and returns again to the Tree, which, dull Plant as it was, never
stirred for all the trouble he put himself to.

Don Sancho, as I told you, had such a devotion for the female sex, that he
could love any Woman at the first sight: but to compass his desires, if money
would not do, he would spare no courtship, no addresses, no submissions, no
services, no importunity to do it. This you will say was the only way to make a
man a Poet, if he were capable of it. Don Sancho indeed could do pretty well at
it, and was very happy in the humouring of any accident good or bad: and
whereas the odness of the subject given a Poet heightens his fancy, if he have
it any thing strong, he thought the adventure had happened to him so strange,
that it would have been insensibility in him, great as that of the Tree it
self, not to say something to it. Having therefore alighted, he discovered his
Poetry to it in these words, if it be true at least, that he was as great a
Fool as I am told he was. O most happy, and most to be envied Tree! since thou
have been felicifi'd with the embraces of her whom I love, though I have no
great knowledge of her, and whom I would not know but to love her, may thy
leaves be mingled among the Stars, may the sacrilegious Ax never offer the
least violence to thy sacred and tender bark; may the Thunder bear a respect to
thy ^oughes, and the worms of the earth to thy roots; may the harsh Winter
spare thee, the Spring enrich thee, may the loftiest Pines envy thee; and, to
conclude, may Heaven protect thee.

While the virtuous Gentleman was exhausting himself in fruitless regrets, or,
if you will, in bemoaning Po^tical ejaculations, which are of greater
impo^^ance th^n any other, and which it is too violent (...) ^^^^cise for a man
to make use of every day; his ^^^^^nts, who knew not what was become of him,
after a good while's search, found him, and came about him. He returned to his
Brother's very melancholy, and, if I am not mistaken in wh^^ I have been told,
he went to bed suppe^less.

But it is not easily credible, how many irons one that tells a story, or writes
a Novel, may have in the fire at once. He that tells the story, it being
supposed he speaks to more than one, is troubled many times to ghess at what
circumstances of it the greatest part of his Auditory sticks, and is impatient
to have it prosecuted: the other, though it may happen he has to do but with
one at a time (for, now the world grows more and more learned, people think it
more edifying to read things of that nature themselves) is subject to the same
inconveniences, not knowing where the Reader would have the design prosecuted,
where interrupted by some unthought-of accident. This brought into my thoughts,
that the Reader I have now to do with, may think I leave him too long in
suspense, as being happily impatient to know, by what enchantment Helenilla and
Mendez had been snatched away from the sight of the amorous DON SANCHO. Let him
have but ever so little patience; I am just going to tell him.

Montufar upon his departure from them was much pleased in himself at the piece
of justice he had done; but as soon as the fury of his revenge began to admit
remission, his Love was proportionably re-inflam'd, and represented Helenilla
to his imagination more beautiful than ever he had seen her. He concluded from
her great patience in receiving so cruel a chastisement (when she saw there was
no remedy but to endure it) that she must needs be of an excellent and
tractable disposition, and much inclined to forget and forgive injuries. He
considered with himself, that what he had taken away from them would be soon
spent, and that her Beauty was a settled and constant revenue to him, while he
continued in her favor, the want of whose company he already thought
insupportable. Upon these considerations, he made all the haste he could back,
and the same barbarous hands which had with so little remorse fastened to the
Trees the two Fugitives, and had afterward so unmercifully swept their
back-sides with good green Broom, knocked off their Chains, I would say, cut
asunder, or untied their Cords, and se^ them at liberty, while Don Sancho was
Christianly employed in reconciling those of his Drunken company who were
fallen out.

Montufar, Helenilla, and Mendez, became good Friends again as they went along,
and having reciprocally promised to forget all dissatisfactions and
differences, embraced one another with as much tenderness for their
reconciliation, as regret for what was past; doing just as the Great ones do,
who neither love nor hate any thing, and who accommodate those two contrary
passions to their advantages, and the present state of their affairs. They held
a Council concerning the way they should take. Their Politics advised them to
forbear going to Burgos, where they might be in danger to meet with the
Gentleman of Toledo: They therefore made choice of Sevil for their retreat, and
it seemed to them that fortune seconded their design, since that, as they came
into Madrid-Road, they met with a Mule-driver, who had three returned Mules he
could dispose of, and which he was glad to let them have to carry them to
Sevil, upon the first proposition made by Montufar to that purpose. He treated
the Ladies upon the way very civilly, to make them forget the ill treatment
they had received from him. They at first were somewhat distrustful of his
insinuations, and resolved to be revenged on him upon the first opportunity:
but at last, more out of policy than any consideration of virtue, they became
greater friends than ever. They bethought themselves, that Discord had ruined
the greatest Empires, and were convinced, that, in all appearance, they were
born one for another. They played not any trick of their Profession in their
journey to Sevil; for having their thoughts sufficiently taken up with their
removal out of a Country where enquiry might be made after them, they were
afraid to run themselves into new inconveniences, which might hinder their
going to Sevil, where they had great designs to carry on.

They alighted a League short of the City, and having satisfied the
Mule-driver, made their entrance into it at the close of the Evening, and took
up their Lodging in the first Inn they came to. Montufar took a House,
furnished it, but meanly enough, and put himself into a black Suit, a Cassock,
and a long Clo^k. Helenilla put her self into the habit of a Religious woman,
having her hair so closely imprisoned, as there was not ought to be seen; and
Mendez, clad like a devout Matron, got her a pair of Beads, of such bigness as
might well serve as Case-shot for a small piece of Ordnance. For some days
immediately after their arrival, Montufar walked up and down the Streets,
habited, as I have described him, with his Arms across, and casting down his
Eyes when ever he met with any of the female Sex. He cried out ever and anon,
with a voice that would break the very stones: Blessed be the most blessed
Sacrament of the Altar, and the ever-happy Conception of the immaculate Virgin,
with several other exclamations of the same kind. He caused the same things to
be repeated by the Children he met with in the Streets* and got them together
many times to make them sing Hymns and godly Songs, and to teach them their
Catechism. He often visited the Prisons, preached to the Prisoners, comforted
some, ministered to others, bringing them Victuals, and many times carrying from
the Market a heavy Basket filled with such things as he had either begged or
provided for them. Oh detestable Rogue! it seems there wanted only thy turring
Hypocrite, to make thee the most accomplished Villain the Earth ever groaned
under!

These virtuous actions, done by the greatest enemy to Virtue of all mankind,
in a short time raised him into the reputation of a Saint. Helenilla and
Mendez, for their parts, did such things as made people begin to talk of their
Canonization. One pretended to be Mother, the other, Sister of the blessed
Brother Martin. They went every day to the Hospitals; waited on the sick, made
their beds, washed their Linen, and, if they wanted, accommodated them at
their own charge.

Thus were the three most vicious Persons in all Spain become the admiration of
Sevil. Much about this time there happened to come thither a Gentleman of
Madrid, about some occasions of his own. He had been one of the acquaintances
of Helenilla; for such Women as turn common, supply many in their time: he knew
Mendez to be no better than she should be, and had so much experience of
Montufar, as to take him for no other th^n a dangerous cheat and a Pandar. One
day, as they were coming all three together from Church, followed by a great
number of persons, who kissed their Vestments, and entreated them to be mindful
of them in their Prayers, they were discovered by the Gentleman I spoke of;
who, upon sight of them being enflamed with a Christian zeal, and not able to
endure that three persons so transcendently wicked should abuse the credulity
of a whole City, broke through the multitude, and coming up to Montufar gave
him a hearty blow over the face. Abominable cheats! cries he to them! Do you
neither fear God nor Man? He would have said something else: but his good
intention met not with the success it deserved, it being not only imprudent,
but dangerous, to be over-precipitate in the discovery of any thing. All the
people fell upon him, looking on him as one that h^d committed Sacrilege in
his incivility toward their Saint. He was soon laid on the ground, laden
with blows and kicks, and no doubt had lost his Life among them, if Montufar,
through a miraculous readiness of wit, had not taken him into his protection,
covering him with his body, thrusting away the most earnest to beat him, nay,
exposing himself to their fury and blows. My dearest Brethren, Cries he as loud
as he could, let him alone for the holy Jesus sake; for the B. Virgin's sake,
be not so violent.

These few words laid that great Tempest; and the people, as easily quieted as
they had been stirred up, made way for B. Martin, who came up to the
unfortunate Gentleman, glad in his Soul to see him so treated, but discovering
in his countenance a great trouble thereat. He raised him up from the ground
where he tumbled over and over, embraced him, and kissed him, though all blood
and dirt, and reproved the people very sharply for their rudeness. I am indeed,
the wicked wretch, said he to those who had any desire to hear him, I am the
Sinner, I am he that never did any thing pleasing in the sight of God. Do you
imagine, continued he, because you see me now clad like an honest Man, that I
have not been all my Life a Thief? a scandal to others, and my own ruin? Let
me be the object of your Injuries; it is at me you ought to cast Dirt and
Stones, it is my Blood your Swords thirst after.

Having said these words with a personated mildness, and thereby absolutely
quieted the people, he went, with a zeal yet more counterfeit, and cast himself
at the feet of his Enemy, and kissing them, he not only asked him pardon, but
got him again his Sword, Cloak, and Hat, which had been lost in the Tumult. He
put them about him, and having led him by the hand to the end of the Street
parted from him, after he had bestowed on him many embraces, and as many
benedictions.

The poor Man was all this while as if he had been enchanted, so astonished was
he at what he h^d seen, and what had been done to him, and conceived so much
shame at the sadness of the adventure, that he was never seen in the Streets
afterward, though his business detained him in the City some time longer.

In the mean time, Montufar, by this act of counterfeit humility had gained the
hearts of the whole City. The people looked on him with admiration, many came
the oftener to Church purposely to see him, and the Children cried after him a
Saint, a Saint, as they would a Fox, a Fox, had they met his Enemy in the
Streets. From this time he began to live the happiest Life of any Man alive.
The great Lord, the Gentleman, the Magistrate, the Prelate courted him every
day to their Tables, and, happy thought he himself, whom he honored with an
acceptance of his entertainment. If any one asked his Name, he made answer,
that he was the Animal, the Beast, fit only to carry Burdens, the
Common-shore of filthiness, the Vessel of iniquity, and such other attributes
as his studied Devotion furnished him withal. He spent the day in some public
places with the Ladies of the City, importuning them with perpetual complaints
of his own luke-warmness: telling them that he was not sufficiently annihilated
in Spirit, that he was guilty of too much Self-centreity, and wanted those
recollections which should confine his thoughts to celestial contemplations,
and divert them from being disordered by the vanities of this World; in a word,
never entertaining them with any thing but what was wrapped up in this fustian
Language: So great a Proficient had a short time made him in Sycophancy and
Hyprocrisie!

Of the great Alms daily bestowed in Sevil, there past most through his hands,
or through those of Helenilla, and Mendez; who, as to what might be expected
from them, acted their parts to the height, and whose names made no less haste
to get into the Calender, than did that of Montufar. A certain Widow, a Lady of
quality, and inexpressibly besotted with Devotion, sent them every day two
dishes of Meat for their Dinner, and as many for their Supper, and those such
as had been ordered by one of the best Cooks about the City. At last, the House
they lived in grew too little for the great number of presents that were
brought in from all parts, and to entertain the Ladies that came to visit them.
If a Woman was desirous to be with Child, her only way was to put her Petition
into their hands, that they might present it at the Tribunal of God, and bring
her a speedy and satisfactory answer of it. She that had a Son in the Indies,
took the same course; and so did she also who had a Brother, Friend, or Cousin,
in Slavery at Algiers. And the poor Widow, who had a cause depending before an
ignorant Judge, against a powerful Adversary, doubted not of its going with
her, since she had made them a present according to her ability. Some presented
them with Sweetmeats, others with Pictures and Ornaments for their Oratory.
Sometimes there were sent them in, all sorts of clean Linen and Clothes for
poor people that were ashamed of their necessities, and often, considerable
sums of Money, to be distributed as they should think fitting. No body came
empty handed to them, nor did any body doubt of their future Canonization. Nay
it grew to that height, that some desired their advice in things doubtful, and
to come. Helenilla, who had a Diabolical wit, managed the business of Answers;
and the cunning Gypsy would be sure to deliver her Oracles, in few words, and
in terms ambiguous and capable of several interpretations. Their Beds, simple
in appearance were all the day covered with Mats, but at night with good
Down-beds and Quilts, and good Coverlets; the House being full of all manner of
Household Stuff, sent in by some or other, for a charitable supply of some
Widow, whose Goods had been taken in Execution, or to furnish the House of a
young Maid married without any Portion. Their doors, in Winter, were shut up at
five of the clock, in Summer, at seven, as punctually as if their House had
been a well regulated Convent; and then the Spits went, the House was perfumed,
the Fowls went to the fire, the Tables were neatly covered, and the
Hypocritical Triumvirate, fed without any remorse, and valiantly drank to their
own good Healths, and sometimes remembered theirs whom they made such Fools.
Montufar and Helenilla lay together, for fear of the Spirits; and their Man and
their Maid, who were of the same Constitution, imitated them in their manner of
passing away the night. But for the Matron Mendez, she always lay alone, and
was more contemplative than active, ever since she had given her mind to the
black Art.

Thus did they spend their time, when the besotted Inhabitants of Sevil thought
they were at their mental prayers, or disciplining themselves. It is not to be
asked, whether they were in good case, as to the body, living at this rate.
Every one blessed God for it, and it was in a manner the general wonder, that a
sort of people who exercised so great austerities, were of a better complexion,
than those who lived in the height of luxury and abundance. During the space
of three years that they led all the people of Sevil by the noses, receiving
presents from all parts, and converting most of the alms that past through
their hands to their own use, what a number of good yellow pieces they got
together, will not easily be credited. What ever happened successfully, was
attributed to the effect of their prayers. They stood for all the Children that
were christened, they were the makers up of all Matches, and the adbitrators of
all differences. At last, God grew weary of suffering their wicked kind of
living. Montufar, who was much inclined to choler, used often to beat his man;
he, on the other side, being high fed, and living at ease, received his
chastisement with a great deal of indignation, and would many times have left
his service upon it, if Helenilla, much more politic in that than her Gallant,
h^d not ever and anon appeased him with kindnesses and presents. He one day
corrected him a little too severely for a trivial fault. The young fellow got
out of doors, and, blinded by his passion, went and gave notice to the
Magistrates of Sevil of the hypocrisy of these three blessed persons. Some
evil spirit suggested it into Helenilla, that the fellow would do the mischief
she feared. She advised Montufar to take all the Gold, whereof they had a
considerable quantity, and to avoid the tempest she was afraid would fall upon
them. No sooner said than done. They took about them what they had of greatest
value, and putting a good face on it in the streets, went out at one of the City
gates, and came in again at another, to blind those that might follow them.

Montufar had insinuated himself into the favor of a certain Widow, as lewd,
and as very a hypocrite, as himself; He had made Helenilla acquainted with all
that passed between them, who took not any thing amiss, no more than Montufar
would have done at her familiarity with a Gallant that had been profitable to
the Community. To her house they made their retreat, and there they were
secretly kept, and entertained to their own wishes; the Widow having an
affection for Montufar, for his own sake, and for Helenilla upon Montufar's
account.

In the mean time, the Magistrate, conducted by Montufar's revengeful servant,
was gotten into the house of our Hypocrites, and made search for the blessed
Children and their glorious Mother, and neither meeting with them nor any
tidings of them, the servant-maid not knowing where they were nor whither they
were gone, had c^us'd all the trunks to be sealed up, and an Inventory to he
taken of all that was in the house. The officers found in the Kitchen what to
entertain themselves withal for above one day, and left not in danger to be
lost any thing they could handsomely make their own. While things were in this
posture comes the old Mendez into the house, having not the least imagination
of what they were doing there. The Officers laid hold on her, and hurried her
to prison with a great concourse of people at her heels. The man and the maid
were sent thither also to keep her company, and having spoke somewhat too much
as well as she, where condemned as she was, to the embraces of the
Whipping-post, and there to receive two hundred lashes. Mendez dies of it
within three days after, as being too old to overcome so rigorous a
chastisement, and the man and the maid were banished Sevil for their lives; so
that the prudent Helenilla, by her foresight, kept her dear Montufar and her
self out of the hands of the Magistrate, who sought after them, but in vain,
both within and without the City. The people were ashamed they had been so
abused; and the Ballad-singers, who were grown hoarse in celebrating their
commendations at all corners of the streets, set their muddy Poets at work to
write as much in dispraise of the counterfeit Saints. These Insects of
Parnassus, exhausted, upon this occasion, their satirical vein; and the songs
they made, to cry down those whom not long before the people had made their
Idols, are to this day sung up and down at Sevil.

Montufar and Helenilla reflecting on the sad Tragedy of Mendez, thought it
their best course to take a countermarch to Madrid, which they did as soon as
they durst venture with safety, bringing thither with them much wealth, and
being also married together. They immediately made enquiry after what news
there might be of Don Sancho o^ Villefagnan, and having understood that he was
not at Madrid, they appeared publicly; he, as well clothed as as any
Gentleman about the Court, and she, after the rate of a Lady of quality, and
beautiful as an Angel. Before the treaty of marriage was concluded between
them, there were certain Articles drawn up, with a mutual promise for the
punctual observance thereof; among others, these; That Montufar as a husband of
much discretion and great patience, should not be any way troubled at such
visits as upon the account of her beauty should be made to her; she on the
other side being obliged not to entertain any but what were beneficial.

They had not been there long, ere those Women, who between the sexes of
Mankind are much of the same predicament with Horse-coursers in matter of
Horses, such as many otherwise be called the Public Intelligencers in the
affairs of Pleasure; otherwise, Haglers, and Caterers in human flesh; in the
vulgar language, Bauds; or, to speak more honorably of them, Women of Designs,
began to beat the market about Helenilla. They made her appear one day at a
Play, another in the Park, and sometimes in the great Street of Madrid, seated
in the boot of a Coach, whence, looking on some, smiling on others, taking
notice of all, she could on a sudden muster such a number of transported Lovers
as might pass for a considerable Regiment. Her dear husband very punctually
observed the articles agreed on at the Contract; such as were bashful in their
addresses he, by his insinuating behavior, encouraged into greater confidence,
and did in a manner lead them by the hand to his wife, being so full of
compliance and so ready to further their enjoyment, as never to want some
urgent occasions, purposely to afford them the freedom of her company alone. He
made acquaintances with none but such as had money enough, and cared as little
how they spent it, and never came into his own house ere he had been assured by
a signal that appeared in the window, when the Mistress of the house was busy,
that he might come in without hindering any sport; and, if the signal were such
as for^ad him entrance, he went his way as well satisfied as a person whose
business is done in his absence, and passed away an hour or two in some
Gaming-house, where all were glad to entertain him for his wife's sake.

Among those whom Helenilla had made her tributary vassals, there was a certain
Gentleman of Granada, who surpassed all his competitors both in the excess of
his love and his expense. He was descended out of so noble a House, that the
titles of his Nobility might be found among the Antiquities of the capital City
of Judaea, and those who had a particular knowledge of his race, affirmed, that
his Ancestors had kept the Books for arraignment of Malefactors at Jerusalem
before and after the time of Caiaphas. The love he had to Helenilla made him in
a short time release a great number of good Pieces which he had imprisoned
happily one by one. By this means came Helenilla's house to be one of the best
furnished about Madrid. A Coach, whereof she knew neither the price, nor was at
the charge of maintaining the Horses that drew it, waited every morning at the
door, to receive her commands, and rolled up and down till night, as she was
pleased to order it. This prodigal Lover took a box for her at the Playhouse
by the year, and there hardly passed a day but he entertained, with some
magnificent Collation, her and some others of the sex, in the houses of
recreation that are about the City. These entertainments were a certain
Paradise to Montufar, who accordingly satiated his natural gluttony thereat;
and being clothed like a Prince, and as full of c^sh as if he had been a
Treasurer, he fed every day like a French-wan, and drank like a German. He had
very great compliances for the liberal Granadine, and was not sparing of his
acknowledgments to Fortune her self.

But the wind turns of a sudden, and brings with it a horrible storm. Helenilla
entertained the visits of a certain young Hector, one of the Danger-fields of
the City; who never durst show their faces in the field; who live at the charge
of some wretched Curtezan whom they tyrannize over; who go every day to Plays
to make tumults and defeat poor Citizens of hats and cloaks; and who every
night beat their innocent swords against the walls, that they may have some
color to swear in the morning, that they had a furious encounter with some
enemies. Montufar* had many times given Helenilla notice, that he was not
pleased with that unprofitable acquaintance of hers. Notwithstanding all his
remonstrances, she still kept him company. Montufar was incensed thereat,
insomuch that, to satisfy himself, he gave Helenilla the same chastisement, as
the deceased Mendez, and she, had sometimes received from him in the mountains
of Burgos. Helenilla pretended her self reconciled to him upon the first
acknowledgments of his passion [but was resolved to be revenged.] The better to
compass her design, she for eight days together treated him with such unusual
kindnesses, that Montufar was absolutely satisfied: she was one of those Women,
who adore their Tyrants, and exercise their cruelty on their adorers. One day,
the Gentleman of Granada had ordered an excellent Supper to be provided,
intending to make the third person at it himself; but some business so fell
out, that he could not come. Montufar and Helenilla drank hand to hand to the
health of their Benefactor. Montufar, according to his ordinary course, made a
shift to get drunk, and as they were taking away the cloth would needs taste of
a Bottle of perfumed Hypocras, which the Granadine had sent in, as a thing
extraordinary. It was never discovered, whether Helenilla, who had opened it
before supper, had put into the bottle a dram of something more than should be:
This is certain, that not long after Montufar had taken it off, he felt a
strange heat in his intrails, and, presently after, insupportable pains and
gripings. He had some suspicion of his being poisoned, and ran to get his
sword, which Helenilla perceiving, got in that interval out of the room to
avoid his fury. Montufar went to her chamber whither he thought she had been
gone to hide her self, and searching after her in the height of his fury, he
discovers, as he took up a piece of Tapistry, Helenilla's young Gallant, who
immediately run him with his sword through the body. Montufar, though
half-dead, made a shift to get him by the throa^. Upon the shrieks of the
servants, who made a hellish noise, the Magistrate comes into the house, just
as the Murderer was in hopes to make his escape, having put Montufar out of
all pain with a sharp dagger he had.

In the mean time Helenilla, who was got into the street, and knew not whether
she went, enters the first door she met with open. She perceived a light in a
low room, and a Gentleman walking up and down in it. She went and cast her self
at his feet imploring his assistance and protection, and was much astonished to
find him to be Don Sancho, of Villefagnan, who was no less surpised to meet
with, in her, the Idol of his heart, which now appeared to him the fourth time.
Don Sancho had, some time before, had some differences with his wife, and those
were come to such height, as that they were thereupon absolutely parted, she
finding it impossible to live with him, by reason of his ill treatments of her,
and his debauches. He had procured from the Court a Commission to plant a new
Colony in the Indies, and was within a short time to take shipping at Sevil.
While Helenilla entertains him with a thousand forged stories, and that he is
overjoyed to find her willing to accompany him in his voyage; the Magistrate
condemns the young Gallant to be hanged for the murdering of Montufar, makes a
search after Helenilla all over Madrid, and seized of all that was in the
house. Don Sancho and Helenilla had a prosperous voyage to the Indies, where
there have happened to them stranger adventures than any have been related yet.
Some particulars have been brought over, but more are still expected. Those
that are lately come out of those parts give an account of Helenilla as being
yet alive, in great prosperity, and Governess of a vast Country; She and Don
Sancho living as happily and as lovingly as any couple in the world. She
engaged him to marry her ere he could have his desires of her; which when he
made some difficulty to do; she satisfied him with this, that, in several
worlds, it was lawful for a man to have several wives. There are several
Booksellers, who with the last Ship that went into those parts, sent over a
young man to get the Copy of her and her Indian husband's adventure, before it
comes to my perusal; but though they do, I do hereby let them know, they must
have my hand in it before it be printed, because I have all the stories
wherewith she entertained Don Sancho at her so sudden meeting with him at
Madrid ready for the Press, which, considering the surprise and confusion she
mu^t needs be in at so fatal an accident, and the presence of spirit she had to
invent them, will accordingly be thought the greatest miracle of female
invention that ever was. I intend to put out all together, (not including what
is already published) under the Title of THE COMPLETE CURTEZAN, or THE MODERN
LAIS, In the mean time, forbidding all manner of persons to trouble either
Booksellers or Friends to send them Books under such names, till they find
these Titles at the beginning of the Book which they now meet with at the end,
or hear further from their humble Servant.

THE INNOCENT ADULTERY.
The Third Novel.
THE Court of Spain was at Vailladolid, and consequently the inconveniences of
those that were obliged to attend it, were the greater, (it being a place as
famous for the dirtiness of it as Paris, if we may believe an eminent Spanish
Poet, who has given us that account thereof) when in one of the coldest Nights
of a Winter that had been more sharp than ordinary, and about the hour that
most of the Monasteries toll their Bell to Ma^ins, a young Gentleman, named Don
Garcias, slipped out of a House where he had spent the day in some Company, or
h^ply at Gaming, which, however we may be sensible of the other losses
consequent thereto, makes us little mind that of our Time, though happily the
greatest. Though the night were dark, yet had he not any light with him;
whether his Lacquey had through sleepiness lost his Link, or that his Master
cared not much whether he had any; and was just passing into the street where
his lodging was, when, at a door, opened of a sudden, a certain person was
thrust out with such rudeness and violence, that the party fell at his feet, on
the other side of the way, as he walked along.

He was much startled at the strangeness of the adventure; much more, when
going to give his hand to the person he thought so unworthily treated, he
perceived, he was stripped to the Shirt, and heard him sighing and bemoaning
himself, without endeavoring in the least to get up. Thence he inferred, he
had hurt himself in his fall, and thereupon, having, with the help of his
Lacquey which was come up to him, set him on his feet, he asked him, Wherein he
might do him any service. You may save my Life, and secure my Honor, replies
the unknown Person, with a Voice interrupted with sighs, and which convinced
him of the mistake he had been in all the while, and that it was a Woman he had
found so barbarously forced out of doors at so unseasonable a time. I beseech
you, added she, by the same generosity which makes you so ready to assist me in
my misfortune, to dispose of me into some place, where I may remain concealed,
provided none know of it but your self, and such as you shall be confident of
their fidelity.

Don Garcias put his cloak about her, and commanding his Lacquey to hold her by
the arm on one side as he did on the other, he soon brought her to his Lodging,
where all were in their Beds, but one Maid, who opened the door, cursing and
bitterly railing at those who made her sit up so late. The Lacquey, whether
upon the directions of his Master, or the pleasure those of his quality take in
the doing of mischief, made her no other answer than that of blowing out her
candle, and while she was gone to light it again, calling him a hundred Rogues
and Skip-kennels, Don Garcias, conducted, or indeed rather carried to his
Chamber, (which was but one pair of Stairs) the distressed Lady, who with much
ado kept on her feet.

The Lacquey having brought up a light, Don Garcias perceived he had met with a
very extraordinary adventure, having brought into his Lodging one of the
handsomest Women in all Spain, and one who immediately raised in him both Love
and Compassion. Her hair was black, but withal of a brightness out-vying that
of Jet; her Complexion, a miraculous mixture of Lillies and Roses; her Eyes, to
speak mo^estly of them, so many Suns; her Breast lovely, beyond all comparison;
her Arms admirable; her Hands yet much more to be admired; and her Stature such
as a Man that were a great Monarch should wish in her whom he called his Queen!
But that delicate black Hair was all in disorder; that attractive Complexion
was pale and discolored; those sparkling Eyes were full of tears; that
incomparable Breast all bruised; those Arms and Hands were not in a much better
condition; in a word, that lovely Body, of so graceful a proportion, was full
of black and bloody places, as if the owner had been beaten with
Stirrup-leathers, a Girdle, or something else, no less unfit to be employed on
so much tenderness and delicacy. If Don Garcias were infinitely pleased to look
on so beautiful a person, the same beautiful person was no less troubled to see
her self reduced to the condition she was in; at the disposal of a Man, she had
not the least knowledge of, and one that seemed not to be five and twenty years
of age. He took notice of her disturbance, and did all he could to persuade
her, that she should be far from fearing any thing unhandsome from a Gentleman,
who would think himself happy to serve her, though with the hazard of his Life.

In the mean time, his Lacquey kindled a little Char-coal fire; for in Spain
there is but little other Fuel; but for that, all Countries must be content with
what provision Nature has been pleased to make them; though she be ever so
much a Stepmother, there is no repining at her disposal of things. He also laid
clean sheets, or should have done if he had any, on his Master's bed, who,
having bidden the Lady goodnight, left her in possession of his Chamber,
double-locking the door upon her, and went to Bed, I know not upon what
pretense, to a Gentleman of his acquaintance that had a Chamber in the same
House. He slept in all likelihood better in his Friend's, than the Lady he had
recommended to his own Bed did in his; he never drew bit, till the cries about
the Streets awoke him; she ceased not weeping and bewailing her self all night
long. Don Garcias got up, rubbed and powdered, and made himself as spruce and
as youthful as he could. Being come to his own Chamber Door, he laid his Ear
to the Keyhole, and having heard the poor Lady still bemoaning her self, he
made no difficulty to go in to her. His presence heightened the violence of her
affliction, and not able to look on him with any command of her grief; You see,
said she to him, a woman, who was, no longer since than yesterday, the most
esteemed of any in Vailladolid, but at present the most despicable, and most
infamous, and in a condition now much more likely to raise compassion, than she
has sometime been to cause envy. But how great soever the misfortune may be
whereto I am reduced, the seasonable kindness I received from you, may yet in
some measure remedy it, if after you have afforded me the Sanctuary of your
Chamber till night, you get me conveyed thence, either in a Sedan or Coach, to
a Convent which I shall name to you. But may I, added she, after all the
Obligations you have cast on me, entreat you to be at the trouble to go to my
House, to enquire what is said and done there; and, in fine, to inform your
self, what discourse there is about the Court and City, concerning the unhappy
Woman, whom you have so generously taken into your protection.

Don Garcias proffered himself to go where ever she pleased to desire him, and
received her commands, with that earnestness and alacrity, as a person newly
fallen in Love, would do those of the Beauty he was become an adorer of. She
gave him such directions, as were necessary; he left her, upon engagement to
make a speedy return, and she immediately fell to such lamentations, as if she
had but newly begun. It was not an hour ere Don Garcias returned; and upon his
coming into the room, perceiv^ng his fair Guest much alarmed, as if she had had
a presentiment of the ill news he brought her; Madam, said he to her, if you
are Eugenia, Wife of Don Sancho, I have somewhat to tell you which very much
concerns you; Eugenia is not to be heard of, and Don Sancho in prison, charged
with the death of his Brother, Don Lewis. Don Sancho, is innocent, said she, I
am the unfortunate Eugenia, and Don Lewis was the lewdest Man in the world.

Her tears, which thereupon broke their way with too much violence, and her
sobbs admitting very little intermission, suffered her not to speak any more;
and I think Don Garcias was not in the mean time a little troubled to compose
himself to sadness, and to express how sensible he was of her affliction. At
last, as we find that violent things are seldom of long continuance,
Eugenias's grief admitted some moderation; she wiped her eyes and face, and
went on with the discourse, which, as I said, her tears and sighs had
interrupted. It amounts not to much, said she to him, that you know the name
and quality of the unfortunate Wom^n, you have in so short a time so highly
obliged; you may well expect she should acquaint you with the particulars of
her Life, and by that confidence reposed in you, make some kind of
acknowledgement of the extraordinary obligation you have cast on her. I am come
out of one of the best houses in Vailladolid. I was born to a great fortune,
and Nature has been so indulgent to me, as to matter of Beauty, that, had I
been proud of it, I needed not to have feared the checks and censures of any:
The accomplishments of my person brought me more Gallants than the greatness of
my Estate; and the reputation of both together raised me Adorers in the most
remote Cities of Spain. Among those who proposed to themselves the felicity of
my enjoyments, Don Sancho, and Don Lewis, two Brothers, equal both as to the
goods of Fortune and Nature, were the most remarkable, as well for the violence
of their passion, as the emulation they expressed who should do me the most,
and most considerable services. My Friends countenanced the pretensions of Don
Sancho, who was the elder of the two, and my Inclinations were consonant to
their choice, and disposed me to a m^n turned of forty years of age, who, by
the mildness and compliance of his disposition, and the extraordinary care he
took to please me, got a greater Interest in my soul, than would happily have
done a person whose age had been more suitable to mine. The two Brothers,
though they had been Rivals, had nevertheless lived so friendly together as
never to have any difference; and Don Sancho, upon his gaining of me, lost not
the friendship of his Brother Don Lewis. Their Houses joined together, or
rather were but one House, since the common Wall that separated them, had a
Door in it, which, by joynt-consent was not locked of either side. Don Lewis
was not shie, even before his Brother, to make the same addresses to me as he
was used to do whilst he was his Rival; and Don Sancho, whose affection was
heightened by his enjoyment, and who loved me beyond his own Life, looked on
his Courtships as the expressions of an innocent gayness and civility. He
called me himself his Brother's Mistress, who for his part palliated a real
love with so much elusion and artifice, that I was not the only person
deceived in it. In fine, having a while accustomed himself to entertain me
publicly with his passion, not minding who were present, he came at last to
make some discoveries of it to me in private, with so much importunity, and so
little respect, that I was no longer to doubt of his unworthy designs upon me.
Though I was but very young, yet had I prudence enough to put him off with such
Retorts, as whence he might have taken occasion to let all things pass as if he
still only personated the passionate Lover. I took in jest whatever he said to
me seriously, and though to my remembrance I never was more angry than at that
time, yet I never did my self greater violence, to forbear doing any thing
inconsistent with the ordinary indifferency of my humor. This he was so far
from making his advantage of, that it incensed him; and giving me a frightful
look, wherein his wicked intentions were but too visible; No, no, Madam, said
he to me, I am not so much a counterfeit since I lost you, as I was while I had
yet hopes to gain you: and though your rigor be great enough soon to free you
from a Love and Addresses which you think troublesome, you have so accustomed
me to suffer, that it will be much better done of you to -- Forbear ever being
alone with you, said I, interrupting him. Upon which one of my Women, coming
into my chamber, prevented him, from making further discoveries of his
insolence, and me, from expressing my resentment thereof, as highly as the
occasion required, and I found my self inclined to do. I was very glad since, I
had not done it, upon this account of my Husband, and was in hope that wicked
Brother would have afforded me less of his love and more of his esteem; but he
still continued both his prevarications before people, and his importunities in
private. To elude his Transportations and serious Addresses, I put on the
greatest severity I could, so far as to threaten to give his Brother notice of
his behavior toward me. I made use of all the ways I could think on, to make
him sensible of his miscarriage. I entreated, I wept, I promised to love him as
a Brother; but he would needs have that place in my affection which Lovers
only pretend to. In fine, sometimes born with, sometimes sharply treated, and
still no less amorous than abhorred, he would have made me the most unfortunate
Woman in Spain, if my conscience, which could not upbraid me with any thing,
had not established and preserved the tranquillity of my mind. But at last my
virtue, which had stood out the assaults of so dangerous an enemy, forsook me;
and I became a prey to one I little thought of, because I forsook it. The Court
came to Vailladolid, and brought with it that gallantry which makes Ladies that
are unaccustomed to it, entertain other thoughts than they had before. There is
somewhat more than ordinary pleasing in all new things; our Ladies thought they
saw something in the Courtiers which they observed not in those who amongst us
went for the greatest Gallants; and the Courtiers on the other side endeavored
to please our Ladies, and to insinuate into their favou^, though they thought
them little better than certain Conquests. Among the Gallants that followed the
Court, in hopes of some preferment in time for their attendance: a Portuguez,
named Andrado, was much taken notice of, for the sharpness of his wit, the
gracefulness of his person and countenance, and more particularly for the
greatness of his expenses, a charm that h^th a strange power upon unexperienced
Ladies, who measure the excellency of the soul, by the magnificence of a man's
retinue and his clothes. Wealth he had not much, but Gaming brought that, which
was happily superfluous with others, to further his Accommodations; and the
advantages he made of it were so considerable, that he lived at as high a rate
as the richest and most sumptuous about the Court. I was so unhappy as to be
thought worth his liking, and when, through my own vanity and his courtship, I
was persuaded that he was taken with something in me, I thought my self the
happiest woman of my quality in the world. I should find it no small difficulty
to express what artifices he had to force himself into a woman's affections,
and answerably thereto what an excessive love I had for him. That Husband, whom
not long before I thought so kind, so dear, and so worthy my respects, was
grown, in my apprehension, as despicable, as odious. For Don-Lewis I had a
greater aversion than ever; nothing pleased me but Andrado; I could love no man
but him, and wherever I came and had not the sight of him, I astonished all
people with my distractions and disquiets. Nor was Andrado's affection to me
less violent. His predominant passion of Gaming gave way to that of his Love;
his presents gained my Women, his Letters and Sonnets took me infinitely, and
the Music he was somewhat over-prodigal of, gave all the Husbands that lived
in my street occasion to be thinking. In fine, he charged me so home, or I made
such weak resistance, that I was wholly at his devotion. I promised him all he
could desire, insomuch that all the trouble we were at, was about the place and
the time. My Husband was to make one at a Hunting-match, which was to have kept
him in the Country for several days together. I sent notice of it to my dear
Portuguez, and we appointed the execution of our amorous designs to be the very
night after my Husband's going out of Town. I was, at a certain hour agreed on
between us, to leave the backdoor of our Garden open, and, under pretense of
passing away some part of the night there, by reason of the extraordinary heat,
to set up a field-bed in a little wainscot Bower, open of all sides, and
surrounded with Orang-trees and Jessemine. In fine, my Husband left Vailladolid
in the morning: but from that to night seemed to me the longest day of my life.
Night came at last, and my Women having set up a bed in the Garden, I pretended
before them an extraordinary sleepiness, so that as soon as they had undressed
me, I bid them go to their beds, one only excepted who was privy to my design.
I was hardly got into bed, and the maid that st^id with me, whose name was
Marina, had but locked that door of the Garden which came from the house, and
opened the backdoor; when my Women came in all haste to tell me that my
Husband was returned. I had but so much time as to get that door locked, which
I had caused to be opened to let in Andrado. My Husband came to me with his
ordinary caresses, and I leave it to you to imagine how I entertained them. He
told me the occasion of his so sudden return, was, that the Gentleman who had
invited him to Hunting, had been thrown by his Horse and broke a Leg; and
having added to that an account of what else had happened that day, he
commended my ingenuity in making choice of a place to avoid the inconveniences
of the heat, and would needs pass away the night with me. He immediately put
off his clothes and came into bed to me. All I could do was to put on the best
countenance I could, and to smother the trouble I was in at his return, and to
assure him, by some forced caresses of mine, that I was not insensible of his.
Andrado, in the mean time, came according to the appointment, and finding that
door locked which he should have found open, he with the assistance of his
Lacquey made a shift to get over the Garden wall, with hopes, notwithstanding
that obstacle, to pass away the night with me. He has avowed to me since, that
his engaging himself in so presumptuous and dangerous a design proceeded merely
from a motive of jealousy, as being in a manner confident, that some Rival,
more in my favor than himself, was admitted to those enjoyments which he had
been put into hopes of. The imagination he had, that happily I had put a trick
upon him, put him into such a fury, that he was fully resolved to be eaven with
me, in case what he suspected should prove true, and to exercise the greatest
revenge he could think of, upon the Gallant he should find possessed of the
place he had promised himself. He made his approaches to the Bower where we
were a-bed, with as little noise as he could. 'Twas a clear Moonshine night,
so that I both perceived him coming in, and knew him. He saw I was frightened,
and observed the signs I made to him to withdraw. He could not of a sudden
discern whether the person who lay by me was my Husband or some other; but
perceiving in my countenance no less astonishment, than confusion and shame,
and finding upon the Table the Clothes and Plume of Feathers, which he had seen
my Husband in, that morning, he was satisfied it could be no other than Don
Sancho who was a-bed with me, and further confirmed in that belief, by finding
him sleeping more securely than a Gallant could have done, had any been in his
place. However he would needs come to that side of the bed which I lay on, and
give me a kiss, which I durst not deny him for fear of awaking my Husband. He
forbore putting me into any further fright, but went away, lifting up his eyes,
shrinking up his shoulders, and doing such actions as betrayed the regret he
conceived at his being so unhappily disappointed, and immediately got out of
the Garden with the same facility as he had got into it.

The next morning betimes, I received a Letter from him, the most passionate I
had ever read, and an excellent Paper of Verses upon the tyranny of Husbands.
He had spent in composing them the remainder of the night after he had left me;
and for the whole day after I had received them, I did nothing almost but read
them over and over, when I could do it without any body's observing it; nay,
so far were we either of us from reflecting on the danger we had been in, that
our thoughts were busi'd to contrive how we might run into the same hazard
again. And for my part, though I had not of my self been sufficiently inclined
to grant him any thing he desired of me, nor loved Andrado so much as I did, or
had ^ot yielded my self up to the charms of his Letters; yet could I not have
withstood the persuasions of my Woman, who perpetually solicited me on his
behalf. She reproached me, that, since I had so little confidence, it argued I
had but little Love for Andrado, and entertained me with stories of the passion
he had for me, with no less earnestness than if she had been to represent to
some Gallant of her own what she her self had for him. I understood by that
carriage of hers, that she was as perfect as needed in the part she was to act,
and withal of what importance it was to be careful in the choice of such
persons as are placed about those of my age and quality. But I had resolved to
ruin my self; and if she had been more virtuous than she was, I should not
have trusted her so far. In fine, she got me to consent, that she should
receive Andrado into a Wardrobe adjoining to my Chamber where she lay alone:
and we had ordered things so, as that as soon as my Husband were fallen asleep,
she should go into my bed to supply my plac^, while I passed away the night
with Andrado. He was accordingly hid in my Wardrobe, my Husband fell asleep,
and I was preparing my self to go to him, with the earnestness usual in persons
who are violent in their desires, yet have much to fear; when a horrid
confusion of Voices dolefully crying out fire, fire, struck my ear, and
awakened my Husband; and immediately my Chamber was full of smoke, and looking
toward the Window, me-thought the Air was all in a flame. A Negro wench that
belonged to the Kitchen had in her drink set the House on fire, and being
fallen asleep it was not perceived, till that, having made its way to some dry
Wood, and thence fastening on certain Stables, it began to break through the
floor of my Lodging. My Husband was a Man very much beloved. Of a sudden, the
House was full of Neighbors, who came to do what good they could. My
Brother-in-law, Don Lewis, whom the common danger made more diligent than any
other, came immediately in to our assistance with all his people, and, animated
by his passion, makes a shift to come to my Chamber, even through the flames:
which had already taken hold of the Staircase. He had made such haste that he
had nothing about him but his Nightgown, which having wrapped me in, he took
me up in his arms, rather dead than living; but more out of a reflection on the
danger Andrado was exposed to, than what I was in my self; carried me to his
own House through the door that was common between us, and having put me into
his own Bed, left me with some of my Women to keep me company. In the mean
time, my Husband, with their assistance, who concerned themselves in the
accident happened to us, ordered things so well, that the fire was extinguished
after it had done much mischif. Andrado found it no hard matter to make his
escape amidst the confusion and thronging of those who were come either to help
us, or to steal; and you may imagine to your self, how joyfully I received that
good news from Marina. He writ to me the next day some things that were
infinitely ingenious and handsome, upon the strangeness of our disappointment,
which I answered as I could, and so we alleviated, by mutual Lette^s, the
trouble we both equally conceived, not to see one another.

The mischief which the fire had done, being in some measure repaired, so that
it was thought fit I should remove from Don Lewis's Lodgings to my own; it
proved no hard matter for Andrado to gain my consent to try the same way once
more, as being confident it would then have taken its effect, if by so
extraordinary an accident it had not been prevented. But it so happened, that
that very night wherein we had appointed to recover what such unfore-seen
emergencies had deprived us of, a Gentleman of my Husband's acquaintance, being
in some trouble about a Duel he had been engaged in, and thinking himself not
safe at an Ambassadour's where he had taken refuge, was forced to bethink him
of some place where he might be in less danger of falling into the hands of
Justice. My Husband brought him secretly to our House, and commanded the Keys
to be carried up to his own Chamber after he had caused the doors to be locked
in his presence, for fear some treache^ous or careless Servant might prove the
occasion of his Friend's discovery.

This order, whereat I was both surpised and extremely troubled, was but just
put in execution, when Andrado gave the signal agreed on between him and
Marina, to let her know he waited in the street for admission. She, much at a
loss what to do with him, made a shift to signify to him that he should stay a
little. We consulted together, she and I, and not finding any possibility to
get him into the house at the door, she went to the window, and speaking as low
as that he could but hear her, acquainted him with the new obstacle that had
intervened, and proposed it to him, as the best expedient she could think on,
to expect till all were a-bed, and then to get in at a little window in the
Kitchen, which she would open for him. Andrado, to satisfy his love, thought
nothing too hazardous to attempt. My Husband saw his Friend a-bed, and upon my
persuasion went in very good time to his own; all the Servants did the like,
and Marina, when she thought all out of the way, set open the little window for
Andrado, who immediately got half way in; but with so little care, and so
unfortunately to himself, that after much striving, which rather hindered than
furthered his getting in, he was so locked in about the middle between the Iron
bars of the window, that he could get neither forwards nor backwards. His man,
who stood all the while in the Street, could do him no service; Marina from the
place she stood in, as little, without the help of some other person. She went
and got out of her Bed one of the Maids whom she was very intimate with,
telling her, that being to receive a kindness that night from a Sweetheart of
hers, one she loved very well, and was shortly to be married to, she had
endeavored to get him in at the Kitchen window, and that he had fastened
himself between two Bars so strangely, that it was impossible to get him out
without either filing them off, or removing them out of their places. She
desired her to come and help her, which the other was soon persuaded to; but
wanting a Hammer or some other Iron-tool fit for such a purpose, the assistance
of those two maids had done Andrado but little good, if he had not himself
bethought him of his Dagger, which they made use of so effectually, that, after
abundance of pains, the bars were got loose out of the wall, and the bold
adventurer put out of the fear he was in of being found so shamefully fastened
in a place; where, to escape best, he could have been looked on no otherwise
than as a Breaker of Houses. This could not be done with so little noise, but
that some of our Servants overheard it, and thereupon were looking into the
street* when Andrado, carrying along with him that piece of the G^ate into
which his Body had entered with some violence, was running away as fast as he
could, followed by his man. The Neighbors, and our people cried out, Thieves,
and it was taken for granted, that it was only some Rogues that would have
broken into Don Sancho's House where they perceived the Grate broken. Andrado
in the mean time being come to his Lodging, was forced to get the Iron grate
which he had carried away about him, filed off; he and his man, with all their
striving and endeavors, being not able otherwise to shift him of that
troublesome girdle.

This third accident put him out of humor extremely, as I have understood
since: but for my part, I entertained it otherwise, and while Marina, almost
frighted out of her little wits, gave me the relation of it, I thought I should
have burst with Laughing. Yet upon second thoughts could I not be less troubled
than Andrado was, at the ill success of our enterprises: but so far were our
desires from being cooled thereby, that they grew the more violent, and
permitted us not to delay the satisfaction thereof, any longer than to the next
day after this pleasant and unhappy adventure. My Husband was gone into the
City, to compose the affairs of his Friend about the Duel, and, in all
likelihood, to have been employed the remainder of that day. I sent Marina to
Andrado's Lodging; which was not far from my House. She found him a-bed, having
not yet overcome the weariness of his night-adventure, and so discouraged at the
disappointments of his love, that Marina was not a little troubled to see, with
what indifference he entertained my furtherance of his desires, and the little
impatience he expressed to come to me; though she sufficiently represented to
him the opportunity which then presented it self, and was not to be slighted.
At last, after much persuasion and many remonstrances he came to me, and I
received him with that excess of joy and satisfaction, a person absolutely at
the command of her passion could be guilty of. I was so blinded therewith, that
I observed not so much as Marina with what coldness he took my kindnesses,
though it were but too too remarkable. At last the importunity of my caresses
forced from him some discoveries of his. Our mutual joy was grown to that
height, as not to be expressed otherwise than by our silence; and the very
thought of what we both desired with equal earnestness, had raised in me a
bashfulness which made me avoid the looks of Andrado, and might have given him
a confidence to do what he pleased with me, when Marina, who was gone out of
the room, as well to stand Sentinel without, as to leave us to the privacy of
our enjoyments, comes in with a sudden alarm that my Husband was in the House.
She dragged Andrado, rather dead than living, into my wardrobe, as being, upon
a sudden reflection on the precedent dangers he had so narrowly escaped, at a
greater loss than I was who had most reason to be frighted. My Husband had some
business to put his Servants upon, before he came up into my chamber. The time
that took him up below afforded me the leisure to put my self into order, while
Marina was busied in emptying a great trunk to make a lodging for Andrado. She
had hardly locked it by that time my Husband was come into my Chamber, who,
having only kissed me at his coming in, without making any stay with me, went
straight into my wardrobe, and lighting on a Play-book there, sat down and
fell a reading. He pitched upon some passage he thought pleasant, and
consequently would have kept him reading a long time (for he was very Bookish)
if, by the advice of Marina, I had not gone into the wardrobe, and, obliging
him to lay aside his Book, brought him thence into my own Chamber. My
misfo^tune was not an end with this; Don Sancho taking notice of my being
melancholy and troubled in mind, as indeed I had reason to be, endeavored to
put me into a better humor by the most divertive discourses he could think on.
He never made it so earnestly his business to please me, and never displeased
me more, nor was more burdensome to me. I entreated him to leave my Chamber,
pretending an extraordinary inclination to sleep: but he, on the other side,
out of an excessive desire to see me out of the sadness he thought me burdened
with, kept me company, much against my will, longer than I could have wished;
and though he were naturally a person the most complaisant of any in the Wo^ld,
I thought him so importunate then, that I was forced to hunt him out of the
room. He would, out of his kindness, have returned into my wardrobe, that he
might be near me, but, upon some private reason I gave him why it was not
convenient, he was persuaded to go to his Chamber. As soon as I had locked my
door, I ran to my Wardrobe to deliver Andrado out of his close imprisonment.
Marina made all the haste she could to open the trunk, and was little better
than dead, as well as my self; when we found him in a manner breathless, not
discovering either by pulse or stirring any sign, whence we might think he was
alive. Do but imagine what a terrible loss I must be at, and what I could
bethink my self to do in such an extremity! I did as women do in such
occurences; I wept, I tore my hair, I grew desperate, and I think I should not
have wanted courage enough to run Andrado's dagger into my breast, if the
greatness of my affliction had not reduced me to such weakness as that I was
forced to lay my self down on Marina's bed. She for her part, though troubled
as much as any could be, had a greater command of her judgment in our common
misfortune, and endeavored to find out those remedies, which, weak as I was, I
should never have made use of, though I should have kept so much discretion
about me as to do it. She told me, that Andrado might only be in a sound, and
that a Chyrurgeon, either by letting him blood, or some other way, might
recover him into the life he seemed to have lost. I looked on her without
making any answer, my grief having reduced me to senselessness and stupidity.
Marina lost no more time in consulting me any further; she went to put in
execution wha^ she had proposed to me; but as she opened the doo^ to get out,
who should meet her but my Brother-in-Law Don Lewis, coming, after he had
looked for me in my chamber, to the Wardrobe, where he concluded I must be,
having been told by my husband that I was in no good humor. This second
misfortune we thought more terrible than the former. Had not Andrado's body
been exposed to his sight, as it unhappily was, there needed no more than the
confusion and astonishment which he might have observed in our countenances, to
raise in him a suspicion that we were upon some strange design, which no doubt
but he would have discovered, as one that concerned himself much in my actions,
not only as a Brother-in-law, but also as a Lover. Unavoidable therefore it
was that I should cast my self at the feet of a person, whom I had so often
seen prostrate at my own; and that, deriving a confidence from the affection he
had for me, and that generosity which ought to be inseparable from the quality
of a Gentleman, recommend to his absolute disposal what was dearest to me. He
did what he could to raise me up; but I, on the other side, resolved not to
stir off my knees, with all sincerity, as well as my tears and sobs would give
me leave, gave him an account of the cruel accident that had befallen me,
whereat I doubt not but in his soul he conceived an extraordinary satisfaction.
Don Lewis, said I to him, I do not implore thy generosity to prolong my life
for some few days; no, my misfortunes render it so contemptible to me, that I
should not want the courage to be my executioner, did I not fear my despair
would cast some blemish on my honor, from which that of Don Sancho, nay
indeed, his life, are happily inseparable. Thou may happily think the disdain^ I
have had for thee, were the effects of my aversion rather than my virtue; thou
mai'st rejoice at my disgrace, nay happily make it contribute to thy revenge: but
will thou have the presumption to impute the crime to me which thou would
have taught me, or will thou be so ungrateful as not to express some indulgence
toward one that has had so much for thee? Don Lewis not suffering me to
proceed any further, You see, Madam said he to me, how just Heaven is in
punishing you, for having been so indiscreet in the choice of what you should
have loved and what you ought to hate: but I have nothing to lose, as being to
make it appear, by my freeing you out of the present trouble you are in, that
you have not a better friend in the world than Don Lewis. He thereupon left me,
and returns presently again, with two Porters, whom he had sent one of his
servants for. Marina and I in the interim had made a shift to get Andrado's
body into the Trunk again: Don Lewis himself helped the two fellows to get it
on their shoulders between them, and caused it to be carried to a friend of
his, whom he acquainted with the adventure, having already made him privy to
the love he had for me.

Having, as soon it was brought in, taken Andrado's body out of the Trunk, Don
Lewis caused it to be laid all along upon a Table, and as they were pulling off
his clothes, feeling his pulse, and laying his hand upon that part of the body
where the beating of the heart is felt, he found him to be not quite dead. With
all expedition a Surgeon was sent for, while in the mean time they put him
into bed, and used all the means they could think on to bring him to life. At
last, he came to himself; he was let blood; a Lacquey was left to wait on him;
and the room was cleared, that so nature and rest might perfect what art and
industry had begun.

You may well imagine what astonishment Andrado was in, when, after this long
Trance, he found himself in a bed, not able to call any thing to mind but the
fear he had been in, and that he had been put into a Trunk, not knowing where
he was, nor what he had either to hope or fear. He was in this terrible
distraction when he heard the chamber door open, and after the curtains were
drawn, by the light of the torches that had been brought in, perceived Don
Lewis, whom he knew to be my Brother-in-law, and who having taken a chair spoke
to him in these terms: Do you know me, Signior Andrado, said he to him? And do
you not withal know I am Brother ^o Don Sancho? I do indeed know you, replied
Andrado, and withal to be Brother to Don Sa^cho. And have you any remembrance,
says Don Lewis, of what happened to you this day at his house? But whether you
do or no continued he, assure your self, that if ever I hea^, of any further
designs you have upon my Sister, or are so much as seen in the street where she
lives, I shall be indebted to you a mischief, and will be sure to pay it,
notwithstanding all your caution; and know, you had been ere this among your
acquaintances in the other World, had I not too much pity and compliance for an
impudent and unfortunate woman, who has reposed this confidence in me; and
were not assured, that the criminal designs you have laid together against my
Brother's honor, had not their effect. I advise you therefore to change your
lodging, and flatter not your self with any hope you can elude my resentment,
if you perform not the promise I expect you should make me to do it. Andrado
would gladly have engaged himself to much more. He made the most unworthy
submissions to him he could think on, and acknowledged he ought him a life
which it was in his power to have taken away from him. His weakness was such as
might well confine him to his bed; but the cruel fear he had been in,
strengthened him to get up. He thereupon conceived an aversion for me, greater
than the love he had sometimes born me, insomuch, that it was a horror to him
but to hear me named. I was in the mean time in no small trouble, to know what
was become of him, yet had not the confidence to make any enquiry after him of
Don Lewis, nor indeed to look with any assurance upon him. I sent Marina to
Andrado's lodging, whither she came, not long after he had got thither himself,
and while he was packing up his things to be gone to a lodging he had taken in
another quarter of the City. As soon as ever he saw her, he told her that if
she had any message from me, she might carry it to some body else, and having
given her a short account of what had passed between him and Don Lewis, he
closed his relation with this character of me, that I was the most ungrateful,
and most perfidious woman in the world; that he looked on me no otherwise than
as one that had plotted his ruin, and that I should no more think of him, than
as if I had never seen him.

With these words he dismissed Marina; but notwithstanding the astonishment she
was in at such a sharp entertainment, she had the wit to follow him at a
distance, and to observe the place where his things were carried, and by that
means discovered the new lodging he had taken. The trouble it was to me to be
charged with an act of malice I was no way guilty of, and to be hated by a
person I loved so well, and for whose sake I had hazarded my life and my
honor, suffered me not to give way to all the joy which I should have
conceived at his being out of danger. I fell into a deep melancholy, which soon
turned to a sickness, and that being such as the Physicians could not well give
any account of, my husband was extremely troubled thereat. To heighten my
misfortune, Don Lewis began to press, and make his advantages of the
extraordinary service he had done me, incessantly importuning me to grant him
that which I was content Andrado should have had, and reproching me with the
love I had for my Gallant, when ever I represented to him the duty I ought a
Husband, and what he ought a Brother. Thus, hated by what I loved, loved by
what I hated; deprived of the sight of Andrado, too often troubled with that of
Don Lewis, and tormented with perpetual reflections on my ingratitude to the
best Husband in the world, who thought nothing too much to please me, and was
more troubled at my indisposition than I was my self, when, had he known the
truth, he might justly have taken away my life; incessantly baited with the
insupportable remonstrances of my conscience, and racked between the two most
contrary passions, Love and Hatred; I kept my bed for two months, expecting
death with gladness: but it was Heaven's pleasure to reserve me to greater
misfortunes. The strength of my age, much against my will, overcame and
dispelled the sadness which I thought only death could have put a period to. I
recovered my health, and Don Lewis renewed his prosecutions with greater
insolence than before. I had given my women order, and particularly Marina,
that they should never leave me alone with him. Being enraged at that obstacle,
and wearied out with my perpetual resistances, he resolved to obtain, by the
most horrid piece of treachery, that ever came into the mind of a person
consummately wicked, what I had denied him with so much constancy.

I have already told you that between his house and ours there was a door,
seldom locked of either side. Having set a night wherein he though: to put his
damnable design in execution, and staying till all, as well at our house as
his, were abed, he comes in at the door; opened that of our house which was to
the street, and going to our stable let loose all the horses, whereof there was
a considerable number, and drove them into the court, whence they got into the
street. The noise they made soon awakened those who had the care of them, and
their bustling about the house awakened my husband. He was a great lover of
Horses; and had no sooner heard that his own were gotten into the streets, but
putting on his nightgown, he runs out after them, very much incensed at his
Grooms, and the Porter, for being so careless as not to make fast the great
gate. Don Lewis, who had hid himself in the room next my chamber, and had seen
my husband when he went out, slipped down into the court some time after him,
and having made fast the street door, and expected some little while to avoid
my suspicion had he come immediately upon me, he came at last and laid himself
down by me, acting the part of my husband in every thing so well, that it is
not much to be wondered at, if I were mistaken in him. His standing so long in
his sh^rt, had made him very cold; so that as he came into bed: Good Lord,
sweetheart, said I to him, how cold you are! How can I be otherwise, replied
he, counterfeiting his voice; it is cold standing in the streets. And for your
horses, said I, are they taken? My people are gone after them, replied he. And
thereupon coming close to me, as it were to warm himself; amidst his embraces
and kindnesses, he had his design upon me, and dishonored his Brother. That
Heaven was pleased to permit it, might happily be, that I should be a future
instrument to punish so enormous a crime, that my honor might be
reestablished by my self, and my innocence publicly acknowledged.

Having ^one what he came for, he pretended to be much troubled about his
horses; he got up from me, went and opened the street door, and withdrew to
his own lodgings: not a little elevated at the crime he had committed, and
hugging himself happily in the reflection of what was to prove the occasion of
his ruin. My husband comes in presently after, and having cast himself into
bed, turned to me, frozen as he was, and obliged me by caresses, which I
thought extraordinary, to beg of him, that he would let me sleep. He thought it
very strange; I wondered much he should; and thereupon made no further doubt of
my being betrayed. The very thought of it would not suffer me to close my eyes
till it was day. I got up much earlier than I was used to do. I went to Mass,
and there met with Don Lewis dressed as if he had been for some extraordinary
entertainment, with a countenance as cheerful as mine was sad and dejected. He
presented me with holy Water; I received it with much indifference at his
hands, which he observing, and looking on me with a malicious smile: Good Lord,
Madam, said he, how cold you are? At these words, being the same I had said to
him, and enough to satisfy me who was the Author of my misfortune, I grew
pale, and immediately blushed, upon thought that I had grown pale. He might
have observed in my eyes, and by the disorder into which those words had put
me, how highly I was offended at his insolence. I went away without so much as
looking on him. What distractions I was in all Mass-time, you may easily
imagine; as also how infinitely my husband must needs be troubled, when he
observed that all dinner time, and all day after, I minded not what was said or
done, and could not forbear sighing and discovering the disturbance of my mind,
though I endeavored all I could to smother it. I withdrew to my chamber sooner
than I was used to do, pretending to be somewhat indisposed. I bethought my
self of a hundred several ways to be revenged; but at last my fury suggested
one to me which I fixed upon. When bedtime was come I went to bed at the same
time with my Husband. I pretended to be asleep, to oblige him to do the like;
and finding him fast enough, and confident all the servants were no less, I got
up, took his dagger, and (besotted and blinded as I was by my passion) it
proved nevertheless so sure a guide to me, that through the same door, and by
the same way that my enemy got into my bed; I got to the side of his. My fury,
though violent, made me not do any thing precipitately; with the hand I had
free I felt for his heart, and when by the beating thereof I had discovered it,
the fear of missing my blow made not that hand to tremble which held the
Dagger; but, with all the circumspection imaginable, I thrust it twice into the
heart of the detestable Don Lewis, and so punished him with a gentler death
than he had deserved. And doubting those two might not do my work, I gave him
five or six stabs more, and so returned to my chamber, with a tranquillity;
whence I inferred my self, that I had never done any thing, from the doing
whereof I should derive greater satisfaction. I returned my husband's Dagger,
all bloody as it was, into the sheath; I put on my clothes with as much haste
and as little noise as I could: I took along with me what Jewels and Money I
had: and, no less distracted by my love than troubled at what I had done, I
left a husband who loved me beyond his own life, to cast my self upon the
courtesy of a young man, who not long before had sent me word that he had not
the least respect for me. The fearfulness incident to my sex, was so strangely
fortified by the impetuous passions I was hurried withal: that, all alone, and
in the night time, I walked from my own house to Andrado's lodgings, with as
much confidence, as if I had done a good action, at noon day. I knocked at the
door, and was answered, that Andrado was not within, being engaged at a Play at
a friend's not far off* His servants who knew me, and were not a little
surpised to see me, entertained me with much respect, and got me a fire in
their Master's chamber. It was not long ere he came in himself, and I believe
it was the least of his thoughts to find me waiting for him in his chamber. He
no sooner cast his eye on me, but betraying his astonishment in the wildness of
his looks: Madam Eugenia, says he, what business has brought you hither? What
can you expect more from a person, you would have sacrificed to the jealousy
of a Brother-in-law you are desperately in love with? Ah Andrado! replied I, do
you make that construction of an unavoidable accident, which forced me to make
submissions to that man whom of all the world I was most afraid of being
obliged to? And should you pass so disadvantageous a judgment on a person that
has given you such extraordinary demonstrations of her affection? I expected
something else than reproaches at your hands. If I am guilty of any crime, it
is not against you that I have committed it, but against a Husband that should
have been dear to me; proving ungrateful to him because I would not be so to
you, and forsaking him to come to a cruel man whose entertainment of me is as
unworthy as my kindnesses to him are great. When your death, which I thought
really so, had put me into that despair, wherein a woman, perpetually expecting
the minute of being surpised by her husband, might be; and when thereupon Don
Lewis came upon me in that deplorable condition, what could I do less than
trust my self to his generosity and the love he had for me? He has
treacherously made his advantages of the confidence, to the loss of my honor;
but it is my satisfaction, that he has bought his enjoyments with the price of
his life, which I have now taken away from him; and that, my dear Andrado, is
the occasion of my coming hither. I must keep out of the hands of Justice, till
such time as it be known, what crime Don Lewis is guilty of, and what
misfortune has befallen me. I have money and Jewels good store, upon which you
may live handsomely in any part of Spain, whither you shall think fit to
accompany my misfortune; while Time shall make all the world sensible, that I
am much more to be pitied than blamed, and my future carriage satisfy you in
particular, that it was not without reason I did what I have done. Very likely,
interrupted he, you have great Apologies to make for your self, and I shall
supply the place of Don Lewis, till thou art weary of me, and then be killed,
as he was, to make way for another. Ah Woman insatiably lustful! continued he:
What could I expect more than this last wickedness of thine to be confirmed in
the persuasion I had, that it was thy design to sacrifice me to thy Gallant?
But thou must not think to escape with bare reproaches; no, I will rather be
the Executioner to punish thy crime, than be thy Complice in it.

With those words he violently tore off my clothes, and, with a cruelty, which
raised horror even in his own servants, gave me a hundred blows, naked as I
was, and having satiated his rage, till that he was grown weary, he thrust me
out into the street, where if you had not fortunately lighted upon me, I should
either have been dead, or in their hands who happily are searching after me.

Having given over speaking, she showed Don Garcias her arms all black and
blew, as also her breast, and what other parts of her body civility permitted
her to discover, which were in the same condition. Whereupon re-assuming her
discourse: Thus have you heard, generous Don Garcias, said she to him, the
deplorable History of the unfortunate Eugenia. Let me beg your advice; if so
there be any for an inexpressibly-unhappy woman, that has been the occasion of
so many fatal accidents. Ah Ma^am, replies Don Garcias, were it but as easy
for me to advise you what is to be done, as it will be to punish. Andrado, if
you give me leave! Deny me not the honor to be the Revenger of your quarrel;
and be not shie in employing upon any design you would have to be undertaken, a
person who is no less sensible of your misfortune, than of the injury has been
done you.

Don Garcias said this to her, with an earnestness, which satisfied Eugenia,
that the Compassion was not so great as the Love he seemed to have for her. She
made the most obliging acknowledgements of his kindnesses which her civility
and gratitude could inspire her with: and further entreated him to take the
pains to go once more to her house to be more particularly informed of what was
said concerning her departure and the death of Don Lewis.

He got thither, as they were carrying to prison Don Sancho, his servants, and
those of Don Lewis, who had taken their oaths that their Master had been in
love with Eugenia. The common door, which was found open, and Don Sancho's
dagger still bloody, gave much suspicion of his being guilty of his brother's
death, whereof he was no less innocent than troubled at it. The sudden
departure of his wife, and her taking away her Jewels and money, put him into
such an amazement, as out of which he could not recover himself, and troubled
him more than his imprisonment and the proceedings of Justice against him. Don
Garcias was in much impatience to give Eugenia an account of these things: but
it so happened he could not do it so soon as he wished. Meeting in the street
with a friend who had some business with him, he kept him a good while in
discourse not far from his own lodging: and, as unlucky fortune would have it,
over against that of Andrado, whence he saw coming out a servant, booted,
carrying a Portmantue. He followed him at a distance accompanied by his friend;
and having observed his going to the Post House, he went in after him, and
found him taking up three horses, to be made ready within half an hour. Don
Garcias suffered him to go his ways, and bespoke the same number of horses to
be ready at the same time. His friend asked him what he meant to do with them?
he promised to tell him if he would go along with him: whereto the other
consented, without troubling himself any further what his design might be. Don
Garcias entreated him to go and put on his Boots, and expect him at the
Post House, while he took a turn to his lodging.

They thereupon parted, and Don Garcias went to Eugenia, to acquaint her with
what he knew of her affairs, and to give his Landlady, a woman that might
safely be trusted with a secret of that importance, order to get Eugenia
clothes and all things necessary, that she might be conveyed that very night
into a Convent, whereof the Abbess was her kinswoman and very much her friend.
Having so done, he whispered his Lacquey in the ear, and bid him carry to that
friend's lodging whom he a little before parted with, his riding suit and
boots: and having entreated his Landlady to be very careful of Eugenia, and to
keep her from the sight of all people, he went to his friend, and soon after
along with him to the Post House, where they had not been long ere Andrado came
also. Don Garcias asked him which way he traveled? he made answer, to Sevil.
Then one Post-boy will serve us both, says Don Garcias to him. Andrado was
content, and happily looked on Don Garcias and his friend, no otherwise th^n as
two simple Cullies, whose money he thought so far due to him, as that he would
not have given much to ensure it. They left Vailladolid all together, and ro^e
on a good while not thinking of any thing but riding, there being indeed but
little conversation between people that ride Post. At last coming into a
Champian far from any Houses, Don Garcias thought it a place fit for his
Design. He rid a little before, and turning about of a sudden, he bid Andrado
stand. Andrado asked him his meaning. My intentions are, replied Don Garcias,
to fight with you, to revenge, if I can, the quarrel of Eugenia, whom you have
injured beyond all hope of forgiveness, in treating her after the basest and
most unworthy manner, that could possibly fall into the imagination of a person
of quality. I am not sorry for what I have done, replies Andrado with much
confidence, not seeming to be in the least surpised at the accident; but you
may happily repent your forwardness to do what you are now engaged in. He was a
person that had Valor; he alighted at the same time with Don Garcias, there
having no more words passed between them; and they had their Swords ready to
fall on: when Don Garcias's Friend tells them, they should not fight without
him, and profer'd to measure his Weapon with Andrado's man, who was a fellow
whom his countenance and proportion would not have betrayed for a Coward.
Andrado protested, that though he had to his Second the greatest Gladiator in
all Spain, he would not fight otherwise than singly one to one. His man not
much minding the protestation of his Master, protested for his own part, that
he would not fight with any man upon any terms at all. So that Don Garcia's
Friend was forced to be only a Spectator, or Godfather to the Combatants,
which is no new thing in Spain. The Duel lasted not long: Heaven was pleased to
favor the just Cause Don Garcias was engaged in, so far, as that his Adversary
making at him with greater violence than skill, run upon his Weapon, and fell
at his feet with loss of blood and life. Andrado's man, and the Post-boy, as
fearful one as the other, cast themselves at Don Garcias's feet, who intended
them not any hurt. He commanded Andrado's man to open the Portmantue, and to
take out of it all his Master had taken from Eugenia. He immediately obeyed,
and delivered to Don Garcias, a Mantle, a Gown, and Coat, all very rich, and a
little Cabinet, whereof, the weight discovered it was not empty. The fellow
found the Key of it in his Master's Pocket, and gave it Don Garcias, who
thereupon dismissing him, told him he might dispose of his Master's body as he
pleased, and threatened he would be the death of him, if ever he were seen at
Vailladolid. He commanded the Post-boy not to come into the City till after
night, and promised him he should find at the Post House the two Horses he and
his Friend had taken up. I am apt to believe he was punctually obeyed by these
two persons: who thought themselves very much obliged to him, that he had not
killed them as he had done Andrado. It was never heard what his man did with
his body; and for his clothes, and what else he had, there is but too much
probability, he became Master thereof. Nor was it ever known how the Post-boy
behaved himself in the business.

Don Garcias and his Friend made all the speed they could to Vailladolid. They
alighted at an Ambassadors of the Emperor, where they had Friends, and
continued there till after night. Don Garcias sent for his man, who told him
that Eugenia was much troubled she could not see him. The Horses were sent to
the Post House by an unknown person, who having delivered them to one that
belonged to the Stable, immediately slunk away. There was no more talk in
Vailladolid of the death of Andr^do than as of a thing which it was uncertain
whether it were so or not; or if any spoke of him, 'twas only as of a
Gentleman killed by some secret Enemy, or by High-way-men. Don Garcias went to
his Lodging, where he found Eugenia put into such clothes as his Landlady had
provided for her; such I believe as were taken up at the Brokers; for in Spain
persons of very good quality think it no disparagement to take up clothes, and
to furnish their Houses that way, no more than other people of less account. He
secretly returned Eugenia her own Clothes and Jewels, and gave her an account
after what manner he was revenged of Andrado. The Relation he made to her
wrought in her a compassion for the unfortunate end of a person whom she had
dearly loved; and, the thought of her being the occasion of so many Tragical
accidents, causing in her no less affliction than the remembrance of her own
misfortunes, she fell a weeping as bitterly as at any time before.

But what added not a little to her affliction, was, that Proclamation had been
made that day all over Vailladolid, prohibiting all persons to entertain
Eugenia, and that whoever brought tidings of her should have two hundred
Crowns. This made her resolve to get into a Convent so soon as she could. She
passed away that night in Don Garcia's Chamber with as little tranquillity as
the precedent. The next morning at break of day he went to that Superior of
the Covenant, who was a Kinswoman of Eugenia's: who, notwithstanding the
Proclamation, promised to receive her, and to keep her undiscovered as much as
lay in her power. Having left her, he went and took up a Coach, and ordered it
to wait for him at a place not much frequented near his Lodging, whither he
conducted Eugenia, accompanied by his Landlady. The Coach brought them to a
place they had appointed the Coachman to stop at, where they alighted, that he
might have no knowledge of the Convent, whither Eugenia was to retire. She was
kindly entertained by the Kinswoman; Don Garcias's Landlady took leave of her,
and went to inform her self what posture the affairs of Don Sancho were in. She
understood it went hard with him, and that there was some talk of putting him
to the Rack. Don Garcias gave an account of all passages to Eugenia, who was so
troubled to see her Husband in danger to suffer for a crime he had not
committed, that she took a resolution to cast her self into the hands of
Justice. Don Garcias persuaded her to forbear a while, and advised her rather
to write to the Judge, to acquaint him that she only could give an account of
the murder of Don Lewis. The Judge, by good fortune chanced to be of some Kin
to her, came to speak with her, together with others that were to be his
Assistants in the trial of Don Sancho. Eugenia confessed that she had killed
Don Lewis: gave them a particular relation of the just motive she had to engage
her self in an action that seemed so violent in a Woman, omitting nothing of
what had passed between Don Lewis and her self; what concerned the love of
Andrado, only excepted. Her confession was written down, and a report thereof
was made to his Catholic Majesty; who, taking into consideration the greatness
of Don Lewis's crime, the just resentment of Eugenia, her courage and procedure
thereupon, the innocence of Don Sancho and his Servants, set them at liberty;
and, upon the entreaties of the whole Court mediating on her behalf, granted
Eugenia her pardon. Her Husband was not displeased at her for the death of his
Brother, and, it may be, loved her the better for what she had done. He went to
see her as soon as he got out of Prison, and used all the entreaties and
persuasions he could to get her home again; but all proved ineffectual. She
doubted not but that he had conceived such a resentment for the death of Don
Lewis as he ought to have done; that he had made some discoveries of what had
past between her and the Portugueze; and thence concluded, that the least
suspicion a Woman gives in point of honor may soon be heightened into a
jealousy in the apprehensions of a Husband, and will sooner or later dissolve
the strictest ties of conjugal Love.

While things stood thus, poor Don Sancho visited her often: and, by the
tenderest demonstrations of an excessive Love, endeavored to get her out of
the Convent, to be once more the absolute Mistress of his estate and himself.
But she on the other side continued constant to her resolution. She got him to
allow her a Pension proportionable to her quality, and the fortune she brought;
and, abating only her obstinacy in denying to live with him, she behaved her
self so obl^gingly toward that kind Husband, that he had all the reason in the
world to be satisfied with her.

But all she did in the Convent to please and humor him, heightened the regret
he conceived that he could not get her thence. He at last took it so much to
heart that it brought him into a Sickness, and that sickness proved such, as
more than threatened the shortning of his days. He sent to Eugenia, begging the
satisfaction to see her once at his House before he took his final leave of
her. She could not deny that fatal kindness to a Husband that had been so dear
to her, and whose affection toward her was then no less violent than it had
ever been. She went to see him expire, and had almost, out of very grief, died
with him, seeing him discover no less satisfaction that he had had but a sight
of her, than if she had restored him the Life he was upon the point to quit:
Nor did this goodness of Eugenia go unrewarded; he left her his whole Estate,
and consequently, one of the most beautiful and richest Widows in Spain, after
her so near being one of the most unfortunate Women in the World. The
affliction she conceived at the death of her Husband, was great, and not
personated: She gave order for his Funeral Solemnities, possessed her self of
his Estate, and returned to her Convent, resolved to spend the remainder of her
Life there. Her Friends proposed to her the best matches in all Spain: She
preferred her own quiet before their ambition, and troubled no less at their
importunate remonstrances than persecuted with the addresses of no small number
of Pretenders, which her Beauty and Wealth drew daily to the outer-room of the
Convent where she was; She at last would not be seen, nor speak with any but
Don Garcias. This young Gentleman had done her so seasonable a service, in an
emergency so important, and with such earnestness, that she could not see him,
without bethinking her self, that she ought him somewhat beyond civilities and
acknowledgements. She had observed by his Retinue and Equipage, that he was not
rich, and she was generous enough to proffer him the assistances which a
necessitous person may without shame receive from another that is more wealthy:
but in that small time she had spent in his Lodging, and by the frequent
discourses he had with her, he had discovered a Noble soul elevated above the
common, and absolutely dis-engag'd from all manner of Interests, those only of
honor excepted. This raised a fear in her he might take it unkindly, if she
made him a Present not suitable to the greatness of her estate and mind; and
she was afraid, on the other side, he should think her wanting in point of
gratitude, if she made not some discoveries of her liberality.

But if her thoughts were in this distraction for Don Garcias, his were in no
less, as to what concerned her. He was insensibly fallen in love with her; but
though the respect he had for her, and the lowness of his Fortunes should not
have deterred him from making any such proposal; what presumption would it have
been in him to speak of love to a Woman, whom only Love had exposed to so
great misfortunes? and that while the sadness of her countenance, and her
frequent weeping, argued her soul too full of grief to be capable of any other
passion.

Among those who visited Eugenia, as her most humble Slaves, with design to
become afterward her Masters, and those not easy to please, among those, I
mean, who made their addresses to her, and whom she shook off with absolute
denial, one Don Diego was remarkable for his obstinacy, as having not any thing
else in him worth notice. He was as arrant a Coxcomb, as it was possible a
young man could be; and, what is consequent to that, fantastic, and, what to
that, insufferably humoursome. Besides all this, the imperfections of his body
were suitable to those of his mind; and as to the goods of fortune, he was as
poor, as greedy of them: but descending out of one of the best Houses in Spain,
and being of near Kin to one of the principal Ministers of State, which only
made him so much the more insolent, there was a certain compliance had for him
where ever he came, upon the account of his quality, though it had not the
least recommendation of any thing of worth.

This same Don Diego, such as I have described him, thought he had found in
Eugenia, all he could have wished in a Wife, and imagined it no hard matter to
obtain her, by the assistances of his Friends at Court, whose encouragements
put him into great hopes of it. But Eugenia was not so easily persuaded to a
business of that importance, as they had flattered themselves she would have
been, and the Court would not, to favor a private person, do a violence that
should be of ill example to the public. Eugenia's retiring into a Convent, her
resolution to continue there, her avoiding of all visits, and the backwardness
of those who had encouraged Don Diego in his applications to her, blasted the
hopes he had conceived of obtaining her without trouble. He therefore resolved
to force the Convent, and to carry her away, an attempt the most highly
criminal in Spain, and such as wherein only an extravagant fool, such as he
was, would engage himself in. He found, for money, people as mad as himself; he
gave order for the laying of Horses at several places, between Vailladolid and
a certain Seaport, where a Vessel was to expect him ready to set Sail. He
forced the Convent; carried away Eugenia; and that unfortunate Lady was to
become the prey of the most worthless person in the World, if Heaven had not
strangely relieved her, when she l^ast looked for it. One single person, who,
upon the cries of Eugenia, met the Ravishers, forced them to a sudden halt, and
charged with so much valor, that, upon the first meeting, he wounded Don Diego
and diverse of his Accomplices, and kept them in ^otion till the Citizens making
head, and seconded by the Officers of public Justice, had reduced Don Diego
and his party to those extremities, that they must either be killed or taken.

Thus was Eugenia rescued; but before she would be conducted back to her
Convent, she would needs know who that gallant Person was, who had so
generously exposed his Life to serve her. He was found, wounded in several
places, and, through loss of abundance of blood, in a manner Dead. Eugenia
desired to see him, and had no sooner cast her eyes on his countenance, but she
knew him to be Don Garcias. Her compassion was great as her astonishment, and
she made such passionate discoveries thereof as might have been interpreted to
her disadvantage, if there had not been otherwise a just ground of her
affliction. She prevailed so far, with much entreaty, as that they would n^^
carry to Prison her generous Reliever, whom Don Diego expiring, and his
accomplices, acknowledged not to be of their party, but the person who had
opposed their design. He was carried to the next House, which by good fortune
happened to be that which had some time been Don Sancho's was now Eugenia's,
and where she had left all her Household Stuff and some Servants. He was
recommended to the care of the best Surgeons of both Court and City. Eugenia
returned into the Convent, and the next day was forced to leave it; and come to
her own House, upon the publishing of a Proclamation, that no secular persons
should be entertained into Nunneries. The next day Don Diego dies, and his
Friends had much ado to hinder a Trial to pass upon him, though Dead* but his
Accomplices were punished according to their deserts. Eugenia in the mean time
was almost out of her self to see so little hopes of Don Garcias's recovery;
she implored the assistances of Heaven; She profer'd the Surgeons to reward
them beyond what they would have asked her; but their Art was at a loss, and
all their hope was in God and the Youthful constitution of the sick person.
Eugenia stirred not from his Bedside, and her attendances on him day and night
were so assiduous, that they might at last have reduced her to a necessity of
having others besides her self. She often heard him pronounce her name in the
transportations of his Fever, and among things incoherent, which his
distracted imagination made him speak, he was often heard talking of Love, and
discoursing with himself, as one that were fighting or quarrelling. At last,
Nature, fortified by remedies, overcame the violence of his disease; his Fever
remitted; his wounds appeared in a better condition; and the Surgeons as^^r'd
Eugenia of his recovery, provided no other accident happened to him. She made
them very great presents, and caused him to be prayed for, in all the Churches
of Vailladolid. Then was it that Don Garcias understood from Eugenia, that it
was she whom he had rescued, and she was told by him how it came to pass, that
he happened to relieve her so seasonably, being upon his return into the City
after he had been to see a friend of his out of Town. She could not, even in
his presence, forbear acknowledging how highly she thought her self obliged to
him; and he could as little smother the extraordinary satisfaction he conceived
to have done her so considerable a service: but there was yet another thing of
greater importance he had to acquaint her withal.

One day, she being alone with him, and entreating him not to suffer her to be
any longer ungrateful, but to make use of her in something of consequence, he
took that opportunity to discover to her the true sentiments he had for her.
The very thought of what he was about to do, made him sign; he grew pale; and
the disturbance of his mind was so visible in his countenance, that Eugenia was
afraid he was in some great torment. She asked him what posture his Wounds were
in. Ah Madam! replied he, my wounds are not my greatest affliction. What is it
then that troubles you, said she to him much frightened. A misfortune, says he,
incapable of any remedy. It was indeed, replies Eugenia, a great misfortune to
be so dangerously Wounded for a person you neither knew, nor deserved you
should hazard your Life for her; but this is not beyond remedy, since your
Surgeons doubt not but you will soon recover it. And that is it I am to
complain of, cries Don Garcias: Had I lost my Life in your service, continued
he, I had brought it to a glorious period, whereas I must now live against my
will, and be a long time the most unfortunate man in the world. Being a person
so excellently qualified as you are, I think you not so unfortunate as you
would make your self, replies Eugenia. How Madam, said he, do you not account
that man unfortunate, who being satisfied of your worth, having a greater
esteem for you than any other whatever, loving you beyond his own Life, must
nevertheless come short of deserving you, though Fortune should prove as
indulgent to him as she has ever been malicious? You strangely surprise me,
said she blushing: but the obligations you have cast upon me, give you a
privilege, which, in the condition I am in, I should not grant any other. I
pray you above all things endeavor your own recovery, and assure your self,
your misfortunes shall not continue long, when it shall come into the power of
Eugenia to put a period thereto.

She stayed not to hear what Reply he would make, and by that means spared him
abundance of complements, which happily he would but poorly have acquitted
himself of, because he would have overstrain'd himself to make them very good
ones. She called those Servants of hers who were to attend him, and went out of
the room just as the Surgeons were coming in to visit him. The satisfaction of
the mind is the sovereign remedy to recover a sick body. Don Garcias derived
such hopes of the advancement of his Love, from what Eugenia had said to him,
that his soul, which before, as that of a Lover without hope, was orepress'd
with sadness, dilated it self for the entertainment of joy, and that joy
contributed more to his recovery than all the remedies of Surgery. He came
to perfect health. He out of civility went from Eugenia's house, but carried
with him, and continued, the pretensions he had to her affection. She had
promised to love him, provided he made no public discoveries thereof, and it
may be she loved him no less than he loved her: but having so lately lost a
Husband, and been engaged in adventures, which had made her the Table-talk of
all Companies in Court and City, she thought it no prudence so soon to expose
her self to rash censures, by running upon a marriage with too much
precipitation. At last Don Garcias, by the excess of his merit and constancy,
overcame all these difficulties. He was, as to his person, so accomplished, as
might make a Rival run mad to think on it. He was a younger Brother of one of
the best Houses of Arragon, and though he had done no great things in the Wars,
he might justly, from the long services his Father had done Spain, derive some
hopes of a recompense from the Court, as advantageous as honorable. Eugenia
could no longer hold out against so many excellent qualities, nor be longer
obliged to him for all he had done and suffered upon her account. She was
married to him. Court and City approved her choice; and that she might not have
the least occasion to repent her of it, it happened, that, not long after their
marriage, the King of Spain bestowed on Don Garcias one of the Commanderies of
St. James. Another thing which had already happened, was, that he had satisfied
his dear Eugenia the very first night of their marriage, that he was much
another Bedfellow than Don Sancho, and that she had found in him, what she
would not have met with in the Portuguez Andrado. Children they had many,
because they took more than ordinary pains to get them; and the History of
their Loves and Adventures is to this day related at Vailladolid, not only
among those that knew them, but to Strangers who occasionally Travel that way.
For my part, I traveled not thither for it, but finding it Printed, made no
doubt of the Truth of it, and expect the same confidence in those who shall
receive it from me.

FINIS.
SCARRON's NOVELS.
The Judge in his own Cause.
The Fourth Novel.
PRince Mulei, son to the King of Morocco, having lost the company with whom he
had spent the day in hunting, was got alone, and that in the nightime, among
certain rocks on the Seaside, not above an hours gentle walking from the City
of Fez. The sky was not over-cast with the least cloud; the Sea glazed up in an
undisturbed calm, and so might serve for a Mirror to the Moon and Stars, which
(...) to sparkle no less there, than in their proper Elem^nt: in fine, it was
one of the pleasantest nights of those warmer Countries, which exceed the
fairest days of our colder Regions. The Prince galloping gently along the River
side, diverted himself in considering the emulation between the Constellations
above in the Firmament, and those which seemed to be on the surface of the
Water, when the sad accents of some doleful shrieking piercing his ears, raised
in him a curiosity to go to the place whence he conceived it might proceed.
After a little riding, he found, among the rocks, a woman, who, as much as her
strength would permit, made her party good against a man, who violently
endeavored to bind her hands, while another woman was emploi'd to stop her
mouth with a linen cloth.

The arrival of the young Prince prevented the Actors of that violence to
proceed any further therein, and gave her a little respit, whom they intended
to treat so unworthily. Mulei asked her, what might occasion her crying out,
and the others, what they would have done to her? But instead of any reply, the
man comes up to him with his Cimitar drawn, and would have dangerously wounded
him, had he not, by the nimbleness of his ^orse, avoided the blow. How now,
impious ^retch, says Mulei to him, dare thou offer vio^^nce to the Prince of
Fez? I knew thee very well to be my Prince, replies the Moor: nay it is because
thou art my Prince, and that it is in thy power to punish me, that I must
either have thy life, or lose my own.

With those words he made at Mulei with such a desperate fury, that the Prince,
though much famed for his valor, was reduced to a necessity not so much of
assaulting, as securing himself against so dangerous an enemy. The two women in
the mean time were very seriously engaged, and she who a little before gave her
self over for lost, kept the other from running away, as if she doubted not but
her Champion would obtain the victory. Despair sometimes heightens a man's
courage, nay sometimes derives it to those who have least of it. Though the
Prince's valor was incomparably beyond that of his Adversary, and maintained
by a more than ordinary skill and vigor; yet the punishment, which the Moor's
crime deserved, made him hazard all, and gave him so much courage and force,
that the victory was a great while in suspense between the Prince and him: but
Heaven, which commonly protects those it raises above others, fortunately
directed the Prince's retinue, which he had lost the evening before, to pass so
near the place, as to hear the noise of the Combatants, and the cries of the
women. They make all the speed they could thither, and came in just as their
Master having worsted his bold Adversary, had laid him on the ground, where he
would not kill him, but reserve him for a more exemplary punishment. He
thereupon ordered some of his people to bind him to a horse-tail, so as that he
might not attempt ought against himself or any other. Two Gentlemen took up the
two women behind them, and so Mulei and his retinue got to Fez, just with the
break of day. This young Prince gover^'d as absolutely in Fez, as if he had
been already King of it. He ordered the Moor to be brought before him, his name
was Amet, and he was son to one of the wealthiest Inhabitants of Fez. The two
women were not known by any, in regard the Moors, the most jealous of all
mankind, are extremely careful in keeping their wives and slaves from the sight
of all others.

The woman, whom the Prince had relieved, surpised both him and all his Court
with the transcendency of her beauty, which was such as had not been seen
before in Africa, and also with a Majestic air, which the wretched habit of a
slave could not hide from their eyes who admired her. The other was clad as
those women of the country are, whose quality is somewhat above the ordinary
rate, and might pass for handsome, though much less than the former. But though
she might enter into competition with her as to beauty, yet the paleness which
through a certain Fear had settled in her countenance deprived it of so much of
its luster, as that of the former received advantage from that lively redness,
which a modest blush had gently spread over it. The Moor appeared before Mulei
with the countenance and deportment of a Criminal, having his eyes continually
fastened on the ground. Mulei commanded him to acknowledge his crime, or expect
to die in the greatest torments. I know well enough what is prepared for me,
and what I have deserved, replies the undaunted Moor, and as it will be of
little advantage to me to confess any thing, so are there not any torments that
shall make me do it. I cannot avoid death, since I would have given it thee, I
would have thee know, that the rage I am in, that I could not dispatch thee,
torments me beyond all that can be inflicted on me by the most inventive
executioners. These women, Spaniards by descent, were my Slaves; one of them
has done as I wished her, and compli'd with her fortune, by marrying my
Brother Zaides; the other would never change her Religion, nor make the least
kind return to the love I had for her.

This was all could be gotten out of him. Mulei ordered him to be put into a
Dungeon laden with chains; The Renegado wife of Zaides was disposed into
another prison, and the beautiful Slave was conducted to a Moor's house named
Zulema, a person of quality, originally a Spaniard, who had left Spain, because
he could not find in his conscience to embrace the Christian Religion. He was
descended of the illustrious House of Zegris, heretofore so famous in Granada,
and his wife Zoraida, who was of the same House, had the reputation to be the
fairest, and withal, the wittiest woman in Fez. She was immediately taken with
the beauty of the Christian Slave, and, upon the first conversation they had
together, was no less with her ingenuity. Had this fair Christian been capable
of consolation, she would have found it in the caresses of Zoraida; but as if
she purposely avoided whatever might alleviate her grief, she endeavored as
much as she could to be alone, that she might afflict her self the more,
insomuch that, when she was in company with Zoraida, she did her self no small
violence, to smother her sighs, and keep in her tears before her.

Prince Mulie in the mean time was extremely desirous to have an account of her
adventures. He had discovered so much to Zulema, who being a person he much
confided in, he withal acknowledged, that he had some inclinations for that
fair Christian, and that he had made a discovery thereof to her, had he not
inferred, from her extraordinary affliction, that he might have an unknown
Rival in Spain, who, though at a great distance, might prevent his being happy,
even in that Country where he was an absolute Prince. Zulema thereupon gave his
wife order to enquire of the Christian the particulars of her life, and by what
accident she came to be Slave to Amet. Zoraida was as desirous to do it as the
Prince, and found it no hard matter to induce the Spanish Slave to satisfy
her; the other not knowing how to refuse any thing to a person, from whom she
had received so many assurances of tenderness and friendship. She told Zoraida,
that she would satisfy her curiosity when she pleased, but that, having only
misfortunes to acquaint her with, she feared the account thereof would be very
tedious to her. You will find it otherwise, replies Zoraida, by the attention I
shall give you, and my concerns therein will satisfy you, that you may safely
entrust the secret thereof to a person who infinitely loves you. Embracing her
with these words, she entreated her not to put off any longer the satisfaction
she desired of her. They were all alone, and the fair Slave, having wiped off
the tears which the memory of her misfortunes drew into her eyes, she thus
beg^n ^he relation thereof.

My name is Sophia, said she, I am a Spaniard, born at Valentia, and brought up
with all the care and tenderness which persons of quality, such as were my
Father and Mother, could express toward a Daughter who was the first fruits of
their marriage, and soon appeared worthy of their affection. I had a Brother,
younger than my self by a year, as lovely a child as could be seen; he loved me
as much as I loved him, and our mutual friendship grew up to such a height,
that when we were not together, there might be observed in our countenances,
such a sadness and disquiet, as the most pleasant divertisements of persons of
our age were not able to disperse. Order was thereupon taken that we should not
be asunder: we learned together whatever is commonly taught children, well
descended, of both sexes, and so it happened, to the great astonishment of all,
that I came to be as skilful and dextrous as he, in all the violent exercises
of a Cavalier, and he as ingenious in whatever is performed by young
Gentlewomen. This extraordinary kind of education took so much with a
Gentleman, an intimate acquaintance of my Father's, that he desired his
children might be brought up with us. The business was proposed to my Friends,
who approved thereof, and the nearness of their houses promoted the design of
both parties. That Gentleman was not inferior to my Father, either as to
quality or wealth. He had also only a Son and a Daughter, much about my
Brother's age and mine, insomuch that it was not doubted, but the two Houses
would be united one day by a double marriage. Don Carlos and Lucia (so were the
Brother and Sister called) were equally amiable: my Brother loved Lucia, and
she him; Don Carlos loved me; I, him, as much. Our Parents knew it, and were so
far from being displeased thereat, that had we not been too young, they would
then have seen us married together.

But the happy state of our innocent Loves was disturbed by the death of my
lovely Brother; a violent Fever snatched him from hence in eight days, and
this was the first of my misfortunes. Lucia was so troubled thereat, that no
persuasions could keep her from embracing a Religious life. I was sick to
death, and Don Carlos was so far given over, as that his Father began to fear
he should see himself without issue, so great a grief did he conceive, at the
loss of my Brother, whom he loved, the danger I was in, and his Sister's
resolution. Don Carlos's Father di'd soon after, leaving his Son a vast estate.
Now was he in a condition to discover the nobleness of his nature; the
gallantries he invented to please me prevailed on my vanity, made his love more
public, and added much to mine. Don Carlos often addre^s'd himself to my
Parents, desiring them to consummate his happiness by bestowing their Daughter
on him. He in the mean time continued his extraordinary expenses, which my
Father perceiving, and considering his estate could not hold out long at that
rate, resolved we should be married. He therefore put Don Carlos in hope, that
he should ere long be his Son-in-law, at which News he discovered such an
extraordinary joy, as would have persuaded me that he loved me above his own
life, though I had not been so fully assured of it as I was. He appointed a
Ball for me, and invited all the Gallantry of the City to it: but to his
misfortune and mine, there happened to be at it a Neapolitan Count, whom some
affairs of importance had brought into Spain. He thought me handsome enough to
fall in love with, and having enquired what quality my Father was of, he went,
and, without any other ceremony, demanded me of him in marriage. My Father,
dazzled at the wealth and quality of this Stranger, promised him what he
desired, and that very day sent Don Carlos word, that he might forbear all
further addresses to his Daughter, forbad me to receive his visits, and
commanded me to look on the Italian Count, as the person I should be married
to, as soon as he we^e returned from Madrid. I dissembled my affliction before
my Father; but as soon as I was got alone, Don Carlos presented himself to my
imagination, as the most aimable person in the world. I reflected on all could
be quarreled at in the Italian Count; I conceived an implacable aversion
against him, and I felt my self so possessed with the love of Don Carlos, that
it was equally impossible for me to live without him, and to be happy with his
Rival. My recourse was to my tears, but what remedy were they in so great a
misfortune.

While I was in this distraction, Don Carlos comes into my chamber, without
first demanding my permission, as he was wont to do. He found me as it were
dissolved into tears, nor could he forbear his, though he seemed willing to
conceal what lay heavy on his soul, till he had discovered the true sentiments
of mine. He cast himself at my feet, and taking me by the hands, which he
bedewed with his tears, I must then loose you Sophia! and a stranger, whom you
hardly know, shall be happier than I, because he is somewhat richer. He will be
possessed of you, Sophia! and you consent thereto; you, whom I have so
infinitely loved; you, who would persuade me that you loved me, and were
promised me by a Father, but alas! an unjust Father, an interess'd Father, and
one that has basely recoyl'd from his word! If you are, continued he, a Jewel
that may be set at any price, it is only my fidelity that can purchase you, and
it is upon the account of that, you should be yet mine rather than any Man's;
if you have not forgotten that you have promised me the like. But, cries he, do
you imagine that a person who had the courage to raise his desires to you,
wants it to be revenged of one you prefer before him; or will you think it
strange, that a Wretch who has lost all should not undertake any thing? If you
are content that I alone should perish, this fortunate Rival shall live, since
he is so happy as to please you, and you think him worthy your protection: but
Don Carlos, who is now become odious to you, and whom you have given over to
his despair, will dye of a Death cruel enough, to satiate the hatred you have
for him.

Don Carlos, replied I, do you join forces with an unjust Father, and a person
whom I never could fancy, to persecute me, and impute ^o me, as a particular
crime, a misfortune which is common to us both? You may rather bemoan than
accuse me, and bethink your self of the means to preserve me yours, than pierce
my soul with undeserved reproaches. I could make more just ones to you, and
force you to acknowledge, that you never sufficiently loved me, since you never
sufficiently knew me. But we have no time to loose in fruitless remonstances.
Carry me where you please, I Will follow you, and therefore I give you leave to
attempt any thing, and promise to second you in it, so that I may ever be
yours.

Don Carlos was so revived at these words, that he was as much transported with
joy, as he had been before with grief. He begged a thousand pardons for his
having charged me with the injustice he thought done him, and having satisfied
me, that unless I were removed thence, it was impossible I should avoid
complying with my Father's will, I referred my self wholly to his disposal, and
promised him, that the second night after, I would be ready to go along with
him. Don Carlos spent the next day in setting his affairs in order, made
provision of Money, and a Bark, which was to set sail, whenever he sent orders
to that purpose. In the mean time I made up all my Jewels, and what Money I
had, and, being a person so young as I was, so well dissembled my design, that
no body had the least suspicion of it. I was not observed by any, so that I
might safely take my way out at the Garden-door, where I found Claudio, a Page,
whom Don Carlos had a kind of fondness for, upon the account of his skill in
Singing, which was as excellent as his Voice, and that in his manner of
speaking, and all his actions, he discovered a greater pitch of ingenuity,
understanding, and gentileness of carriage, than the condition of a Page is
commonly observed to have. He told me, that his Master had sent him before, to
conduct me to the Bark, and that he could not come himself, for some reasons I
should know when I saw him. A Slave of Don Carlos, whom I also knew very well,
soon after came to us. We got out of the City without any trouble, and were not
gone far from it ere we perceived a Vessel in the Road, and soon after a
Shallop that waited for us at the Waterside. They told me, that my dear Don
Carlos would come very suddenly, and that in the mean time, I should go to the
Vessel. The Slave carried me into the Shallop, and several Men, whom I had
observed on the shore, and took for Mariners, forced Claudio also to get into
the Shallop, who seemed to make some resistance, to avoid coming into it. This
added to the trouble I was already in, for the absence of Don Carlos. I asked
the Slave where he was; he roundly answered, I was not to expect any Don Carlos
there.

In the mean time, I could hear Claudio crying out as loud as he could, and
bursting forth into tears, saying to the Slave, Treacherous Amet! is it thus
thou keep'st thy promise with me, and, by removing my Rival out of the way,
leave me with my Lover? Imprudent Claudio! replies the Slave, is a Man
obliged to keep his word with a perfidious person, or could I expect, that one
that has betrayed his own Master, should not serve me the like trick, by
giving notice to those who have the oversight of the Coasts, to make out after
me, and deprive me of Sophia, whom I love beyond my own Life?

These words spoken to a Woman, whom I took all the while to be a Man, and
whereof I could not understand the meaning, caused me so great an affliction,
that, I fell down in a manner dead in the arms of the perfidious Moor, who had
not stirred from me. I continued a good while in the swound, which, when I had
recovered, I found my self in one of the Cabbins of the Vessel, which was now
got a good way to Sea. Imagine to your self what despair I must be in, finding
my self without my Don Carlos, and among the professed enemies of my Religion,
for I soon perceived that I was in the power of the Moors; that the Slave Amet
had absolute power over them, and that his Brother Zaides was Master of the
Vessel. The insolent Villain no sooner saw me in a condition to hear what he
might say, but, in few words he told me, that he had a long time had an
affection for me, and that his passion forced him to carry me thus away by
violence, and to bring me to Fez, where it should be my own fault, if I were
not as happy as I might be in Spain, as it should be his, if I there had any
occasion to regret the loss of Don Carlos. I made a shift to close with him,
notwithstanding the weakness I was in by reason of my former swounding, and, by
a vigorous attempt, which he thought not off, and which, as I told you before,
I had learnt when I was a child, I drew out his Cymitar, and had punished him
for his perfidiousness, if his Brother Zaides had not seasonably laid hold on
my arm, and so saved his Life. It was no hard matter to disarm me, for, having
missed my blow, I forbore making any further vain attempts, against so great a
number of enemies. Amet, who had been frightened at my resolution, ordered all
to withdraw out of the room where he had disposed me, and left me in an
affliction not easily to be imagined, after the cruel change which had happened
in my fortunes. I spent the whose night in bemoaning my self, nor did the next
day bring any remission of my grief. Time, which many times alleviates such
troubles, could do nothing on mine, insomuch that the second day after our
setting out to Sea, I was in a greater distraction, than I had been that
unlucky night, when, with my liberty, I lost the hope of ever seeing Don Carlos
again, and ever having a minute of enjoyment while I lived. Amet had found me
so terrible, when ever he presumed to appear before me, that he came no more
into my sight. At certain times, somewhat was brought me to eat, but I so
obstinately refused it, that the barbarous Moor began to fear he had brought me
away to no purpose.

In the interim, the Vessel had passed the Straight, and was not far from the
Coast of Fez when Claudio comes into my Cabin. As soon as I perceived him,
unhappy miscreant, who have thus betrayed me, said I to him, what had I done to
thee, that thou should make me the most wretched person in the world, and
deprive me of Don Carlos? You were too much beloved of him, replies he, and
since I loved him as well as you did, I have committed no great crime, in
endeavoring to remove a Rival, as far as I could from him: but if I have
betrayed you, Amet has also betrayed me, and I should happily be no less
troubled than you are, did I not find some comfort in this consideration, that
I am not miserable alone. Prithee, let me understand these riddles, said I to
him, and know who thou art, and, consequently, whether I have, in thee, a
Friend or an Enemy.

Know then, Sophia, said he to me, that I am of the same Sex as your self, and,
as well as you, I have also been in love with Don Carlos; but if we have
suffered by the same flame, it has not been with the same success. Don Carlos
has ever loved you, and has ever believed, that you loved him; whereas, on
the contrary, he never loved me, nor could ever imagine that I should love him,
as having not known me to be what I truly was. I am of Valentia, as you are,
and my quality and fortunes are such, that if Don Carlos had married me, he
needed not to have feared the reproaches made to those who under-ally
themselves. But the affection he had for you wholly took him up, and it seems
he had eyes only for you. Not but that mine did what they could, to save my
mouth the labor of making a shameful discovery of my weakness. I went to all
places where I thought to meet him; I placed my self where he might see me, and
I did all things for him, which he should have done for me, had he loved me, as
I loved him. I had the disposal of my self and estate, as having been left an
Orphan while I was yet very young; and there were often proposed to me matches
equal to my condition, but the hope I still cherished, that I might at length
engage Don Carlos to love me, hindered me from complying with any. Instead of
being discouraged by the unhappy fate of my love, as any other would, who, as
I, had sufficient perfections not to be slighted, I was the rather excited to
the Love of Don Carlos, by the difficulty I found to insinuate my self into his
affections. In fine, to avoid the self-reproach, that I should neglect any
thing which might promote my design, I caused my hair to be cut, and having
disguised my self in Man's clothes, I got my self presented to Don Carlos by an
old menial Servant of my own, who went under the name of my Father, a poor
Gentleman of the Mountains of Toledo. My countenance and Mien your Lover liked
so well, that he was soon induced to take me into his service. He knew me not
again, though he had seen me so many times, and he was as soon satisfied with
my ingenuity as taken with my voice, and my skill in singing, and playing on all
those instruments, on which persons of Quality may, without disparagement,
divert themselves. He soon found in me those endowments which are not commonly
seen in Pages, and I gave him so many demonstrations of my fidelity and
discretion, that he treated me rather as a Confident, than a Domestic servant.
You know best of any, whether I am to be credited in what I say. You have a
hundred times commended me to Don Carlos, even in my presence, and done many
good offices, but what vexed me to the heart, was, that I received them from a
Rival, and while they made me more acceptable to Don Carlos, they rendered you
the more hateful to the unhappy Claudia, (for so I am called.) In the mean
time, the treaty of your marriage went forward, my hopes backward; that was
concluded, these were lost. The Italian Count, who, about that time, fell in
love with you, and whose Titles and Estate as much dazzled your Father's eyes,
as his warped countenance and his imperfections gave you occasion to slight
him, procured me at least the pleasure, to see you a little traversed in your
loves, and my soul began to flatter it self with those fond hopes, which the
unfortunate are over-apt to derive from vicissitude. In fine, your Father
preferred the Stranger, whom you fancied not, before Don Carlos whom you did.
So I saw her, who caused my unhappiness, in her turn, unhappy her self, and a
Rival whom I hated, more unfortunate than my self, since I lost nothing in a
man, who had never been mine, whereas you lost Don Carlos, who was wholly
yours, and yet that loss, how great soever it might be, was happily to you a
lesser misfortune, than to have, for your perpetual Tyrant, a man, whom you
could not love.

But my prosperity, or, to say better, my hope, proved not long-lived. I
understood from Don Carlos, that you were resolved to follow him, and I was
employed to set things in order to the design he had to carry you to Barcelona,
and thence to cross over into some part of France or Italy. All the force I had
had till then to endure my cross fortune, left me upon this so sharp an
assault, it being a resolution I was the more surpised with, the less I had
apprehended any such misfortune. The trouble I conceived thereat cast me into a
sickness, and that confined me to my bed. One day, as I was bemoaning my sad
destiny, and that my presumption of not being overheard by any made me break
forth into as loud expostulations, as if I had spoken to some Confident, who
knew the secret of my loves, I perceived standing before me the Moor, Amet, who
had heard me. Having recovered the trouble his unexpected presence had put me
into, head-dress'd himself to me in these words.

I know thee very well, Claudia, and that even before thou had disguised thy
sex, to become a Page to Don Carlos; and that I never discovered this my
knowledge of thee, proceeded hence, that I had a design as well as thou had.
I have heard what desperate resolutions thou art ready to take; thou will
discover thy self to thy Master to be young Maid deeply in love with him, and
yet hopest not any from him, and then thou will kill thy self in his presence,
so to deserve the regrets of him, whose love thou could not gain. Wretched
Lass! what will be the effect of thy own self-murder, but to give Sophia a
further assurance of her Don Carlos? I have a better advice for thee, if thou
art able to to take it. Deprive thy Rival of her Servant; it may easily be
done, if thou credit me, and though it requires much resolution, yet no more
than thou have already expressed, in putting on man's habit, and hazarding thy
honor, to satisfy thy love. Hear me then attentively, continued the Moor, I
will acquaint thee with a secret, which I never discovered to any, and if thou
likest not what I shall propose to thee, it will be at thy own choice, whether
thou follow it or not. I am of Fez, a person of quality in my Country; my
misfortune made me slave to Don Carlos, and Sophia's beauty, hers. I have told
thee much in few words. Thou think thy misery remediless, because thy Lover
carries away his Mistress, and is bound for Barcelona. It Is both thy happiness
and mine, if thou can make thy advantage of the opportunity. I have treated
about my ransom, and paid it. A Galeot of Africa waits for me in the road, not
far from the place where Don Carlos has one ready for the execution of his
design. He has put it off for one day; let us prevent him with as much
diligence as subtilty. Go and tell Sophia from thy Master, that she should make
ready to come away this night, at the time thou shall come for her; conduct her
to my Vessel; I will carry her into Africa, and thou shall continue alone at
Valentia, to enjoy thy Lover, who happily would have loved thee as soon as
Sophia, had he but known that thou had loved him.

At these last words of Claudia, I was so overcome with grief, that with a deep
sigh, I fell into another swound, without any signs of life. The outcries of
Claudia, who happily then began to repent her that she had made me so
unfortunate, yet was nevertheless such, brought Amet and his Brother into the
room where I was. They applied all the remedies they could, till at last I
recovered, and might hear Claudia still reproaching the Moor with his
perfidiousness. Infidel Dog! said she to him, why have thou advised me to
reduce this Beauty to the deplorable condition thou see her in, if thou
had no mind to leave me with the person I loved? And why have thou caused me
to commit against a person so dear to me, a treachery which proves as hurtful
to me as to him? How dare thou say thou art of noble birth in thy Country,
when thou art the most perfidious and basest of all men? Hold thy peace, simple
Maid, replies Amet, reproach me not with a crime, wherein thou art my Complice.
I have already told thee, that he, who could betray a Master as thou have done,
very well deserved to be betrayed, and that taking thee along with me, I only
secure my own life, and happily Sophia's, since she might have di'd of pure
grief, upon the knowledge of thy staying behind with Don Carlos.

At these words, the noise made by the Mariners, who were ready to enter into
the Port of Salley, and the shooting off of some Guns, which were answered by
the Artillery of the Port, interrupted the reproaches reciprocally made to one
the other, by Amet and Claudia, and for a while eased me of the sight of those
two odious persons. We got ashore; Claudia and I had veils put over our faces,
and we were lodged with the perfidious Amet, at a Moor's, one of his kindred.
The next day, we were disposed into a close Chariot, and conducted to Fez,
where, if Amet were received by his Father with much joy, I came in, the most
afflicted and most desperate person in the world. For Claudia, she soon
provided for her self, renouncing Christianity, and marrying Zaides, brother to
the treacherous Amet. The wicked woman used all the artifices imaginable to
induce me to change my Religion, and to marry Amet, as she had done Zaides, and
so she became the most cruel of my Tyrants, even while, after they had in vain
tried to draw me in by kindness, fair promises, and treatments, Amet and all
his people exercised on me all the barbarism they could. My constancy was
sufficiently exercised against so many enemies, and I was more able to endure
my troubles than I could have wished my self, when I began to imagine that
Claudia repented her, that she had been so wicked. Before others she seemed to
persecute me with greater animosity than any, but privately she did me some
good offices, which made me look on her as a person who might have been
virtuous, had her education been accordingly.

For one day, while all the rest of the women were gone to the public Baths,
as you Mahumetans are wont to do, she came to me, and finding me very sad, she
spoke to me to this purpose. Fairest Sophia! I have heretofore thought I had
some reason to hate you, but now that hatred is at an end, since I have lost
the hope of ever enjoying him, who loved not me enough, because he loved you
too much. It grieves me to the soul, that I have occasioned your misfortune,
and forsaken my God, for fear of men. The least of these stings were enough to
make me undertake things beyond my sex. I can no longer live at this distance
from Spain, and all the Christian part of the world, with these Infidels, among
whom I know it is impossible I should ever work out my salvation either here or
hereafter. You may assure your self of my repentance by the secret I shall
acquaint you with, which putting my life at your disposal, you may revenge your
self of all the mischiefs I have been forced to do you. I have corrupted fifty
Christian Slaves, most Spaniards, and all persons fit to undertake some great
enterprise. With the money I have secretly given them, they have secured a Bark
ready to waft us over into Spain, if it please God to favor so so good a
design. All you have to do is to join fortunes with me, and so escape if I do,
or, perishing with me, get out of the hands of your cruel enemies, and put a
period to so unfortunate a life as yours is. Resolve therefore, Sophia, and
while we cannot be suspected guilty of any design, let us, without loss of any
time, consider of the most important action of your life and mine.

I cast my self at Claudia's feet, and measuring her by my self, I never
questioned her sincerity. I was at a little loss to give her sufficient thanks,
and assure her of the great resentments I had of the favor which I conceived
she would do me. We appointed a day for our escape, toward a place on the
Seaside, where she told me that our Bark lay, under certain Rocks. The day,
which I thought would prove so happy, came; we very happily got out of the
house and City. I admired the goodness of Heaven in the easiness we found in
compassing our design, and I incessantly blessed God for it. But the end of my
misfortunes was not so near as I thought it. Claudia did all this by order from
the perfidious Amet; nay, exceeding him in perfidiousness, the end of her
bringing me to such a solitary place, and that in the night time, was only to
leave me to the violence of the Moor, who durst not have attempted ought
against my chastity in his Father's house, who, though a Mohammedan, was yet a
morally honest man. I innocently followed her, who led me to destruction, and I
thought I should never be sufficiently thankful to her, for the liberty I was
in hope ere long to obtain by her means. I could not be weary of giving her
thanks, not yet of going a good pace, in rough ways encompassed with rocks,
where she told me that her people expected her, when hearing a certain noise
behind me, and turning my head, I perceived Amet with his Cymitar drawn. You
infamous Slaves, said he, is it thus you run away from your Master? I had not
the leisure to answer him. Claudia held my hands fast behind, and Amet letting
fall his Cymitar, came up to the Renegado, and both of them together did what
they could to bind my hands with cords, which they had provided for that
purpose. Having a greater strength and activity than women commonly have, I a
good while resisted the attempts of those two wicked persons: but at length I
grew weak, and my only recourse was to my cries, which might draw some
passenger into that solitary place, where I rather hoped not for any relief,
when Prince Mulei came in to my rescue. You have heard how he saved my honor,
nay I may say my life, since I had assuredly died of grief, if the detestable
Amet had had his desires on me.

Thus did Sophia conclude the relation of her adventures, and the amiable
Zoraida encouraged her to expect from the generosity of the Prince, that some
course would be taken for her return into Spain; whereupon she acquainted her
Husband with all she had heard from Sophia, whereof he afterward gave Prince
Mulei an account. Though all that had been related to him of the fortunes of
the fair Christian, flattered not the passion he had for her, yet was he glad,
being a person nobly inclined to virtue, to receive some knowledge thereof, and
find that her affection was engaged in her own Country, that so he might not
attempt a censurable action out of a vain hope of finding it easily compassed.
He had an esteem for the virtue of Sophia, and was inclined, by his own, to
endeavor a remission of her misfortune. He sent her word by Zoraida, that he
would give order for her return into Spain, when she pleased, and, having once
taken that resolution, he forbore to visit her, out of a distrust of his own
virtue, and the beauty of that amiable person. She was not a little troubled to
find out a secure way for her return. 'Twas somewhat a tedious voyage into
Spain, whose Merchants traded not to Fez, and though she might have met with a
Christian vessel, yet being fair and young, as she was, she might find, among
those of her own Religion, what she had been afraid to meet with among the
Moors. Honesty is not often found aboard a Ship; sincerity is as little
observed there as in War, and wherever beauty and innocence are at the
weakest, the insolence of the wicked will not fail to take its advantage to
thrust them to the wall. Zaraida advised Sophia to put on Man's clothes, since
her advantageous Stature, beyond that of other Women much furthered her
disguise. She told her it was the advice of Prince Mulei, who knew not any
person at Fez, to whom he might safely trust her, and she told her withal,
that he had had the goodness to provide for the safety of her Sex, by assigning
her a companion of the same, of her own faith, and disguised as her self, and
that so she might avoid the disquiet it would be to her, to see her self alone,
aboard a Vessel, among Soldiers and Mariners.

Prince Mulei had bought of a Pyrat a Prize which he had taken at Sea; 'twas a
Vessel belonging to the Governor of Oran, which had aboard her the whole
family of a Spanish Gentleman, whom the Governor, upon some disgust, sent over
a Prisoner into Spain. Mulei had heard that the said Gentleman was one of the
best Huntsmen in the world, and Hunting being an exercise the Prince was most
of any inclined to, he would needs have him to be his Slave, and to make the
more sure of him, would not have him separated from his Wife, his Son, and
Daughter. In the space of two years that he lived at Fez, in the Prince's
service, he taught him how he might take any thing with a Gun, whether it were
on the Earth, or in the Air, and showed him several other Games unknown to the
Moors. By these ways, he had so insinuated himself into the Prince's favor,
and was become so necessary in his divertisements, that he would not hear of
any Ransom for him, but endeavored by all the obligations he could lay on
him, to make him forget his own Country. But the regret he conceived, that he
should not once more see it, put him into a melancholy, which soon after ended
in his Death, to which it was not long ere his Wife followed him. Mulei felt a
certain remorse, that he had not set him at Liberty, together with his
relations, since they had by their Services deserved it, and so resolved to
repair, toward their Children, the injury he thought he had done the Parents.
The Daughter was named Dorotea, much about the same Age with Sophia, handsome
and witty. Her Brother was not above fifteen years of Age, and his name Sancho.
Mulei pitched on them to accompany Sophia, and took that opportunity to send
them together into Spain. The business was kept very secret. Men's clothes,
according to the Spanish mode were made for the two Gentlewomen, and little
Sancho. Mulei showed his magnificence in the great quantity of Jewels he
bestowed on Sophia. He also bestowed very noble Presents on Dorotea, which,
added to those her Father had received from the Prince's liberality, made her a
very considerable fortune.

About this time, Charles the Fifth was engaged in a war in Africa, and had
besieged the City of Tunis. He had sent an Ambassador to Mulei to treat about
the ransom of certain Spaniards, persons of Quality, who had been cast away on
the Coast of Morocco. To this Ambassador did Mulei recommend Sophia, under the
name of Don Fernand, a Gentleman of quality, who desired not to be known by his
own name; and Dorotea and her Brother were to be his retinue, one as a
Gentleman waiting on him, the other as Page. Sophia and Zoraida could not part
without regret, and many tears were shed on both sides. Zoraida bestowed on the
fair Christian a Necklace of Pearl, so rich, that she would not have received
it, if the obliging Moor, and her Husband Zulema, who had as great a kindness
for Sophia as his Wife, had not assured her, that she could not disoblige them
in any thing so much, as the refusal of that pledge of their friendship.
Zoraida made Sophia promise, that she should hear from her, by the way of
Tangiers, Oran, or some other places which the Emperor was possessed of in
Africa.

The Christian Ambassador took Shipping at Salley, having along with him
Sophia, whom we must henceforth call Don Fernand. He came to the Emperor's
Army, while it was yet before Tunis. Our disguised Spanish Lady was presented
to him as a Gentleman of Andalusia, who had some time been a Slave to the
Prince of Fez. She had no great reason to be so fond of her Life, as to be
afraid of engaging in the War, and being now to act the part of a Cavalier, she
could not, in honor, avoid the performance of duty, as other gallant Persons
did, whereof the Emperor's army was full. She thereupon listed her self among
the Volunteers, missed no design that was undertaken, and signalized her self
upon all occasions, so as the Emperor came to hear much of the counterfeit Don
Fernand. Nay, such was her good Fortune, that she happened to be near him,
when, in the heat of an engagement, wherein the disadvantage was on the
Christian side, he fell into an ambuscado of Moors, was forsaken by his party,
and encompassed by the Infidels, and in all probability he had been killed
there, his Horse having already received that fate under him, if our Amazon had
not mounted him on hers, and, seconding his Valor with unexpressible efforts,
given the Christians time to see their error, and to come into the relief of
the Valiant Emperor. So signal an action was not unrecompensed; the Emperor
bestowed on the unknown Don Fernand a Commandery of Saint James, of a vast
Revenue, and the Regiment of Horse of a certain Spanish Lord, who had been
killed in the last engagement. He also bestowed on him the equipage of a person
of Quality, and from thenceforward, there was not a Person in the whole Army
more highly esteemed or more considerable than this Valiant Virago. All the
actions of Man were so natural to her; her Countenance was so fair, and made
her seem so young; her Valor was so admirable, considering her youth; and her
Prudence and Conduct so remarkable, that there was not any Person of quality or
command in the Army, but courted her Friendship. It is not therefore much to be
admired, if, all pleading for her, but especially her noble and heroic
Actions, she came in a short time to be her Master's greatest Favorite.

About this time, there came over some Recruits from Spain, in those Vessels
which brought over Money and Ammunition for the Army. The Emperor would needs
see them himself in their Arms, accompanied by the chiefest Commanders, among
whom was our Amazon. Looking very earnestly on these Recruits, she imagined
that she had seen Don Carlos, nor was she mistaken. She could not be at rest
all that day; she sent to find him out among the new Levies, but he could not
be found, in regard he had changed his name. She slept not all night, got up
with the Sun, to find out, her self, that dear Lover which had cost her so many
tears. She found him, and was not known by him, she being grown somewhat
Taller, and the sultry heat of Africa having a little changed the Complexion of
her Countenance. She pretended to take him for another of her acquaintance, and
asked him what news from Sevil, and how such a person did, naming the first
came into her mind. Don Carlos told her she had mistaken him, that he had never
been at Sevil, and that he was of Valentia. You are extremely like a person I
loved very well, says Sophia, I would say Don Fernand, and for that resemblance
I will be your friend, if you find in your self no aversion to become mine. The
same reason, replies Don Carlos, which obliges you to proffer me your
friendship, had already ensur'd mine to you, if it be worth your acceptance.
You are somewhat like a person I have a long time been in love with; you have
her Countenance and Voice, but you are not of the same Sex, and certainly,
added he, with a deep sigh, you are not of her Humor. Sophia could not forbear
blushing at those words of Don Carlos, which he took no notice of, happily by
reason his eyes, which began to be moistened with tears, could not well
perceive the alterations of Sophia's countenance. She was troubled, and not
able at the present to dissemble it, she desired Don Carlos to come to her
Tent, where she would expect him, and so left him, after he had described his
Quarter, and told him that he was known in the Army by the name of Don Fernand,
one of the

At the hearing of that, Don Carlos was afraid he had not rendered him the
respect due to his Quality. He had already heard what esteem he was in with the
Emperor, and that he was as much in favor with him as any about the Court. He
soon found out his Quarter and Tent, which any one could direct him to, and he
was as well received by him, as a simple Cavalier could expect to be, by one of
the chiefest Field-Officers. He again imagined he discovered Sophia's
countenance, in that of Don Fernand; was more astonished at it, than he had
been before, and that much more at the sound of his Voice, which entered into
his very Soul, and there renewed the remembrance of that person, for whom, of
all the world, he had had the greatest affection.

In the mean time, Sophia, undiscovered by her Lover, entertains him at dinner,
which done, she commands all the Servants to withdraw, and, having given order
that none should visit her, was told a second time, by that Gentleman, that he
was of Valentia, and afterward very patiently heard him relate what she knew
as well as himself of their common adventures, to the day that he intended to
have carried her away. Could you imagine, Sir, said Don Carlos to her, that a
Gentlewoman of such Quality, who had received so many assurances of my Love,
and had given me as many of hers, should be wanting in point of fidelity and
honor; should have the subtilty to smother such great failings, and be so
blinded in her choice, as to prefer, before me, a young Page I had, who carried
her away from me, the day before I should have done it. But are you fully
convinced it is so, says Sophia to him. All things are in the disposal of
Chance, which sometimes is in an humor to confound our ratiocinations, by such
effects, as we least expect. It Is possible, your Mistress may have been forced
to that separation from you, and, it may be, is rather unfortunate, than
chargeable with any miscarriage. O that it were the pleasure of the Gods,
replies Don Carlos, I could make the least question of it, I should comfortably
endure all the losses and misfortunes it has caused me; nay, I should not
think my self unfortunate, could I but imagine that she were still faithful to
me; but she is only such to the perfidious Claudio, and never pretended love
to the wretched Don Carlos, but to ruin him. Methinks, it may be inferred
from what you say, replies Sophia, that you never had any great affection for
her, when your charge against her is without your hearing what she may have to
allege for her self, and you represent her, not only as an unconstant, but
also as a wicked person. And could any one have been more wicked than she has
proved, cries Don Carlos, when, to elude the suspicion of having been carried
away by the Page, she left in her Chamber, the very night she vanished from her
Father's, a Letter, writ with the greatest malice imaginable, which has
reduced me to more sensible miseries, than that it should ever get out of my
memory. When you have heard it, you will happily be able to judge what Sycophancy
so young a Thing could be guilty of.

THE LETTER.
Sir,
YOu should not have forbidden me to love Don Carlos, after you had once laid
your commands on me to do it. A merit so great as his must needs have raised in
me an affection for him proportionable thereto, and when the mind of a young
Person is prepossessed with such a passion, it is so filled, that there is no
place for interest. Know then, that I go hence with him, whom you were pleased
I should affect, even from my Infancy, and without whom it were as impossible
for me to live, as it would be, not to dye a thousand times a day, with a
Stranger, whom I cannot any way fancy, even though he were much richer than he
is. Our offense, if it be any, deserves your pardon; which if you grant us, we
will return to receive it, with greater speed, then we are now forced to, to
avoid the unjust violence you would do us.

SOPHIA.




You may easily imagine, continued Don Carlos, the extreme grief which Sophia's
Parents conceived at the reading of this Letter. They were in hopes I might be
still with their Daughter, either in Valentia, or not far from it. They
discovered not their loss to any but the Viceroy, who was their kinsman, and
it was hardly light the next morning, when some Officers coming into my room
found me asleep. I was, as well I might, very much startled at such a visit,
and when, after they had asked me where Sophia was, I also made the same
question to them, my adversaries were incensed, and violently dragged me to
prison. I was examined, and could make no plea for my self against Sophia's
Letter. It was clear, that I had a design to have carried her away; but it
appeared withal, that my Page had vanished at the same time with her. Sophia's
Parents sent people to find her out, and my friends, on the other side, made
diligent search where the Page might dispose of her. This was the only means
to clear me; but we never could hear any thing of these fugitive Lovers,
whereupon my enemies charged me with the death of them both. At last,
injustice, backed with power, carried it against oppressed innocence. Notice
was given me that I should soon receive my sentence, and that it would be that
of death. I hoped not that Heaven would do any miracles on my ^ccount, and so I
thought it my best way to endeavor the recovery of my liberty by an act of
despair. I joined my self to certain Bandits, who were prisoners as well as my
self, and all persons of resolution. We forced the Prison-doors, and, assisted
by our friends, got into the Mountains about Valentia, ere the Viceroy had any
notice of our escape. We continued a long time Masters of the Field. Sophia's
inconstancy, the prosecution of her friends, the injustice I thought done me by
the Viceroy, and, in fine, the loss of my estate, put me into such despair,
that I hazarded my life in all the engagements wherein my Camerades and my self
met with any resistance, and by that means I got into such reputation with
them, that they made me their Chief. I behaved my self in that charge so
successfully, that our Party became dreadful to the Kingdoms of Arragon and
Valentia, and we grew so insolent, as to impose a Contribution on those
Countries. I here make a dangerous discovery to you, but the honor you do me,
and my own inclination do so far enslave me to you, that I am willing to put my
life into your hands, by acquainting you with the greatest secrets of it. At
last, I grew weary of that lewd course of life; I got away from my Camerades,
when they least suspected I should, and took my way to Barcelona, where I was
entertained only as a private Gentleman, in the Recruits ready to be
transported into Africa, which have since joined with the Army. I have no great
reason to be in love with my life, and having been guilty of such a misexpence
thereof, I cannot employ it better than against the enemies of my Religion, and
to serve you, since the goodness you are pleased to express toward me, has
given me the only joy, my soul has been capable of, ever since the most
ungrateful woman in the world has made me the most unhappy of all men.

Sophia, undiscovered, took the part of Sophia unjustly accused, and omitted
nothing that might induce her Lover to forbear judging his Mistress so
rigorously, till he were more fully satisfied of her offense. She told the
unfortunate Cavalier, that she concerned her self very much in his misfortunes;
that she wished it in her power to alleviate them, and to give greater
expressions thereof than words; that she desired him to accept of a relation to
her, and when occasion served, she would employ all the credit she had with the
Emperor, and the interest of all her friends, to rescue him from the
prosecution of Sophia's, and the Viceroy of Valentia.

Don Carlos would not admit of any thing urged by the counterfeit Don Fernand,
in the vindication of Sophia, but accepted of the entertainment he proferr'd
him. That very day, that constant Mistress spoke to the Commander, under whom
Don Carlos was, that, being a kinsman of hers, he might be under her command.
Thus is our unfortunate Lover received into the service of his Mistress, whom
he thought, either dead, or had forsaken him. He finds himself, as soon as
entertained, very highly in his favor whom he thought his Master, and wonders
how he comes, so suddenly, to be so much loved. He is immediately made his
Treasurer, Secretary, and Confident. The rest of the servants respect him
little less than Don Fernand himself, and no doubt he might be happy, in the
love of a Master that seems so amiable to him, and whom a secret instinct
forces him to love, if lost Sophia, if unconstant Sophia, did not perpetually
present her self to his imagination, and gave him a sadness, which the caresses
of so dear a Master and his bettered fortune were not able to smother. Though
Sophia had a tenderness for him, yet was she not displeased to see him
troubled, not doubting but she was the cause of his affliction. She often
discoursed with him concerning Sophia, and sometimes with so much earnestness,
nay indignation and bitterness, vindicated her whom Don Carlos charged with no
less a crime than a forfeiture of faith and honor, that at last he imagined,
that Don Fernand, who would be still harping on the same string, had sometime
been a Servant to Sophia, and happily was still.

The war in Africa came to the period mentioned in the History thereof. The
Emperor carried it on afterward in Germany, Italy, Flanders, and other
places. Our Female Warrior, under the name of Don Fernand, added to the
reputation she had before of a valiant and experienced Commander, by many
gallant encounters, wherein she showed no less valor than conduct, though the
latter of those qualities be seldom found in a person so young, as her sex made
her appear. The Emperor was obliged to go into Flanders, and, to that end, to
desire the King of France to give him passage through his Countries. The great
Monarch who then reigned, would needs, in generosity and confidence, surpass a
mortal enemy, who had ever surpassed him in good fortune, whereof he had not at
all times made good use. Charles the Fifth was received into Paris, as if he had
been King of France. The fair Don Fernand was one of the small number of
persons of quality, who accompanied him; and if his Master had made a longer
stay in that gallant Court, the beautiful Spanish Lady, taken for a man, had
raised love in many of the French Ladies, and jealousy in some of the most
accomplished Courtiers.

In the mean time, the Viceroy of Valentia dies in Spain. Don Fernand,
encouraged by the affection his Master bore him, and the services he had done,
presumed to demand that important charge, and obtained it, without much envy.
He soon acquainted Don Carlos with the good success, and put him in hopes,
that, as soon as he had taken possession of the Government of Valentia, he
would accommodate the difference between him and the Relations of Sophia;
procure his pardon from the Emperor for having been chief Commander among the
Bandits, and endeavor to put him into possession of his Estate.

Don Carlos might have derived some comfort from all these noble promises, had
not the misfortune of his Love made him absolutely disconsolate. The Emperor
came into Spain, and went straight to Madrid, and Don Fernand went to take
possession of his Government. The next day after his arrival at Valentia,
Sophia's Relations presented a Petition against Don Carlos, who was Steward and
Secretary to the Viceroy. The Viceroy promised them justice, and Don Carlos,
that he would protect his innocence. A new Indictment was put in against him;
the Witnesses were examined a second time, and, in fine, Sophia' Relations,
exasperated at the loss of her, and out of a desire of revenge, which they
conceived just, solicited the business so earnestly, that, in five or six days,
it was ready for judgment. They desired that the person indicted might be sent
to prison; the Viceroy gave them his word, that he should not stir out of his
house, and set down a day to pass judgment on him.

The eve of that fatal day, which held the whole City of Valentia in suspense,
Don Carlos desired a private audience of the Viceroy, which was granted him.
Casting himself at his feet, May it please your Highness, said he to him, to
morrow is the time, that you are to satisfy all the world of my innocence.
Though the witnesses I have produced absolutely clear me of the crime laid to
my charge, yet I now come to assure your Highness with as much sincerity, as if
I were in the presence of God, that I had not only no hand in the carrying
away of Sophia, but withal, that, the day before she was carried away, I did
not so much as see her, nor ever heard of her since. True it is, that I should
have carried her away, but a misfortune, to me yet unknown, removed her hence,
either to my ruin, or her own.

No more, no more, Don Carlos, says the Viceroy to him, go thy ways, and take
thy rest securely; I am thy Master and Friend, and better informed of thy
innocence than thou do imagine; nay, though I might doubt of it, yet should I
not be obliged to be too exact to satisfy my self, since thou art in my house,
and of my house, and that thou came not hither with me, but upon the promise
I made to protect thee. Don Carlos rendered his thanks to so obliging a Master
with all the eloquence he was master of. He went to bed, and the impatience he
was in to see himself cleared, would not suffer him to sleep. He got up at the
break of day, and having dressed himself somewhat above his ordinary gath,
waited at the rising of his Master. But hold a little, I am mistaken, he went
not into his chamber till all his clothes were on; for from the time that
Sophia had disguised her sex, only Dorotea, the confident of her disguise, lay
in her chamber, and did all those services, which done by another might have
discovered what she would have kept concealed. Don Carlos therefore entered into
the Viceroy's chamber, as soon as Dorotea had opened it for all visitants; and
the Viceroy no sooner saw him, but he reproached him with his early rising,
being a person accused, who would have himself thought innocent, and told him,
that a person who could not sleep betrayed something that lay heavy on his
conscience. Don Carlos a little troubled, made him answer, that it was not so
much the fear of being found guilty, as the hope of defying the further
prosecutions of his enemies, by the justice he expected from his Highness, that
had hindered him from sleeping. But you are very nearly dressed, and gallant,
says the Viceroy to him, and I find you very calm, considering your life is in
so great a hazard. I am now at a loss what to think of the crime wherewith you
stand charged. As often as we fall into discourse concerning Sophia, you speak
of her with less earnestness and more indifference than I do; and yet I am not
charged, as you are, to have ever been loved by her, and to have murdered her,
and possibly young Claudio too, on whom you would cast the charge of her
conveyance away. You affirmed that you have loved her, continued the Viceroy,
and yet you live after you had lost her, and you have omitted nothing that
could be done in order to your discharge and quiet, you, who should rather be
weary of your life, and hate whatever might tend to the preservation of it. Ah!
unconstant Don Carlos, it must needs be that some other Love has induced you
to forget the inclinations you had for lost Sophia, if so be you ever truly
loved her, when she was wholly yours, and durst do any thing for your s^ke.

Don Carlos, half dead at these words of the Viceroy's, would have made some
reply thereto, but he would by no means permit him, Come, come, hold your
peace, said he to him, with a severe countenance, and reserve your eloquence
for your Judges; for my part, I shall not be surpised therewith, nor, on the
account of one of my menial servants, raise in the Emperor an ill opinion of
my integrity. And therefore in the mean time, added the Viceroy, turning to
the Captain of the Guard, let him be secured; he, who broke prison, may much
rather his promise, when he finds there are no other hopes of impunity, than
what may be had by an escap^.

Immediately Don Carlos's Sword was taken from him, which raised a great
compassion in all those who saw him encompassed by the Guards, cast down and
discouraged, and having much ado to keep in his tears. While the poor Gentleman
was repenting himself, that he had not been sufficiently distrustful of the
unconstant humor of Grandees: the Judges, before whom he was to be tried,
entered the room, and took their places, after the Viceroy had taken his. The
Italian Count, who had continued all this time at Valentia, and the Father and
Mother of Sophia appeared, and produced their witnesses against the Prisoner,
who was now at such a loss, that he hardly had the courage to plead for
himself. They showed him the Letters which he had sometimes written to Sophia;
the Neighbors were brought in, and the Domestics of Sophia's house, and at
last there was produced against him the Letter she had left in her Chamber, the
day he had designed to carry her away. The Prisoner brought in his Domestics,
who deposed, that they had seen their Master in Bed; but he might have got up
after he had made them believe he was asleep. For his own part, he swore very
liberally, that he had not carried away Sophia, and represented it to the
Judges, that it was the most improbable thing in the world, that he should
carry her away, soon after to be separated from her: but a further charge
against him was, that he had murdered her, and also the Page, the confident of
his Loves. There remained only to pass the Sentence, and no doubt it would have
been that of death, when the Viceroy ordered him to approach, and spoke to him
in these words.

Unfortunate Don Carlos! Thou may well conclude, after all the demonstrations
of affection thou have received from me, that, if I could have but suspected
thee guilty of the crime laid to thy charge, I should not have brought thee to
Valentia. There Is no way for me but to condemn thee, unless I would begin the
exercise of my charge by an Injustice, and thou may judge how much I am
troubled at thy misfortune, by the tears I shed for thee. 'Twere possible thy
adversaries might be satisfied, were they of a lower quality, or less resolved
upon thy destruction. In a word, if Sophia appears not her self to vindicate
thee, prepare thy self for death.

Don Carlos, at this, despairing of all safety, cast himself at the Viceroy's
feet, and said to him, Your Highness may be pleased to remember, that, in
Africa, even from the first time I had the honor to be entertained into your
service, and whenever your Highness engaged me in the tedious relation of my
misfortunes, I ever related them in the same manner, and you might presume,
that, in those Countries, and all other places, I should not have affirmed to a
Master, who so highly honored me with his affection, what I should here deny
before a Judge. I ever told your Highness the naked Truth, as sincerely as to
my God, and I tell you still, that I loved, that I adored Sophia; How! say that
thou ador'st her, ungrateful Man? says the Viceroy to him, surprising all the
Assembly by his Action. Yes, I do adore her, replies Don Carlos, very much
astonished at what the Viceroy had spoken. I promised to marry her, continued
he, and we agreed together, that I should carry her away to Barcelona. But if I
did effectually convey her hence, if I know where she is, let me be put to the
most cruel death can be imagined. I cannot avoid it; but I shall dye
innocently, unless it may be said I have deserved death, for loving, even
beyond my own Life, an unconstant and perfidious creature. But what is become
of this perfidious Creature and thy Page, cries the Viceroy, with a furious
countenance? Are they gone up into Heaven? Are they sunk down under the Earth?
The Page was a Gallant; replies Don Carlos, she was handsome; he was a Man, she
was a Woman. Ah Traitor! said the Viceroy to him, how have thou now discovered
thy base suspicions, and the little esteem thou had for the unfortunate
Sophia! Cursed be the Woman that suffers her self to be cajoll'd by the
promises of Men, and comes afterward to be slighted for her credulity! Neither
was Sophia a Woman of ordinary virtue, wicked Man! nor thy Page Claudio a Man.
Sophia was constant to thee; and thy Page was a distracted Woman in love with
thee, and robbed thee of Sophia, whom she betrayed as a Rival. I am Sophia,
unworthy, ungrateful Lover! I am Sophia, who have suffered unimaginable
miseries, for a Man, that deserved not to be loved, and one who thought me
guilty of the greatest infamy I could fall into.

Sophia could say no more, her Father, who knew her, took her into his arms.
Her Mother fell into a swound, on the one side; and Don Carlos on the other.
Sophia dis-engag'd her self from her Father, to go to the relief of the two
persons who had swounded, but soon recovered themselves, while she was in
suspense to whether of the two she should run. Her Mother wept over her, she
did the like over her Mother. She embraced, with all the tenderness imaginable,
her dear Don Carlos, who had almost fallen into another swound. But with much
^do he kept upon his feet, and not presuming yet to kiss Sophia's lips, as he
could have wished, he revenged himself on her hands, which h^ kissed a thousand
times one after another. Sophia was hardly able to return all the embraces she
received, and all the complements that were made to her. The Italian Count,
making his among the rest, would have entertained her with the pretensions he
had to her, as having been promised him by her Father and Mother. Don Carlos,
who heard him, quitted one of Sophia's hands, which he was then greedily
kissing, and drawing his Sword, which had been delivered to him, set himself
into such a posture, as put the whole assembly into a fright, and swearing
after the rate of millions, made it appear, that no human force should deprive
him of Sophia, if she her self forbad him not to think of her. But she
declared, that she would never have any other Husband than her dear Don Carlos,
and entreated her Father and Mother to consent thereto, or resolve to see her
shut up in a Monastery for the remainder of her Life. Her Parents gave her
liberty to make her own choice, and the Italian Count took Post that very day,
for Italy, or some other place where he had a mind to go.

Sophia dismissed not the Assembly, till she had g^^^ them a relation of her
adventure^, which w^^^ ^dmir'd by all. A person was dispatched awa^ express to
carry the news of this miracle to the ^mperour, who continued to Don Carlos,
after he ^ married. Sophia, the Vice-ro^alty and Government of Valentia, and
all the kindnesses which that Virago had deserved under the name of Don
Fernand, and bestowed on that happy Lover a Principality, which his Posterity
enjoys to this day. The solemnities of the Nuptials were extraordinary,
discharged by the City of Valentia; and D^rotea, who put on Man's clothes at
the same time as Sophia, was also, at the same time, married, to a Cavalier, a
near Kinsman to Don Carlos.

SCARRON's NOVELS.
The Rival-Brothers.
The Fifth Novel.
DOrothea and Feliciana were the two most beautiful and most amiable Ladies of
any about the famous City of Sevil; but though they had not been such, their
quality and great fortunes were so considerable as might well engage all those,
who were desirous to be advantageously m^tch'd, to make their addresses to
them. It is not then to be doubted, but that, of Suitors, there was a pretty
Catalogue, yet had not Don Manuel, their Father, declared himself in favor of
any man's pretensions, and Dorothea, who, being the elder, should, by the
course of the Cards, be married first, had, as well as her sister, been so
reserved in her demeanor and actions, that the most presumptuous of her humble
Servants were in some doubt, whether their services were kindly or unkindly
received. These two Beauties never went publicly to Mass, but they were
attended by a number of the greatest Gallants about the City, wherein the
Miracle was, that so many different pretensions should agree so well, and that
in a superstitious Country young Gentlemen should be guilty of any devotion,
besides what they have for their Mistresses. Before they could get off their
gloves to take a little Holy Water, other hands, some fair, some otherwise,
bestowed on them more than they needed. Their fair eyes were no sooner off
their Prayer-books, but they were the center of I know not how many immodest
looks: and every step, as they went out of the Church, they had salutations to
return.

But if they were thus importuned with courtship in Churches, and public
places, where people conceive themselves obliged to observe some reserv'dness,
they wanted it not at home. For, their Father's house being in the midst of a
spacious plain, there passed not a day without some of those divertisements,
whereby Lovers would insinuate themselves into the favor of their Mistresses.
And these our young Ladies took the more kindly, in that they made that
restraint, which the tyrannical custom of the Country imposes on their sex, the
more supportable to them. In the day time, Cavalcades, Tilting, and such
exercises were their entertainment, every night several sorts of Music. One
d^y above the rest, there came in an unknown Person who did such things as
astonished all the beholders, and had been particularly observed by the two
fair Sisters, to be one so neatly made, as if nature had intended him for a
pattern. Several Gentlemen of Sevil, who had known him in Flanders, where he
had the command of a Regiment of Horse, invited him to make one at their sport
of Tilting, which he did, habited as a Soldier.

Not long after, there happened to be at Sevil, the ceremony of the
Consecration of a Bishop. The Stranger we spoke of before, who went under the
name of Don Sancho de Sylva, came into that Church where it was to be
performed, with several others the greatest Gallants about the City, and the
two fair Sisters Dorothea and Feliciana de Monsalvo were also there among
diverse Ladies, all disguised, according to the mode of Sevil, with mantles of a
thick stuff, and hats with plumes of feathers in them. It was Don Sancho's
fortune to stand between the two Sisters, and another Lady, with whom he would
have entered into some discourse, but she civilly entreated him, to forbear
speaking to her, and to resign the place he was in, to a person she expected,
to meet her there. Don Sancho compli'd with her desires, and thereupon turning
about, he makes toward Dorothea d^ Monsalvo* who stood nearer him than her
Sister; and had observed what complements had passed between him and the other
Lady. I was in hopes, Madam, said he, addressing himself to her, that, being a
stranger in this place, the Lady to whom I would have spoken, would have
vouchsafed me her conversation; but she has punished the confidence I had to
think that mine was not to be slighted. I acknowledge my oversight, and I shall
be more distrustful of my self another time. And therefore, be you pleased,
Madam, to express less rigor toward a Stranger, whom you have seen treated
with so much disrespect, and, for the honor of the Sevillian Ladies, to give
him occasion to make some acknowledgment of their kindness. You rather give me
occasion to treat you with as much contempt as the other Lady did, replies
Dorothea, since your applications to me are the effects of her refusal of them:
but that you may not have too great cause to complain of the Ladies of this
Country, I am content to discourse only with you, as long as this Ceremony
shall last, and thence, besides the kindness you may conceive done to your
self, you may infer, that I have not appointed any one to meet me here. Being
so excellent a person as I imagine you to be, says Don Sancho, I cannot forbear
wondering at it, but must withal conclude, that you are much to be feared, or
that the Gallants of this City are very timorous, or rather that he, whose
place I have taken up, may be absent. And do you think, Sir, says Dorothea to
him, that I am so ignorant in the matter of loving, that, in the absence of a
Gallant, I could not forbea^ going to an Assem^ly, where I should not ^ail
meeting with some other? Take heed another time how you pass so rash a censure,
of a person you know not. You would find, Madam, replies Don Sancho, that what
you call my Censure is more to your advantage than you think, if you permit me
to serve you answerably to the inclinations I have for you. Our first motions
are violent, and therefore not always to be followed, says Dorothea to him;
besides there is a great difficulty in what you propose to me. Not any so
great, replies Don Sancho, but I shall be able to overcome, when the reward of
it is to become your Servant. It Is not a design to be compassed in few days,
says Dorothea; I find you a person will be easily transported, in that you seem
to have forgotten, that you only take Sevil in your way to some other place,
and perhaps are yet to learn, that I should not take it kindly any man loved
me, en passant, that is, by the way. Be you but pleased, Madam, said he, to
grant me what I desire, and I promise you not to go any further than Sevil
while I live. There is a great deal of spirit and gallantry in what you say,
replies Dorothea, and thence I wonder much, that a person who is able to say
such things, has not already made choice of a Lady, on whom he might bestow
his gallantries. Proceeds it hence that he thinks them not worth his trouble?
No, but rather out of a distrust of his own strength, says Don Sancho. Answer
me precisely to what I ask you, says Dorothea, and confidently tell me, which
of our Ladies is Mistress of those charms that might force your stay at Sevil.
I have already told you, that it is in your power to do it if you please,
replies Don Sancho. You never saw me, says Dorothea; it must needs be some one
that you have seen, therefore name some other. Since you press so much upon me,
says Don Sancho to her, I must acknowledge, Madam, that if the Lady Dorothea
Monsalvo were as ingenious as you are, I should account that man happy, whose
merit she might value, and whose services she might allow of. There are in
Sevil many Ladies as handsome as she is, nay many exceed her, says Dorothea,
both in beauty and wit; but since you are pleased to pitch upon her, pray tell
me seriously, did you never hear it reported, that she favored any one of her
Gallants particularly above all the rest? Finding my self at a great distance
from deserving her, says Don Sancho, I never made it my business to enquire.
And why do you think you might not deserve her as well as another, says
Dorothea? I took you to be a person of greater courage than to betray so great
a distrust of your self. Had you studi'd Ladies as much as I imagined you might
have done, you would have found them mighty humoursome and fantastic, and that
many times the first onset of a new comer makes a greater progress in their
affections, than several years of services rendered by those Gallants, who are
never out of their sight. From the character you give those Ladies, Madam, says
Don Sancho, I may infer you would be loath to be included in the number, and so
you take an ingenious way to rid your hands of me, by encouraging me to love
some other Lady, and I clearly see, you would have but little regard for the
services of a fresh Gallant, to the prejudice of one to whom you had been long
before engaged, though 'twere out of no other reason than that you would not be
thought humorous or fantastic. Take heed how you entertain any such thing in
your imagination, replies Dorothea, but rather persuade your self, that I am
not so easily induced to receive a witty complement for an assurance of a
growing inclination toward me, from a person who never saw me. If there wants
only that to make way for the amorous inclination I have for you, replies Don
Sancho, conceal not your self any longer, from a person, who, though a stranger
to you, is already infinitely taken with your wit. It Is possible you might not
be so much with my countenance, says the Lady. Ah Madam, says Don Sancho, it is
impossible you should be otherwise than very beautiful, when you so ingeniously
acknowledge that you are not; and now I am fully satisfied you would be rid of
me, either, because you think me troublesome, or that your heart is already
taken up. 'Twere therefore unjust, the goodness obliged you to bear with me
thus far, should be any longer pressed upon, only be pleased to assure your
self, that what I have said was not merely to pass away the time with you, but
to make a sincere proffer of that of my whole life to serve you. To satisfy
you, Sir, replies Dorothea, that I would not have that thought lost which I
have spent in discoursing with you, I shall be glad, ere we part, to know who
you are. I can do no less than obey you, replies he; know then, Madam, whom I
think so amiable, though I have not seen, that I am known by the name of Sylva;
that my Father is Governor of Quitto in Peru; that by order from him I am come
to Sevil; and that I have spent most part of my Life in Flanders, where I have,
by my Services, attained to the highest Commands in the Army, and gotten a
Commandery of Saint James. This is a short account of what I now am, what I
would be while I live, it lies on you, Madam, to give me leave, in some less
public place than this is, to assure you. That shall be as soon as I may
conveniently do it, replies Dorothea; in the mean time, trouble not your self
to get any further knowledge of me, unless you will run the hazard of never
knowing me for your friend: only take this for your present satisfaction, that
I am a person of quality, and that my face is such as will not frighten any
body.

Don Sancho was satisfied, and having, with a low Congee, taken his leave of
her, he thrust himself in among a great number of fine Gallants, who were very
seriously discoursing together. There are a sort of severe Ladies, who may be
more particularly known by the character I shall here give of them, to wit,
such as extremely concern themselves in the conduct and demeanor of others,
and are very secure as to their own; who imagine themselves the only fit
Judges of what is well or ill done, though there may be good wagers laid of
their virtue, as a thing whereof there is no great certainty, and think that
upon the discovery of a little brutish rudeness, they may pretend to
supererogation in point of Honor, though the miscarriages of their greener
years gave more scandal, than their wrinkles will ever good example; these
Ladies, I say, who are very short-sighted in the ordinary occurrences of humane
Life, will take occasion to quarrel at the Author, and affirm, that Madam
Dorothea was guilty of a great want of reserv'dness, and indiscretion, not
only in being so over-free to favor a person whom she only knew by sight,
but also in permitting him to speak to her of Love, and that if a young
Gentlewoman, over whom they had any power, had done as much, she should make no
long abode in this world. But let these yet-to-be-taught Ladies learn from me,
that every Country has its particular customs, and that if in France, England,
and some other parts, married Women and Maids, who are trusted to go any where
upon the security of their own good behavior, are offended, or at least should
be so, at any the least expression of Love; in Spain, where they are kept in as
Nuns, they take it not amiss that any one should tell them they love them,
though the person that should tell them so, had not any thing for which he
might expect a return of his Love. Nay, they do much more, they are the Ladies
commonly that make the first overtures, and are first taken, inasmuch as they
are the last seen, by their Gallants, whom they have the advantage to see
daily, in Churches, and other public places, and sometimes from their
Balconies and Chamber-windows.

Dorothea acquainted her Sister Feliciana with the discourse had passed between
her and Don Sancho, and made no difficulty to tell her, that she was more taken
with that Stranger, than with all the Gallants of Sevil, and her Sister
approved the design she had upon her Liberty. Thereupon the two fair Sisters
had a great deal of serious discourse together, concerning the advantageous
privileges which the Men have above the Women, who were seldom married
without the consent of their Friends, which many times happened contrary to
their liking, whereas the Men were at liberty to make choice, where they best
fancied. For my part, says Dorothea to her Sister, I am confident, Love shall
never be able to make me do any thing contrary to my duty; but I am on the
other side fully resolved never to be married to a Man, who shall not alone be
possessed of whatever I could wish in several others, and I had rather spend my
Life in a Monastery, than in the company of a Husband I could not affect.
Feliciana told her Sister, that she had taken the same resolution, and they
confirmed one the other therein, with all the fine arguments, which their
ingenuity could furnish them with, upon that occasion. Dorothea found it some
difficulty to make good the promise she had made Don Sancho, of discovering her
self to him, and acquainted her Sister how much she was troubled thereat: but
Feliciana, who was very fortunate in finding out expedients, put her Sister in
mind, that a certain Lady, a Kinswoman of theirs, and one of their most
intimate friends (for all of ones Kindred are not such) would do her all the
service lay in her power, in a business wherein her quiet was so much
concerned. You know, says this best-natur'd Sister in the world, that Marina,
who has lived with us so ma^^ years, is now married to a Surgeon, who has
taken of our Kinswoman a little House adjoining to her own, and that there is a
common Entry between both. The place where they stand is a remote street not
much frequented, and though it should be observed, that we visited our
Kinswoman oftener than we had been wont, there would be no notice taken of Don
Sancho's going into a Surgeons, besides that the business may be so contrived,
that he may come thither only in the night, and disguised.

While Dorothea, with the assistance of her Sister, was contriving how to
compass this amorous interview; while she was disposing her Kinswoman to serve
her, and preparing Instructions for Marina, Don Sancho's thoughts were wholly
taken up with the unknown Lady. One while he is in suspense whether the promise
she had made him, that he should hear from her, were not an abuse; another, he
imagined, that there was somewhat in her last words which discovered a certain
kindness toward him. He saw her every day, though he knew her not, in the
Churches or some other public places, receiving the adorations of her
Gallants, who were all his intimate acquaintance^, and the greatest friends he
had in Sevil. He was one morning putting on his clothes, his thoughts full of
his unknown Mistress, when a mess^ge was brought, that there was a woman
desired to speak with him. Being conducted to his chamber, he received from
her, this

LETTER.
THat you heard not sooner from me, attribute not to any remission of that
kindness I expressed to you at our first meeting, but purely to want of
convenience. If you still persist in a desire to be better known to me, receive
directions from the Bearer, where you are to meet her in the evening, and she
will conduct you to the place, where I shall be ready to receive you.




It may be easily imagined how gladly he entertained this message, His
transportation was such, that he could not forbear embracing that happy
Ambassadress, and he presented her with a Gold chain, which, after some
ceremony, she received from him. She appointed him to meet her at a certain
place in the dusk of the Evening, leaving him the most satisfied, but withal
the most impatient man in the world. At last night came; he went to the place
where the morning Ambassadress expected him, tricked up and perfumed as if he
had spent the whole day about it. He was conducted by her to a little obscure
House, which looked somewhat suspitiously, and thence into a noble large Room,
where he found three Ladies, all veiled. He discovered his unknown Mistress by
her Stature, and immediately broke forth into complaints, that she would not
vouchsafe to unveil her self. She staid not for any further entreaties,
whereupon she and her Sister uncovering their faces, Don Sancho knew them to be
the fair Sisters, Dorothea and Feliciana de Monsalvo. You are now convinced,
says the Elder to him, taking off her Veil, that I told you but truth, when I
assured you, that a Stranger might sometimes obtain that in a minute, which
those Gallants whom a Lady sees every day should not deserve in many years: but
I would have you withal consider with your self, that you will be the most
ungrateful of all Men, if you do not highly esteem the favor I show you, or
pass any censure of it to my disadvantage, though I told you such things might
be the effect of a fantastic humor. I shall ever value what I receive from
you, as if it were sent me from Heaven, says the passionate Don Sancho, and you
shall find, by the care I shall take to preserve the kindness you do me, that
if I ever lose it, it will not be my negligence, but my misfortune.

This sharp onset was as eagerly pursued on both sides, to the mutual
satisfaction of the two Lovers; which the Mistress of the house and Feliciana
perceiving, took occasion to stand at a considerable distance from them, and so
they had all the convenience they could have wished, to counter-charge one the
other with amorous complements, and heighten the flames they had already raised
in each other; nay, though the Love there was between them, might be accounted,
considering the little time of their acquaintance, very great, yet would they
appoint another day, to make some additionals thereto, if any might be
admitted. Dorothea promised Don Sancho that she would endeavor to see him as
often as she could: he returned her his most humble thanks, with all the
Rhetoric he was master of.

Upon this cessation of discourse, the two other Ladies came up to them, and
they fell into it afresh, and continued the kind engagement, so long, that
Marina thought it time to mind them of their departure. Dorothea was troubled
at that alarm, and Don Sancho grew pale and silent; but there was a necessity
of parting. The transported Cavalier took occasion the next day, to write a
Letter to his Mistress, and sent it by the common Ambassadress Marina, and she
returned him such an Answer thereto, as he could have wished. I shall forbear
inserting their amorous Epistles here, because there never came any of them to
my hands, and I am loath to foist in any of my own dressing, out of a fear they
might not prove as good as theirs. They had many interviews afterward at the
same place, and they spent the time, as they had done at the first, and so by a
continued progress, their Loves came up to that fervency, that, abating their
not shedding their blood as Pyramus and Thisbe are recorded to have done, they
were not behind them* as to a violent tenderness one for another. It Is commonly
said, that Love, Fire, and Money cannot be long concealed. Dorothea, who was in
a manner transported with continual thoughts of her lovely Stranger, could not
speak of him with any moderation, nay, she commended him so highly beyond all
the Gentlemen of Sevil, that some Ladies, who would have carried on their
designs secretly as she did, hearing her incessantly speaking of Don Sancho,
and preferring him so as to cast a certain contempt on those they fancied,
took-notice of it, and were offended. Feliciana had often privately advised
her, to speak of him with more caution and reserv'dness; nay, many times, in
company, when she saw her transported with the pleasure she took in discoursing
of her Gallant, had trod on her foot so hard as to make her cry out, and find
somewhat else to talk of.

These discoveries were at last so observed, that a certain Cavalier, a Suitor
of Dorothea's, had notice given him thereof, by a Lady he was intimately
acquainted with. He was the more easily induced to believe, that Dorothea had a
more than ordinary kindness for Don Sancho, when he considered, that ever since
the coming of that Stranger to the City, those who accounted themselves the
Slaves of that fair Lady, of which number he thought himself the most heavily
chained, had not received the least favorable look from her. This Rival of Don
Sancho's was a person of great wealth, descended of a noble House, and much in
favor with Don Manuel, who yet was the more backward to press his Daughter to
m^rry him, in regard that when ever he spoke to her of it, her answer was, that
she wanted two or three years of being ripe for that state.

This same young Gentleman (now his name comes into my head, Don Diego) before
he engaged himself in an action which might be charged with imprudence, thought
it requisite to be fully assured of a thing, which yet he did only suspect. He
had a very spruce fellow that waited on him in his Chamber, one of those
insolent attendants who think it is for their Master's credit that they wear as
good Linen as themselves, or at least wear theirs; and all, that they may be
the more gracious in the eyes of the waiting women. This Servant's name was
Guzman; he pretended much to ingenuity, out of a conceit that it had been
derived to him from that Countryman of his, whose adventures are so famous;
but having, among other endowments, a smattering in Poetry, he employed his
Talent in composing such Romances as in other Countries are known by the name
of Ballads. He sung them playing on his Gitthar, but so wretchedly, that his
wry mouths and the stretching out of his tongue, spoiled the discord, at least
to those that looked on him. He had also the graceful knack of dancing a
Saraband, and never went without his Castagnets. He had once some intentions to
turn Comedian, but somewhat in his humor was not liked, for he was very much
addicted to Vapouring and Hectorship, and to give you a true character of him,
there was some suspicion of his nocturnal achievements, as being one who would
bid people stand with as much confidence as a Constable, but with this greater
civility, that he would dismiss their persons, and secure only what he found
about them.

All these excellent Talents, heightened by a little eloquence, which reached
only so far as he had read, and what he heard from his Master, made all the
Waiting-women, even those who pretended to somewhat of Beauty, look on him as
the blank (if I may make that comparison) of their amorous desires. Don Diego
gave him instructions to go and court Isabella, a young Maid who waited on the
two beautiful Sisters. He went, and insinuated himself so far into Isabella's
favor, that she thought her self the happiest creature in the world, to be
loved by Guzman, nay, the kindness they had one for another grew to such a
degree, that he became very earnest in the continuance of what he had begun
only to obey his Master. Isabella had so well feathered her Nest in her
service, that she might well be accounted a good fortune, for the proudest
attendant of any in Spain. Her Mistresses treated her very kindly, and were
very liberal to her, besides somewhat she had to expect from her Father, who
was an honest Tradesman. In fine, Guzman thought it his best course to make
sure of her, by proposing a match; she was as willing as he was, and took him
at his word; they made one another mutual promises of marriage, and ever after
lived together as if the ceremonies had passed between them.

Things standing thus, Isabella began to conceive an extreme indignation
against Marina, the Surgeon's wife, at whose house Don Sancho and Dorothea had
their private meetings, and it troubled her much, that though she had lived
with her Mistress before her, she should still be her Confident in a business
of that nature, wherein the liberality of a favored Lover is very
considerable. She had heard of the Gold chain which Don Sancho had bestowed on
Marina, as also of several other presents he had made her, and imagined she
might have received many more, which she knew nothing of. This raised a deadly
hatred in her against Marina, which makes me think, that the pretty Gentlewoman
was not a little troubled. It is not therefore to be wondered, if, upon the
first Interrogatories which Guzman made to her, and particularly this, whether
it were true that Dorothea was in love with any one, she should discover the
secrets of her Mistress, to a person, whom she looked on as part of her self.
She acquainted him with all she knew of the designs of our young Lovers, Don
Sancho's liberality to Marina, whom he enriched by his continual presents, till
at last she broke forth into downright railing at her, as one that made those
advantages, which should rather have been received by a Servant that lived in
the house. Guzman entreated her to give him notice of the next meeting they
were to have there. She did so, and he failed not to give his Master an account
of it, as also of all had been told him by the perfidious Isabella.

Upon this intelligence Don Diego put himself into the habit of a Beggar, and
laid himself down in the street not far from Marina's door, into which he saw
his Rival enter, and not long after came a Coach, out of which alighted
Dorothea and her Sister, and went into the same House, leaving Don Diego in a
great rage, to see what he could not then remedy. He went home, and resolved to
rid himself of so formidable a Rival. Having hired some of those, whose
profession it is to murder any they are set upon, (a sort of people may be as
easily procured in Spain, as Porters in other places) he expected Don Sancho
several nights together, and at last meeting with him, he set upon him,
seconded by two of those mercenary Hectors, as well armed as himself. Don
Sancho, on the other side, was reasonably well provided for them, as having
about him, besides Sword and Poniard, a case of Pistols charged. He defended
himself at first as a Lion, and found that his enemies had this advantage of
him, that they defied any thing he could do with his Sword. Don Diego pressed
upon him more than the others, who, being hired men, behaved themselves
accordingly. He retreated still all he could, to remove the noise of the
engagement farther from the house where his Dorothea was: but at last fearing
to endanger himself too far, and finding Don Diego still violently pursuing
him, he discharged one of his Pistols, upon which he fell down half dead, and
called as loud as he could for a Confessor, and the two Hectors immediately
vanished. Don Sancho got to his own lodging, and the neighbors came out into
the street and found Don Diego, whom they knew, ready to depart this life, and
charging Don Sancho with his death. He had soon notice of it by his friends,
who told him, that though he might clear himself upon the judicial proceedings
which might be brought against him, yet Don Diego's friends would be sure to
revenge his death, and find out some way or other to kill him. He retired into
a Monastery, whence he gave his Mistress an account how his affairs stood, and
set all things in order to his departure from Sevil, as soon as he might do it
safely. A strict search was made for Don Sancho, but he could not be found. The
heat of it being over, and all persuaded that he had made an escape, Dorothea
and her Sister, under pretense of some Devotion, were conducted by their
Kinswoman, at whose house they had met, to the Monastery, where Don Sancho was,
and there, by the means of one of the Religious men, the two Lovers had an
enterview in a private Chapel. After some discourse, they made mutual promises
one to the other of a constant fidelity, and parted with so much regret, and
such melting expressions, that her Sister, her Kinswoman, and the Religious
man, who were witnesses thereof, not only wept then, but could never since
think of it without tears.

Having delivered certain Letters to his Father's factor, to be sent to him to
the Indies, he left Sevil, in a disguise. In those Letters he acquainted him
with the accident, which had occasioned his departure from Sevil, and that he
intended for Naples. He got well thither, and was nobly entertained by the
Viceroy, who, among the many favors he did him, honored him with a near
relation to his person. But the main satisfaction was wanting, that of hearing
from his dear Dorothea, so that within a year he grew weary of the kindness of
his entertainment, and wished for some oppotunity to leave Naples. He expected
not long; for the Viceroy being to send out a small Squadron of six Galleys
against the Turk, Don Sancho's courage would not let slip so fair an occasion
to exercise it self. He was received, to the great satisfaction of the
Commander, who was glad to have a person of his worth and quality abo^rd him.
This Squadron of Naples met with eight Turkish G^llies, almost in sight of
Messina, and eng^g'd them. After a long sight, the Christian Galleys took three
of the enemies, and sunk two. The Admiral of the Christian Galleys was engaged
against that of the Turks, which being better armed and manned t^an any of the
rest, had accordingly made the greater resistance. In the mean time, the wind
began ^o rise, and the sea to grow rough, so that both Christians and Turks
thought it concerned them more to secure themselves against the Tempest, than
any further to prosecute the Engagement. They jointly loosed the
Grapling-irons, whereby the two Galleys were fastened together, and the Turk^sh
Admiral parted from the Christian, j^st ^s Don Sancho had cast himself into it,
no^ followed by any body. Finding himself all alone amongst his enemies, he
thought death to be preferred before slavery, and, what ever might be the
consequence of it, cast himself into the Sea, hoping to recover the Christian
Galleys by swimming. But the weather proved such, that he could not be
perceived, though the Christian General, who had been witness of Don Sancho's
action, and was extremely enraged at his loss, which he thought unavoidable,
caused the Gallie to tack about toward the place where he had cast himself
overboard. In the mean time Don Sancho made his way through the waves, and
having swum a good way toward the shore, assisted by the wind and tide, he
fortunately lighted on a plank of one of the Turkish Galleys, and with the help
of it got to land on the co^st of Sicily. Having returned God his humble thanks
for so great a deliverance, he made toward a little hamlet inhabited by some
poor Fishermen, who gave him the best entert^inment they could. The
extraordinary actions he had done in the engagement, what he ^ad suffered in
the Sea, and the cold he endured, and his walking afterward in his wet
clothes, brought him into a violent fever, which forced him to keep his bed
for many days; yet at last, without any trouble of Physicians he recovered his
former health. During his sickness, he made a resolution to continue the world
in the persuasion of his death; as well that he might be in less fear of his
enemies, the Relations of Don Diego, as make a further trial of the fidelity of
his Dorothea.

During the time of his abode in Flanders, he had contracted an intimate
friendship with a Sicilian Marquess, of the house of Montalto, whose name was
Fabiano. He sent one of the Fishermen to Messina, where he lived, to enquire
whether he were then in the Country; and answer being brought him, that he was
there, he went thither, habited as a Fisherman, and, in the night, goes to the
Marquess's house, who, with all others to whom he was known, bewailed his
death. The Marquess was overjoyed to meet with a friend, whom he had given
over for lost. Don Sancho gave him an account how miraculously he had escaped,
as also of his adventures at Sevil, and particularly the violent passion he had
for the Lady Dorothea de Monsalvo. The Sicilian Marquess proffered to go along
with him into Spain, and to bring away Dorothea, if she would consent, into
Sicily. Don Sancho was extremely well pleased with the proposal, yet would not
receive from his friend so dangerous demonstrations of his friendship, telling
him, that he would be infinitely glad of his company into Spain, but for what
might be the consequence of it, he would remit all to fortune.

Don Sancho had a servant, of whose fidelity he ^ad had many years experience.
This fellow, whose name was Sanchez, took his Master's loss so heavily, that
when the Christian Galleys, which had been in the former Engagement against the
Turks, put in at Messina, to refresh themselves, he came asho^e and got into a
Monastery, with a resolution to s^end the rem^inder of his days there. The
Marque^ Fabiano h^ving heard of the relation (...) ^^^mes had to Don Sancho,
sent to the Superior of the Monastery, (who indeed had entert^in'd him upon
the recommendation of that Sicilian Lord) desiring he might be dismissed, which
was easily granted, in regard he had not yet put on the habit of the Religion*
Sanchez not knowing what might be the occasion of his dismission, made some
difficulty to come out; but when he was brought into the presence of his dear
Master, his soul was too narrow for his joy, for having cast himself at his
feet, there was a necessity of some assistance to help him up again.

Some days after, he was sent by Don Sancho into Spain, to make preparations
for his coming thither, and particularly to give him an account of Doro^hea,
who, in the mean time, was persuaded, with all others, that Don Sancho was
dead. Nay the report of his death soon flew into the Indies. Don Sancho's
father di'd out of grief, not long after he had received that sad news, and
left another Son he had four hundred thousand Crowns, conditionally, that his
Brother should have the one moiety of that sum, in case the news of his death
should prove false. This Brother of Don Sancho's was called Don Juhan de
Peralto. He took shipping for Spain, with this vast sum of money, besides
abundance of rare Indian commodities, suitable to the magnificence of a person,
who had been Governor of a considerable place in those parts, and arrived
safely at Sevil, about a year after the accident, which had happened to Don
Sancho. Going under a name much different from his Brother's, it was easy for
him to conceal the relation he had to him, besides the particula^ concernment
he had to keep it secret, by reason of the long stay his occasions might oblige
him to make in a City, where his Brother had so many enemies. He chanced to
have a sight of Dorothea, and fell in love with her, as his Brother had done,
but with this difference, that she made him no return of his love. That
afflicted Beauty could fancy nothing after the loss of her dear Don Sancho:
whatever was done by Don Juhan de Peralto, instead of pleasing, was the
greatest trouble in the wo^ld to her, nay she daily refused the best Matches
about Sevil, which were earnestly proposed to her by her Father Don Manuel.

Much about that time Sanchez comes to Sevil, and, according to the
instructions he h^d received from his Master, secre^ly made the best enquiry he
could, how the Lady Dorothea had behaved her self, since their departure
thence. He was soon informed by common report, that a young Gentleman, of very
great wealth, l^tely come from the Indies, was fallen in love with her, and
made the most magnificent discoveries of his affection that a passionate Suitor
could imagine. He writ to his Master, representing things much worse than they
were, and his Master imagined them yet worse than his Man had represented them.
He communicated the whole business to the Marquess, expressing so great a
distraction at the account he received of his Mistress, that he was in some
suspense whether he should see her any more. His friend comforted him the best
he could, telling him, that it was not impossible but his man might be
mis-inform'd, and that the affairs of his love might be in a much better
posture than he expected. The reasons urged by the Marquess, together with his
own reflections on the mutual promises of fidelity that had passed between
them, especially the endearing expressions at their parting, dispelled those
clouds of suspicion, and represented his Dorothea as faithful and constant to
him as she had engaged to be. They thereupon resolved for Spain, and embarked
themselves at Messina in some Spanish Galleys, and in a short time happily
arrived at St. Lucar's whence they took post for Sevil. They came into the City
after night, and alighted at the house which Sanchez had taken for them. They
stirred not out all the next day, but as soon as it was night, Don Sancho and
the Marquess went their rounds, about the place where Don Manuel lived. They
heard some people setting their Instruments in tune, under Dorothea's windows,
and soon after very excellent Music, and that having ceased, a single Voice
joined to a Theorboe, made heavy complaints of the cruelty of a Tygress
disguised into an Angel. Don Sancho felt some temptations within himself to
spoil all the harmony of the Serenade, and to send away the Musicians with
fleas in their ears: but the Marquess prevailed with him to forbear,
representing to him that he could have done no more, if his Mistress had
appeared in the Balcony, to assure his Rival, that she was not displeased with
his Courtship; or the words of the Air, which had been sung, were
acknowledgments of kindnesses received, rather than complaints of a
dis-satisfi'd Lover. The Author of the Serenade, and his Company, went away, in
all probability, not over-satisfi'd with what they had done, as having not so
much as the stirring of a dog, to assure them that any body regarded their
Music: and Don Sancho and the Marquess, finding the coast clear, returned to
their quarters, where they had a long debate what construction they should make
of the pretensions of this new Suitor. Don Sancho was inclined to a persuasion,
that his Dorothea might have some secret kindness for him, though, for some
reasons which hindered her from making any show of it at that time, she seemed
to take no notice of his Courtship, especially when he considered, that she
might, with all the others, be assured of his death. On the contrary, the
Marquess entreated him to suspend his belief of her being engaged to any other,
till he had made some fuller discoveries thereof.

Don Sancho submitted to the remonstrances of his friend, and that the rather,
when it came into his mind, that the greatest expressions of cou^tship made by
one, whose person is not affected, are so much the more importunate. And indeed
so were those of the Indian Cavalier, to the fair Dorothea, who was so far from
giving him any encouragement by her acceptance, that he could not but perceive
they were more and more troublesome to her. Her Father Don Manuel was extremely
desirous to see her disposed in marriage, and she doubted not, but that if the
Indian Cavalier, Don Juhan de Peralto, being a person so well descended, and so
wealthy, should proffer himself for a Son-in-law, he would be preferred before
all others, and she more earnestly pressed by her Father to accept of him than
she had been.

The next day after the Serenade, whereof the Marquess Fabiano and Don Sancho
had had their part, Dorothea took occasion to confer notes with her Sister,
concerning Don Juhan, and his courtship, and told her, that she could not brook
the gallantries of that conceited Indian, and thought it the strangest thing in
the world, he should make such public demonstrations of his love to her,
before he had made any overtures thereof of her Father. It Is such a kind of
procedure, says Feliciana to her, as I should never approve of, and if your
case were mine, I should give him such an entertainment, upon the first
opportunity that presented it self, as might immediately dash all the hopes, he
had conceived of ever pleasing you. For my own part, continued she, I could
never fancy his person; he has not that delicacy, and insinuation of carriage,
which is acquirable only at Court, and the vast expenses he is at here in
Sevil, argue not so much the nobleness of his disposition, as the extravagant
and salvage humor of that yet unciviliz'd part of the world whence he came. It
is observed, that those parts of the world which su^ply us with gold and
silver, are most barren as to the other productions of nature; so those people
that inhabit them, think they need no other recommendation, than what they
derive from the entrails of certain almost inaccessible Mountains, created
only for the punishment of Slaves and Malefactors. All your Servant's actions
smell so strongly of the Indian, that he must be allowed some years, to refine
the barbarism of the Climate he has lived in so long, before he can be reduced
to the civility of this, wherein we have had our education. If ever you grant
him the favor to speak to you, advise him to study the courting of a Lady
after another manner then he has been taught among the Topinambous, and then
you may promise to hear what he shall have to say for himself.

This was partly the character she gave Don Juhan de Peralto, which she
delivered with such bitterness and derision, that Dorothea could do no less
than wonder at it. It seems the scornful young Lady had clearly forgotten, that
upon his first appearance at Sevil, she had confessed to her Sister, that she
liked him well enough, and when ever she had occasion to speak of him, she was
as liberal of her commendations, as she was now of her reproaches. Dorothea
observing her Sister so much changed, or at least seeming to be, as to the
sentiments she sometimes had for the Indian Cavalier, immediately imagined,
that her inclination toward him might be the greater, the more earnest she
seemed to have it thought, that she had not any. To be more fully assured of
it, she told Feliciana, that she was not displeased with the gallantries of Don
Juhan, out of any aversion she had for his person, nay, on the contrary,
observing in his countenance somewhat of the air of Don Sancho's, she might
prefer him before any other Cavalier about Sevil; besides she doubted not, but
that, having all the advantages of birth and fortune, he would easily get her
Father's consent. But to what end, continued she, should I fancy to my self
these imaginary pleasures? I have lost Don Sancho, and since it was not my
fortune to be his wife, I am resolved never to be any other man's, and
therefore, to avoid all future addresses, my only course will be to spend the
rest of my days in some Monastery. Ah Sister, says Feliciana, though you were
not fully resolved upon so strange a design, yet could you not give me a
stranger affliction than by telling me of it. That I am so resolved, Sister,
you may be assured, replies Dorothea; but for your part, you have the less
reason to be troubled at it, in regard it will be to your advantage, for, by
that means, you will be the most considerable fortune about Sevil. Upon this
account it was, that I had a desire to see Don Juhan, that I might persuade
him, to address that courtship to you, which he vainly bestows on me, after I
have convinced him of the impossibility there is, that we should ever be
married together. What may be the consequences of his applications to you, Time
only can discover; Love is full of vicissitudes, and there is not so great a
distance between affection and aversion, but that one of them may tread on the
heels of the other. Nay, to deal sisterly, that is, freely, with you, I am not
a little troubled, to find you express so much of the latter, toward a person,
who is so far from deserving it, that he might justly expect somewhat of
kindness from you, both as a Stranger, and one that has not run the the hazard
of displeasing you, by any presumptuous demonstration of his love. Think what
you please of my judgment in this case, but this it is, that I do not see any
person about Sevil, with whom you might he more advantageously matched than
with him. I must confess, I look on him, rather with a certain indifference
than aversion, says Feliciana, and when I told you, that I could not fancy him,
it was more out of complaisance to you, than any real prejudice I had against
him. Nay if it be so, Sister, replies Dorothea, you are rather to acknowledge,
that you deal not ingenuously with me, and that when you expressed the little
esteem you had for Don Juhan, it was clearly out of your mind, that you had
sometime very highly commended him to me; or I am to conclude, that what you
have said since, betrayed not so much your own dislike of him, as your fear of
his being too well liked by me.

Feliciana blushed at these last words of her Sister, and was vexed to the
heart. Her thoughts were in such a distraction, that she spoke abundance of
things, which rather betrayed her guilt, then contributed ought to her
vindication; so that at last she was forced to confess, that she had a more
than ordinary kindness for Don Juhan. Dororothea encouraged her to continue it,
and promised to assist her all she could in the prosecution of her love. Having
thus brought her to acknowledge what she before but suspected, she took
compassion of her, and forbore all further reproaches.

That very day, Isabella, who had discarded her beloved Guzman, ever since the
unhappy accident that had happened to Don Sancho, received orders from her
Mistress Dorothea, to go to Don Juhan de Peralto, deliver him the key of one of
the garden doors of Don Manuel, to tell him, that she and her Sister would
expect him there, with a charge, that he should not fail to be at the place
appointed, at midnight, before which time, it was likely their Father would be
abed. Isabella, who had been already corrupted by Don Juhan, and done all lay
in her power, to bring him into her Mistress's favor, but to no purpose, was
extremely surpised to see her humor so changed, and not a little glad, to be
the messenger of such good news to a person, of whom, though she had not
brought him any before, she had yet received many great presents. No doubt then
but she made all the haste she could to the lodgings of the amorous Cavalier,
who had received so little encouragement before, that he could hardly have
believed his own good fortune, had it not been for the convincing assurance of
the key, which she delivered him. That key opened a place it was never intended
it should, I mean the breast of the amorous Gallant, who presented his faithful
Sollicitress with a perfumed purse lined with a hundred good yellow pieces,
which glorious sight raised in her as much fatisfaction as she had brought him.

Were there a constant current of good fortune, that is, no vicissitude in
humane affairs, and that what ever were fortunately begun might, without any
rub or disaster, be brought to its period of happiness, there should be much
less work for those who write Romances and Novels, and so the world would be
deprived of a great deal of that pleasure which is derived from endeavors of
that kind. But their delight wholly consisting in a certain conflict, and
interfering of unexpected accidents, it is likely there will be a constant
supply of such things, as long as mortals shall walk on this Molehill, as on a
Chess-board, perpetually contriving how to cross the designs of one another.

Whoever shall seriously consider this grave advertisement, will not think it
strange, that, the very same night, Don Juhan was to come into Don Manuel's
Garden, to meet with the two Sisters, Don Sancho, accompanied by his friend,
the Marquess, should be walking their rounds about Dorothea's Lodgings, to be
more fully satisfied of the designs of his Rival. It was no otherwise, and it
will ever be a maxim, That one man's misfortune makes another man's sport.
About eleven that night, the Marquess and he being gotten into that street,
where Dorothea lived, four men well armed came up and posted themselves close
by them. The jealous Don Sancho presently imagined it was his Rival, whereupon
coming nearer them, he told them that the Post they had taken up, was very
convenient for him, in order to the compassing of a design he was then engaged
in, and so desired them to quit it. We should do it, Sir, replied one of them,
without much entreaty, if the some Post, you are so desirous of, were not
absolu^^ly necessary for the carrying on of a design that we also have, and
will be so soon disp^^ch'd, that it will not much retard the execution of yours.

Don Sancho was as much enraged at this, as if it had been the most uncivil
answer that could have been given upon such an occasion: to draw therefore, and
to charge persons, whom he thought so disobliging, was the same thing with him.
That unexpected assault of Don Sancho's, surprised and put them into disorder,
and the Marquess behaving himself no less gallantly than his Friend had done,
they defended themselves so poorly, that they were in a trice beaten out of the
street. Don Sancho received a slight wound in his arm, and run him who had
given it him so heartily through the body, that it was a good while ere he
could get out his Sword again, and doubted not but he had dispatched him. The
Marquess in the mean time was in pursuit of the others, who ran away as fast as
they could, as soon as they saw their Camerade laid on the ground.

Having rid themselves of those spies, Don Sancho looked about him, and
perceived at one end of the street some people with a Light, coming up toward
them, upon the noise of their engagement. He was afraid it might be the
Magistrate with his Officers, and it was no other. He made all the haste he
could into the street, where they began to fight, and thence into another, in
the midst whereof he met full but with an old Gentleman, who had a Lantern with
him, and had drawn his Sword upon the noise which Don Sancho made by running
toward him. The old Gentleman was Don Manuel, who had been at a Neighbor's
house at play, as he was wont to do every day, and was then going to his own,
by the Garden-door, which was not far from the place where he met Don Sancho.
He called out to the amorous Cavalier, Who goes there? A man, replies Don
Sancho, whom it concerns to make all the haste he can away, and therefore
desires you would not hinder him. It may be, says Don Manuel, there is some
accident happened, which obliges you to seek out for sanctuary; fear nothing,
my House, which is here hard by, may serve your turn. It Is very true, replies
Don Sancho, I am somewhat at a loss how to avoid the pursuit of the Magistrate,
who it may be is now making a search for me; but since you are so generous as
to proffer me, though a Stranger to you, a reception upon so dangerous a score
as this, I accept of your kindness, and entrust you with my safety, with this
promise, never to forget the favor you do me, and to press it no farther, than
till such time as those who look after me are passed by.

They were by this time come to the Garden-door; Don Manuel opened it with a
Key he had about him, and having brought in Don Sancho, he disposed him into a
close Arbor, while he went into the House to take order for his more secret
retirement, so as that none might know of his being there. Don Sancho had not
been long in the Arbor, when he perceives coming toward him a Woman, who
approaching spoke softly to him, O Sir, are you come, my Mistress Dorothea
stays for you. From that word Don Sancho imagined that he might be in the house
of his Mistress, and that the old Gentleman, who had brought him in thither,
was her Father. He presently suspected that Dorothea had appointed his Rival to
meet her there, and followed Isabella, more tormented with jealousy, than
troubled about the pursuit of the Magistrate.

In the mean time Don Juhan came, according to his appointment, precisely at
the hour assigned him, opened the Garden-door with the Key he had received from
Isabella, and went into the same Arbor, out of which Don Sancho was but newly
gone. He had not been there long, ere he perceives a Man coming straight
toward him; he put himself into a posture of defense, for fear he might be
assaulted, and was not a little surprised, when he found that Man to be Don
Manuel, who bid him follow him, assuring him he should be so disposed of, as
that he need not fear being discovered. Don Juhan concluded from Don Manuel's
words, that he might possibly have received into his Garden some Gentleman
pursued by the Officers of Justice. He could do no less than follow him, giving
him thanks all along as they went for the favor he showed him: but it may be
withal conjectured, that he was not so much troubled, at the hazard he was
running into, as the obstruction whereby his amorous design was disappointed.
Don Manuel brought him into his own Chamber, and, having left him there, went
out, and ordered a Bed to be made for himself, in another room.

We will leave him locked up where he is, extremely troubled, yet not daring to
make the least discovery of it, and see, what is become of his Brother Don
Sancho de Sylva. Isabella brought him into a Ground-room, which looked into the
Garden, where the two Sisters Dorothea and Feliciana expected Don Juhan de
Peralto; one, as a Lover, whom she was very desirous to please; the other, to
assure him that she could not have any kindness for him, and to persuade him he
would do better to make his applications to her Sister. Don Sancho enters the
room where the two fair Sisters were; they were frightened at his appearance.
Dorothea stood like a statue, as if she had not been able to stir from the
place; but her Sister fearing she could not continue long in that posture,
disposed her into a Chair, lest she might have fallen down all along. Don
Sancho after he had fixed his Eyes on them, stuck to the place he was in:
Isabella was ready to sink into the ground for fear, and imagined it might be
the Ghost of Don Sancho, that appeared to them, to revenge the injury his
Mistress did him. Feliciana, though much startled to see him risen from the
dead, was yet more troubled at what had happened to her Sister, who being come
to her self, Don Sancho took her by the hand, and made this discourse to her.

Ungrateful Dorothea! if the Report which has been spread of my death did not
in some measure excuse your inconstancy, the affliction I conceive thereat
would not allow me Life enough to make you the deserved reproaches of it. I was
willing the world should be persuaded that I was dead, that I might be
forgotten by my enemies, not by you, who had engaged your self not to love any
other besides me. But how have you broken that promise! I see there needs only
but a common Report of some unfortunate accident, to make a Woman forget all
engagements of fidelity, even to that person, whom, of all the world, she only
pretended to fancy. I might easily be revenged, and make so great noise by my
complaints and expostulations, as should awake your Father, and give him
directions how to find out the favored Gallant, whom you have disposed into
some secret place about his House: but besotted Man that I am! I feel in my
self still a certain fear to displease you, and am more troubled at the
necessity you give me, not to love you any longer, than at the discovery I have
made of your being in love with another. Make much of your dear Lover, O as
false as fair Woman! make much of him I say, and fear no more disturbances in
your enjoyments, for you shall ere long be rid of a Man, who might, while you
lived, have reproached your proving treacherous to him, even while he hazarded
his Life to wait on you.

With these words Don Sancho would have quitted the room: but Dorothea stays
him, and was going to vindicate her self, when Isabella comes running in to
tell her, that her Master, Don Manuel, was coming after her. Don Sancho had
only time enough to get behind the door, and, while the Old man was chiding
his Daughters that they had not been a-bed, and had his back toward the
Chamber Door, made a shift to get out, and going back the same way into the
Garden, went into the same Arbor where he had been before, and were preparing
himself for what ever might happen, he expected a favorable opportunity to
make his escape thence.

There are, no doubt, those, who think Love the pleasantest thing in the world.
But far is it from their imagination, that a Lover's constant courtships and
adorations may at last be requited with contempt, scorns, frowns, and elusions,
which require an extraordinary measure of patience and good nature to endure
them. Little do they apprehend, that a young Spark, after many years continued
addresses, even when he thinks himself as it were within a bars length of
felicity, may, by some unexpected obstructions and disappointments, be tumbled
into eternal disgrace, and all this occasioned, not so much by any backwardness
of his Mistress, as his own unhappy misapprehensions.

These were the reflections of the unfortunate Don Sancho, while Don Manuel was
gone into his Daughter's chamber to fetch a Light, to bring in the Officers who
were imperiously knocking at the Garden-door, upon the information they had
received, that Don Manuel had entertained into his House one of those who had
been fighting in the street. Don Manuel made no difficulty to let them in, to
search his House, out of an assurance they would be so civil as not to look
into his own Chamber, and that the Gentleman whom they expected to find, was
safely locked in there. Don Sancho perceiving out of the Arbor, that it was
impossible for him to escape the search of so many Officers as were scattered
up and down the Garden, comes out to Don Manuel, and whispers him in the ear,
that a person of Honor would be more tender of his promise then to abandon one
whom he had taken into his protection. Don Manuel, who was much surprised to
find him there, entreated the chief Officer, to leave Don Sancho, in his
custody, till the next morning; which request was soon granted him, as well out
of a respect to his quality, as for that the party, whom Don Sancho imagined he
had killed, was not very dangerously wounded.

The Officers, having received somewhat toward a morning's draught, took their
leave, and departed; and Don Manuel, having discovered by the same discourse
which had passed between him and Don Sancho, when he first met him, that he
must needs be the person whom he had received into his Garden, doubted not, but
that the other was some Gallant, brought into the House, either by Isabella, or
his Daughters. To be more fully satisfied of it, he conducted Don Sancho de
Sylva into a room by himself, and desired him to stay there till he returned
again. He went to that place where he had left Don Juhan de Peralto, to whom he
told a feigned story, that his man was come into the House along with the
Officers, and waited below to speak with him. Don Juhan knew that his man lay
very sick at that time, and not in a condition to come to him, though he had
known where he was, which he did not. He was therefore somewhat troubled at
what Don Manuel had said to him, and so he had no other answer to make him,
than that his m^n should go and stay for him at his Lodging.

By this discourse and some others Don Manuel found him to be that young
Gentleman lately come from the Indies, who was so much talked of about Sevil,
and, being sufficiently informed as to his quality and estate, resolved, he
should not go out of the House ere he had married that Daughter of his, to whom
he had ever so little addressed himself. He spent some further time in
discourse with him, to be more fully satisfied as to some doubts, which then
burdened his mind. Isabella stood all the while at the door, and overheard
them, and gave an account of all to her Mistresses. Don Manuel had a glimpse of
her, and imagined she was come with some message to Don Juhan, from one of his
Daughters. He left him, to run after her, just as the Wax-light, which was in
the room, being at an end, went out of it self. While the Old man is groping to
find out Isabella, she acquaints Dorothea and Feliciana, that Don Sancho was in
their Father's chamber, and that she had seen them talking together. The two
Sisters ran thither upon her word, Dorothea being not afraid to find her dear
Don Sancho with her Father, resolved, as she was, to acknowledge, that she
loved him, and that she had been loved by him, and withal to tell him, upon
what motives she had appointed Don Juhan to come thither that night. She
therefore goes into the room, which was without any light, and having met with
Don Juhan, just as he was coming out, she took him for Don Sancho, and having
him fast by the arm, she thus expostulated with him. Why do thou avoid me,
tygre-hearted Don Sancho! and why would thou not what answer I should make to
the undeserved reproaches thou have made me! I must confess, thou could not
bethink thy self of any too great for me, if I were as guilty as thou have some
grounds to imagine: but thou art not to learn, that there are some false
things, which have many times more likelihood of truth than truth it self, and
that this latter is ever discovered by time. Allow me but so much, as may show
thee that which will recover thee out of the confusion, in which thy own
misfortune, and mine, and happily that of diverse others, has involved us both.
Assist me to vindicate my self, and run not the hazard of being unjust, by an
over-hastiness to condemn me, before thou have found me really guilty. It Is
possible thou may have heard, that a certain Gentleman loves me; but have
thou heard that I made any return to his love? Thou may have met him here;
for it is true, that his coming hither was by my appointment; but when thou
shall understand what design I had in it, I am confident thou will have a cruel
remorse, that thou should injure me, while I give the greatest assurance of
fidelity I could. O that this importunate and troublesome Servant of mine were
here before thee! thou should find by the treatment I gave him, whether he
ever had any ground to affirm, that I loved him, nay, whether he could ever so
much as tell me that he loved me, or that I ever vouchsafed even the reading of
any Letter that came from him. But that misfortune of mine, which always
procured me the sight of him, when it should prejudice me, will not permit me
to see him, when he might help to undeceive thee.

Don Juhan had the patience to suffer Dorothea to speak, without offering to
interrupt her, that he might learn somewhat more than she had yet discovered to
him. But perceiving she had given over, and expected some return from him, he
was going to give her a sharp answer, when Don Sancho, who was looking for the
way into the Garden, and heard Dorothea speaking to Don Juhan, comes up close
to her, making the least noise he could, yet not so as but that he was
perceived by Don Juhan and the two Sisters. They had not the time to speak one
to another, ere Don Manuel comes into the room with a Light, which some of his
Servants carried before him. The two Rival-Brothers looked one on the other,
and were observed to be in a posture ready to fall one upon the other, as
having their hands on the hilts of their Swords. Don Manuel steps in between
them, and commanded his Daughter to make choice of one of them for her Husband,
that he might fight with the other. Don Juhan told him, that for his part he
was ready to quit all manner of pretensions, if he might have any, and
submitted himself to the Cavalier he saw before him. Don Sancho said the same
thing, with this addition, that since Don Juhan had been brought into Don
Manuel's house by one of his Daughters, it was probable they had a mutual
affection one for the other, and that for his part, he would rather dye a
thousand times, than enter into the state of Matrimony with the least scruple.
Dorothea cast her self at her Father's feet, beseeching him to give her
audience, and he should know how all things stood. She related to him all that
past between her and Don Sancho de Sylva, before he had, in her quarrel, killed
Don Diego. She acquainted him that Don Juhan de Peralto fell afterward in love
with her; as also with the design she had engaged her self in, to undeceive
him, and to advise him to demand her Sister in marriage, and at last concluded
her discourse with this protestation, that if she could not satisfy Don Sancho
her innocence, and the continuance of her affection to him, she would that very
day enter into a Monastery, whence no persuasions in the world should ever get
her out again.

Don Sancho was soon satisfied with the account Dorothea had given of her
fidelity toward him, and immediately demanded her in marriage of Don Manuel.
By some passages of her discourse concerning Don Juhan, particularly by the
time of his first appearance at Sevil, the place whence he came in the Indies,
and the Relations he had there, the two Rival-Brothers came to know one the
other. Don Juhan finding also by some circumstances of Dorothea's discourse,
the affection which her Sister Feliciana had for him, humbly addressed himself
to her, assuring her that if she still persisted in the same sentiments, he
should think himself the happiest man in the world. He thereupon demanded her
in marriage of Don Manuel, who received them both for his Sons-in-law, with a
satisfaction that cannot well be expressed.

As soon as it was day, Don Sancho sent for the Marquess Fabiano, who came to
participate of his friend's joy, after he had spent the night in distracted
thoughts what should have become of him. The whole business was kept secret,
till Don Manuel and the Marquess had disposed a Cousin of Don Diego, to whom
his Estate, upon the other's Death, had fallen, to forget his Kinsman's
misfortune, and accommodate himself with Don Sancho. During this negotiation,
the Marquess fell in love with a Sister of that Gentleman's, and demanded her
of him in marriage. He gladly entertained a proposal so advantageous to his
Sister, and thereupon was content to accept of any thing they could offer on
the behalf of Don Sancho. The three marriages were solemnized the same day,
with so great content of all parties, as was not only remarkable at that time,
but continued many years after.

SCARRON's NOVELS.
The Invisible Mistress.
The Sixth Novel.
DON Carlos of Arragon was a young Gentleman of an illustrious Family, well
known in Spain under that name; his person such, that a curious eye might have
observed somewhat in him transcending all descriptions of the most elaborate
Romances, yet not comparable to the noble accomplishments of his mind. But what
comes more particular to the character we have to give of him, is, that, at
certain Shows, wherewith the Viceroy of Naples entertained the populace, upon
accasion of the Nuptial solemnities of Philip, the second, third, or fourth, of
Spain, (I cannot now well call to mind) he did things beyond their belief, who
only received them by relation. The next day after a famous Tilting, at which
he had behaved himself with such gallantry, as raised no less astonishment in
the beholders, than indignation and shame in those who ventured at a trial of
their address in the same exercise, the Ladies obtained a permission of the
Viceroy, to go about the City disguised, and masked after the French mode, for
the convenience of such Strangers as those magnificencies had brought thither
from all parts of the Kingdom. That day, Don Carlos put on the richest clothes
he had, and went, among many others, who, as so many Cockatrices, intended to
murder all the Ladies they looked on, to a Church, where most of the Gallantry
were to meet. Where be it observed by the way, that Christian Churches may be
profaned, as well in those Countries which profess most obedience to the holy
See, as in others, and in stead of being used as the Temples of God, become a
Rendezvous for those who have not the opportunities so well to meet elsewhere.
The only remedy I can at present think of to prevent this scandal, is, that
there be a new Officer created in every Parish, whose charge it shall be, to
mark what persons come to those Sacred places upon Love-appointments, and if
they will not depart the place by fair means, to drive them thence with as
little regard, as they would do those snarling creatures, which many times
stick not to quarrel there, to the great distraction of people's devotion.

But some busie-body will happily be so impertinent as to ask, why I should
trouble my head with these abuses, as if I were some Master of a Parish, or
Lay-Elder, that had a Maid who should exercise his dog at home? I would have
the fool that is scandalized at it, know, that in this lower part of the world,
all men are fools, as well as liars, some more, some less, and perhaps I who
now speak a greater fool than any, though it might abate somewhat of my folly,
that I am so free to acknowledge it, and withal that this Book of mine, and all
others of this kind, being but so many collections of fooleries, I hope, every
fool in his quality and degree, will some-where or other light upon a little
description of himself, if he be not too much besotted with self-conceit.

But let the Reader take it as he will. Let me go on with my story. Don Carlos,
as I told you, was gotten into a Church, with diverse other Gentlemen, Italians
and Spaniards, who were strutting up and down in their feathers, like so many
Peacocks, and making reverences to more persons than they were known to, (a
vanity practiced sometimes in Churches as well as Hide-Parks) when three
Ladies, all close masked, singl'd him out from among the rest, and having led
him a little aside, one of them addressed her self to him either in these
words, or others to the same effect.

Signor Don Carlos, said she to him, I have a business to impart to you,
whereof perhaps you little thought either before or at your devotions, which
is, that there is in this City a Lady to whom you are extremely obliged. She
was present at the Tilting, and all those other exercises, wherein you have
lately been engaged, and always wished you might come off with honor, as you
have done. She is not so vain to think your success wholly the effect of her
wishes, but leaves it to your self to consider, what degree of kindness you
will allow her good wishes, and what a Lady's concerning her self so
particularly in your good fortune may signify; if it were expressed in other
terms.

The young Gallant was a little surpised at the strangeness of the adventure;
but having recovered himself, he made this Reply. The greatest advantage I can
make to my self of what you tell me, Madam, is, that I receive it from you, who
seem to be a Lady of quality, and I am to assure you, that could I have
imagined any Lady had had such tender wishes for me, I should have endeavored
to do more than I have done to deserve her approbation. And therefore, I am to
account the obligation she has put on me the greater, in that it proceeds from
a person, to whom I have not the honor to be known.

The disguised Lady told him, that he had not omitted any thing which might
render him, even in the judgment of persons less prejudiced by kindness than
that Lady, one of the most accomplished men in the world. But another thing she
had taken particular notice of, was, that it might be presumed, by his Liveries
of black and white, his affection was not any where engaged. I never
understood, Madam, replies Don Carlos, what colors signified in such a case;
but this I know, that it is not so much out of any insensibility, or
indifference I have toward your fairer sex, that I have not made my addresses
to any one of it, as an apprehension of my own want of merit.

There passed abundance of other ingenuous complements between them, for their
discourse continued a long time; but I shall forbear the communication of them,
not only because they never came to my knowledge, and that I am loath to make
others out of a fear it might be to the disadvantage of Don Carlos and the
unknown Lady, who were infinitely more witty than I am, as I have been since
informed by an honest Gentleman of Naples, who was intimately acquainted with
them both. The result was this, that the masked Lady declared her self thus far
to Don Carlos, that she her self was the person who had that inclination for
him. He desired to see her; She desired him to excuse her for the present,
telling him she would endeavor to satisfy him some other time, and to assure
him that she was not afraid to give him a meeting, at which there should be
none but themselves, she would give him a pledge. With that she discovered to
the gentile Spaniard, the fairest hand he had ever seen, and presented him with
a Ring, which he made no difficulty to receive, but with such distracted
reflections on the odness of the accident, that he had almost forgotten to make
her a congey, when she took leave of him.

The other Gentlemen, who had, at a distance, observed what had passed between
Don Carlos and the Lady, though not overheard their discourse, seeing they
were parted, came up to him, very desirous to know what might occasion so long
a converse in so public a place. He freely told them what had happened, and
showed them the Ring, wherein was a Diamond of very great price. Whereupon
every one passed his judgment on the adventure, and the result of the whole
debate was, that Don Carlos found himself seized by as violent a passion for
the unknown Lady, as if he had seen her face, such an inevitable influence has
Wit over those that have any. Eight tedious days, and those attended by ten
times more tedious nights, passed away ere he heard any further account of the
Lady; which that he was extremely troubled at, I should easily have believed,
though I had never been told so much.

During that time, his divertisement was to go every day to an acquaintance of
his, a Captain of Foot, at whose house several persons of quality met to spend
some few hours and pieces at play. One night, that Don Carlos was not in an
humor to venture any thing, but was going home much sooner than he was wont,
he was called by his name, from a ground-room belonging to a house, which
seemed to be some persons of great quality. He comes up close to the window,
which had a grate before it, and presently sound by her voice, that she was his
invisible Mistress, who presently said to him; Come as near as you can to the
window, Don Carlos, I have been here a good while expecting you, that we may
decide a difference there is between us. I have some apprehension of your
impatience, and must permit you to expostulate, though you have not so great
reason to complain, as you imagine to your self. What construction, Madam,
replies Don Carlos, can I make of all these bravadoes of yours, when in the
mean time you dare not trust me with the sight of your face, nay, after my so
long expectation, think it a signal favor to me, to make your appearance at a
grated window, and that in the night. No more of your censures, Don Carlos,
says she him, be satisfied, that I think it not yet time we should be fully
known one to another, and imagine it not want of any confidence in me, that I
have been so backward to meet you, but impute it to a curiosity I had to know
you, before I suffered you to see me. I need not tell you, that in appointed
combats there should be an equality of arms: if your heart should not be as
free and dis-engag'd as mine, the advantage would be of your side; and thence
it came, that I was desirous to be informed concerning you. And what account
have you received of me, says Don Carlos? The world, Madam, is full of flattery
and calumny, it concerns you to examine well the credit of your ininformation.
But may you communicate what you have found out by an enquiry which has been
so long a making as it is since I had the honor first to meet you? I have as
much as I am satisfied with, replies the disguised Lady, and it is only this,
that we are free enough to become one another's. No, Madam, says Don Carlos,
there is a great inequality in the case; for you see me, and know who I am, nay
you acknowledge your self, that you have particularly inquired of me, whereas I
never saw you, nor know who you are, nor where to be informed. What judgment do
you conceive I should make of this shiness, and the earnest care you take to
keep your self from my knowledge. These mysterious proceedings are seldom used
by those, whose designs are just and generous; and it is no hard matter to
deceive a person who mistrusts no treachery; but he is not so easily deceived
twice. If you think to make use of me, to raise a jealousy in some other, give
me leave to tell you beforehand, that you will not find me for your purpose,
and that I am not to be drawn into any other plot than that of being your most
humble and most faithful Servant.

The invisible Lady suffered him to go on in his discourse, out of an
expectation, that, among the many things he said, he might let fall somewhat,
which might contribute to the further discovery she was desirous to make of
him. But at last finding nothing to fasten on but his distrust of her, she made
him this Reply; Well, Don Carlos, have you been sufficiently censorious, or am
I yet to tell you, that your assurance of my sincerity, must be the issue of
your own belief of it, and that your hastiness will rather retard than hasten
the accomplishment of your desires. Assure your self therefore, without any
further reflections on the grounds you have to suspect me, that I am very real
and sincere, and that you shall find me no less in all that shall happen
between us, and I expect you should be the like to me. That were but just,
replies Don Carlos, but it were requisite I should see you, and know who you
are. It shall not be long ere you do, replies the Lady, and therefore, in the
mean time, receive this Antidote against impatience, that only by the trial I
shall make of your constancy, you may attain what you pretend to from me, who
now assure you, (to the end your courtship may not be without some
encouragement and hope of requital) that I am equal to you as to Quality; that
I have an Estate plentiful enough to maintain you in as much splendor as the
greatest Prince in the Kingdom; that I am young; that I may challenge somewhat
of beauty; and for matter of wit, you are better stored your self, then to be
doubtful whether I have any or not.

With these words she shut to the window, leaving Don Carlos with his mouth
open, ready to make her some Answer, so surpised at the smartness of her
expressions, so passionately in love with a person he had never seen, and so
distracted at the strangeness of the procedure, that, not able to stir from the
place, he stood still for a good quarter of an hour, making several reflections
on so extraordinary an adventure. He knew there were many Princesses and Ladies
of great quality then at Naples; but he knew withal, that there were many
subtle Curtezans, eagerly bent to trapan Strangers, greet cajollers of such as
were ignorant of their impostures, and so much the more dangerous, by how much
they were the more beautiful.

Having recovered his astonishment, he went very disconsolately to his lodging,
but resolved to prosecute the design wherein he was engaged, with all the
caution he could, out of a fear it might prove a cheat put upon him. I shall
not tell you exactly whether he supped, or not, nor yet whether, in case he
went to bed supperless, he slept, or not, and yet there might be much
probability of the latter. These considerable circumstances of a Hero's life, I
seldom trouble my self or my Reader with, though it be very much practiced by
the Authors of much greater Romances, than the world is ever like to have from
me. For those Gentlemen give such a punctual account of all their Hero's do,
and regulate their employments according to the several parts of the day,
appointing them to do such a thing first, and then some other, as if they were
shut up in some place of spiritual Retreat. For example, they must rise betimes
in the morning, and having met with somebody, though they had never seen the
party before, entertain him or her, with the History of their adventures, till
they be called in to dinner: dine very lightly, and, as soon as they have
dined, retire into some arbor, to proceed in the continuation of it, or spend
the afternoon in reading some Romance; whenever they drink, take as many
go-downs as there are letters in their Mistress's names, in commemoration of
them; and if the clock strikes, make so many ejaculations for the good success
of their Loves. If the weather be inviting to go abroad, they are led into some
Grove, where they are to acquaint the Trees and Stones with their misfortunes,
till their supper-time calls them home, at which having, instead of eating,
spent the time in sighs and reveries, go and build Castles in the air upon
some Turret, that looks toward the Sea, while some Squire or Servant discovers
that his Master is such a one, the Son of such a King, and that there is not a
better natured Prince in the world; and though he be then one of the handsomest
men in the world, that he was quite another person, before Love had disfigured
him. And thus they make those whom they would represent for exemplars of all
the great and heroic Virtues, in many things no better than so many
Extravagant Shepherds and Don Quixots.

But to return to my Story. Don Carlos came the night following to the same
post, where he found his invisible Mistress ready to entertain him. She asked
him whether he had not been much troubled at the former converse they had
together, and whether it were not true, that he had entertained some distrust
of what she had told him. Don Carlos, without answering her question, entreated
her to satisfy him, what danger or inconvenience there might be, in
discovering her self, since things were upon eaven terms on both sides, and
that they proposed to themselves no other ends in their gallantries, than such
as might be approved by all. In that lies the whole danger of it, says the
invisible Lady, as you shall find in time; be you therefore assured, that I am
real, and, in the relation I gave you of my self, I have been so modest, that,
without injury to truth, I might have told you much more. Their discourse
lasted a long time. They made some advance in the mutual love they had raised
in one another, and at last parted, after a reciprocal promise to meet there
every night, at the time they had agreed on.

The next day, there was to be an extraordinary Ball at the Viceroy's Palace.
Don Carlos was in hopes to make a discovery there of the person, who would be
invisible to him in all other places. In the mean time he made enquiry, whose
house that was, where he had received such favorable audiences. He was told by
the neighbors, that there lived in it an ancient Lady, the Relict of a certain
Spanish Captain, that she lived very private, and had neither Daughters nor
Nieces. He knocked at the door, and desired to see the old Lady; answer was
brought him, that since the death of her Husband, she admitted no visits from
any person whatsoever; which added not a little to the disturbance of his
thoughts.

Don Carlos went at night to the Viceroy's, where you may imagine there was a
noble Assembly of Gallants. He very exactly observed all the Ladies, to find
out her whom he so much desired to know. He fell into discourse with those he
met; but without any satisfaction. At last he singl'd out the Daughter of a
certain Marquess, where his Title lay I know not, nor care much, especially now
we are come to an age wherein people are too forward to assume Titles of Honor
to themselves. The Lady was young and beautiful enough, and her voice came
somewhat near hers whom he looked for: but after much observation, he found
such a distance between her intellectu^ls and those of his invisible Deity,
that it r^pented him he had in so short a time made such a progress in his
courtship to that Beauty, as whence he might presume that she had a more than
ceremonious kindness for him. They danced together several times, and the Ball
being done, little to the satisfaction of Don Carlos, he took leave of his
Captive, whom he left highly conceited of her self, that she alone, in so noble
an Assembly, had received the gallantries of a Cavalier, who was no less
esteemed by all the women, than envied by all the men.

From the Viceroy's, he immediately went to his lodging, and thence, having
taken such arms as he thought requisite, to the fatal Grate, which was not far
from it. The Lady, who was already got to her post, asked him what news he
brought from the Ball, though she had been there her self. He ingenuously told
her, that he had danced several times with a very beautiful person, and had
entertained her with discourse as long as the Ball lasted. This confession gave
her occasion to put diverse questions to him, whereby he might easily have
perceived that she was jealous. Don Carlos on the other side discovered the
trouble of his mind, that she had not been at the Ball, and that it gave him
some cause to mistrust her quality. She soon observed what he would have been
at, and to prevent the disturbance such a doubt might raise in him, she used
all the wit and Rhetoric she had, and showed him all the kindness could be
expected between two persons separated by an iron-grate, which concluded with a
promise, that she would be visible within a very short time. They thereupon
took leave one of the other, he very doubtful whether he should believe her,
and she a little jealous of the beautiful Lady, whom he had entertained all the
time of the Ball.

The next day, Don Carlos going into a Church, to hear Mass, and meeting just
at the door with two Ladies masked, presented them with holy water, to sp^re
them the trouble of taking it themselves. The better clad of the two told him,
that in requital of that civility she had somewhat to acquaint him with,
wherein he might be highly concerned. If you are not too much in haste, Madam,
says Don Carlos to her, you may immediately ease your self of what you have to
tell me. Follow me then into the next Chapel, replies the unknown Lady. She
went in first, and Don Carlos followed her, much in doubt whether she were his
Mistress, (though he was satisfied she was about the same stature) in regard he
found some difference in their voices, this Lady speaking somewhat faster than
the other.

Having shut themselves into the Chapel, she made him this discourse. Signor
Don Carlos, said she, the whole City of Naples is full of wonder, at the great
reputation you have acquired, since the small time of your residence in it, and
you are looked upon, by all, as the most accomplished person in the world,
Only this occasions a general astonishment, that, being what you are, you
should not have observed, there are in this City several Ladies of great
quality and worth, who have a particular esteem and kindness for you. They have
expressed so much, as far as modesty and the reserv'dness of their sex would
permit, and though they earnestly wish you assured of it, yet would they rather
it might be said, you regarded it not out of a certain insensibility, than
dissembled your inadvertency, out of indifference. There is, among others, one,
of my acquaintance, who, not regarding what may be said of such a discovery,
gives you this eminent assurance of the esteem she has for you, as to give you
notice, That your midnight adventures are observed; that you indiscreetly
engage your affection to what you have no knowledge of, and since the person
you court as a Mistress will not vouchsafe you a sight of her, that it is
either out of a fear she is not amiable enough to gain your love, or ashamed of
her own. I doubt not but the object of your contemplative love is some Lady of
high quality, and transcendent wit, and that you imagine to your self a
Mistress who is, such, of all the excellencies her sex is capable of, and
consequently deserving the adoration of such a person as you are; But Signor
Don Carlos, let me give you this advice, not to trust your imagination, to the
prejudice of your judgment, but rather mistrust a person, who disguises her
self, and avoid all further engagement in these nocturnal conversations. To
deal freely with you, it is I who am jealous of this fantasm of yours, troubled
you should speak of her, and, since I have expressed my self thus far, am
resolved to quash her designs, and defeat all her projects, so as to deprive
her of a victory which I may justly dispute with her; since I am not inferior
to her, either as to beauty, fortune, or quality, or indeed any thing that may
render a woman amiable. Farewell, I leave you to make your advantage of the
good counsel I have given you, which, if you are wise, I doubt not but you will.

With these last words she went out of the Chapel, not staying for the Answer,
which Don Carlos was ready to make her. He would have followed her, but he
found at the Church-door a person of quality, who presently fell into
discourse, with her, and continued it so long, that he grew weary of staying to
see her dis-engag'd. All the remainder of the day, his thoughts were wholly
taken up with this adventure, and he suspected, at first, that the Gentlewoman
he had met with at the Ball, might be the last masked Lady, that had appeared
to him: but considering with himself, that she seemed to be much more
ingenuous, than the other had discovered her self, he was at a loss what to
think of it, and began to wish he had not engaged himself so far to his obscure
Mistress, that he might have addressed his devotions to her whom he had last
parted with. But at last, reflecting that she was no more known to him than his
former invisible Lady, whose wit had charmed him in the conversation he had had
with her, he resolved what course he should take, and little regarded the
menaces which had been made him, as being a person not to be frightened with
great words.

In pursuance of this resolution, he went that very night to his iron-grate at
the hour appointed. The two Lovers spent their time, much after the same rate
as they had at their former meetings. But being come near the height of their
amorous discourse, it was unexpectedly interrupted by a strange accident. Don
Carlos was of a sudden surpised by four men in vizards, who having disarmed
him, carried him away by main force into a Coach, which waited at the lower end
of the street. I leave the Reader to imagine how heartily he railed on them,
and the reproaches he made them, that they had taken him so much at their
advantage. Nay, he tried what fair words and promises might do; but instead of
prevailing ought upon them, it only obliged them to look more narrowly to him,
and deprive him of all hope to help himself either by his strength or courage.

In the mean time, the Coach went forward as fast as four good Horses could
draw it, and about an hour after they had left the City, he was brought into a
magnificent Palace, the great Gate whereof stood open, as if it had been
purposely for his reception. The four disguised persons received Don Carlos out
of the Coach, holding him fast under the arms, as if he had been some
Ambassador conducted to the Grand Signor, or the King of Persia. He was
brought up the first Story with the same ceremony, and there, two Gentlewomen
masked received him, at the entrance of a spacious Hall, having each of them
Torches in their hands. The disguised men took leave of him, and withdrew,
after they had made him a most low congey. It Is very probable, they left him
neither Sword nor Pistol, nor that he returned them any thanks for the care
they had of him, and their trouble to bring him thither. Not but that he was a
person of as much civility as any man in the world, but one surprised may well
be pardoned the backwardness of expressing it so much as another.

I shall not tell you whether those great Waxlights which the Gentlewoman held,
were in Silver Candlesticks, but this I am sure of, that they were carved and
embossed work, and the Hall was one of the most sumptuous in the world, and, if
you please, the furniture of it, without disparagement, comparable to some
Appartments of our late Romances, as for example Zelmana's Ship in Polexander,
Ibrahim's Palace in the Illustrious Bassa; or the Room, in which the King of
Assyria entertained Mandana, in the Grand Cyrus, which, not to disparage those
other I named, is, one of the most magnificently furnished Books of any in the
world. Imagine then how much our cajoll'd Lover was astonished to find himself
in so sumptuous an appartment, attended only by two Gentlewomen masked, who
spoke not at all, and conducted him thence into another room, more nobly
furnished than the Hall, where they left him all alone. Had he been of the
humor of Don Quixote, he would have been transported into some extravagance
befitting so great an Adventurer, and he would have conceited himself at least
Esplandian or Amadis; but our grave Spaniard was no more troubled at it, than
if he had been in some Inn, or Country House of his own. True it is, he was
much troubled for his Invisible Mistress, and having his thoughts continually
fixed on her, he thought that room sadder than any Prison, which is never
accounted handsome, but on the outside. He was confident they intended him no
hurt who had Lodged him so nobly, and wanted not much of being satisfied, that
the Lady, who had spoken to him the day before in the Church, was the
Sorceress, who had wrought all these enchantments. He admis'd in himself the
fantastic humors of Women; and with what expedition they execute what they
have once resolved; and thereupon he concluded it his best course patiently to
expect the period of the adventure, and to continue faithful to his Mistress at
the Grate, what promises or menaces whatsoever might be made to him.

Some time after, certain Officers belonging to the House, all in Vizards, but
very richly clad, came in to lay the cloth, which done, Supper was brought up.
All was very magnificent; Music and Perfumes were not wanting, and our Don
Carlos, besides the senses of Smelling, and Hearing, satisfied also that of the
Taste, much beyond what I should have imagined, the condition he was in
considered; my meaning is, that he made a good Supper, for, as I told you, he
could not live on the airy entertainments of sighs, and amorous imaginations. I
forgot to tell you, that I think he washed his mouth before he sat down, for I
have heard, that he had an extraordinary care of his teeth. The Music
continued playing a good while after Supper, and all having left him, Don
Carlos walked up and down the room a good while, ruminating on all these
enchantments, or somewhat else, it m^tters not much. At last two Gentlewomen
masked, and a little Dwarf of a Page masked also, after they had laid a rich
cloth on a Side-table, came to help him off with his clothes, without any
previous question, whether he had any mind to go to Bed or not. He suffered
them to do what they pleased; the Gentlewomen ordered his Bed, and marched
away; the Page helped him off with his boots or shoes, and afterward with his
clothes. Don Carlos got into Bed, and all this was done with as strict an
observation of silence of all sides, as if he had been in some Monastery of
Carthusians. He rested well enough for an amorous person; the Birds of an
adjoining aviary awaked him at the break of Day; the masked Dwarf was ready to
wait on him, and brought him the finest Linen, the whitest, and best perfumed
that he had ever seen.

'Twere too hard a task to give an account how he passed away the time from
Morning till Noon, let those who feel the gripings of a passionate love imagine
it, as for other people, it matters not what they think. The silence, which had
hitherto been exactly observed of all sides, was broken at last, by another
masked Gentlewoman, who came to ask him, whether he would be pleased to see the
Princess of that enchanted Palace. He told her, it was his desire, and that she
should be very welcome. Not long after, she comes into the room, attended by
four Gentlewomen very richly clad, and with that luster and attraction, as if
the Graces had bestowed the whole morning in dressing her. Never had our
Spaniard seen a greater conjunction of Love and Majesty in one countenance,
than he now saw in that of this unmasked Urganda. He was so ravished and
astonished together, that all the Congees he made, and the several postures he
put himself into, while he led her by the hand into an adjoining room, were
little better than so many stumblings. What he had thought so sumptuous in the
Hall, and the other room, whereof I told you before, were nothing in comparison
of what he found in this, and yet as magnificent as all things were, they
received some addition of luster from the masked Lady, who honored the place
with her divine presence. They sat down on a sumptuous Couch, the most
sumptuous that had ever been made, since the first invention of Couches. Having
viewed him a while, to see how he kept his countenance, she at last spoke to
him, with a Voice as sweet as a Virginal, discovering her mind in a discourse,
not much different from that I am now going to give you.

I doubt not, Signor Don Carlos, says she to him, of your being surprised, at
what has happened to you in my House since your coming into it last night; but
if it have not had that effect on you which I imagine to my self, I have
however the satisfaction of assuring you that I am no worse than my promise,
and convincing you, by what I have already done, what I am further able to do.
It Is possible, my Rival, your Invisible Mistress, may, by her artifices, and
the good fortune of having engaged you first, be absolutely possessed of that
place in your heart, which I am to dispute with her: but she is no Woman that
will be put off with one denial, and if my fortunes, which are not to be
slighted, and all may be had with me be too weak a motive to induce you to love
me, I shall yet have this self-content, that I have chosen rather to run the
hazard of being slighted for my imperfection, than obscure my self out of
subtilty or shame.

With those words she took off her mask, and gave Don Carlos a full discovery
of Heaven, or, if you please, a small draught of it, the loveliest Head in the
world, sustein'd by a Body of the noblest-stature he had ever admired, in a
word, both together making up a person wholly divine. By the fresh complexion
of her countenance, a Man would have guessed her not to exceed sixteen years of
age; but a certain mixture, of majesty and gallantry in the air of it, such as
young persons are not arrived to, gave a greater assurance of her being four
years elder.

Don Carlos stood mute a while, as being unresolved what answer he should make
her, not a little incensed against his invisible Lady, who hindered him from
making an absolute disposal of himself to the most beautiful person he had ever
seen, and at a perfect loss, both as to what he should say, or what he should
do. At last, after an interior conflict, which lasted long enough to raise
some doubts in the Lady of the enchanted Palace, he took a firm resolution, to
make her a clear discovery of his soul, and it proved (such is commonly the
reward of sincerity) one of the noblest and most advantageous actions he ever
did. But you expect his answer. Many persons, who have heard of it, have been
of opinion he might have done better, and declared his mind a little more
smartly, when he had once resolved which game he would be at. But I am only
his Secretary, and think my self concerned in point of conscience, to lay down
the very words he delivered, which were these, as near as I can remember. I
must acknowledge, Madam, said he, that it would have been too great a happiness
to please such a person as you are, could I have been but so happy as that I
might have loved you. I am sufficiently sensible, that I refuse the most
beautiful person in the world, to court another who possibly may be such only
in my imagination. But, Madam, would you think me worthy your affection, if you
thought me capable of an unfaithfulness, toward a person, whom I had promised
constancy? And is it consistent mith my constancy that I should address my
affection to you? But why do I say mine, when I have not had any to dispose,
since the engagement of fidelity I made to that Mistress, who is yet pleased to
be invisible to me? You are therefore, Madam, not so much to blame me, as
bewail my misfortune; or rather let us jointly bemoan our selves, you, because
you cannot obtain your desires, and I, that I cannot see what I love.

He delivered this with so sad an accent, that the Lady might easily observe he
made a sincere discovery of his thoughts. She omitted nothing which she
conceived might persuade him, to fall off from his former love; he was deaf to
all, her entreaties, nay was little moved at her tears, though the greatest
Rhetoric a Woman can use. She renewed the charge several times; he as
obstinately kept his ground. At last she fell to bitter railings and
reproaches, and having vented on him all the injurious expressions, that could
proceed from exasperated rage, and that a woman's, she left him, not so much to
consider what he had to do, as to curse his misfortune. A Gentlewoman came in a
while after, to tell him, that, if he pleased, he might take a turn or two in
the Garden. He went, not meeting with any body in his way, till he came to the
bottom of the stairs, where he found ten men with vizards on, who waited at the
door, armed with Partisans and Carbines. As he passed through the Court, to go
toward the Garden, which was in all things answerable to the Palace, one of
those men, who stood Centrie at the gate, comes up to him, and whispers him in
the ear (as if he had been much afraid to be overheard) That he had received
from an ancient Gentleman a Letter directed to him, and that he had promised
the delivery of it into his own hands, though it might hazard his life, if it
were discovered: but a present of twenty pieces, and a promise of a like sum
afterward, had prevailed with him to venture the doing of that dangerous
kindness. Don Carlos promised secrecy, and made all the haste he could into
the Garden to read what he had received from him.

THE LETTER.
Signor Don Carlos,
YOu may easily imagine what trouble I have been in, ever since I lost you, by
that you are in your self, if so your love be as violent as mine. My affliction
was not capable of any abatement, till I had discovered the place where you
are, and that is the only comfort I have. The Lady, who contrived your surprise
and carrying away, from the place where we thought our selves secure from such
ambushes, is the Princess Porcia. To satisfy her own humor, she slights all
other considerations, and you are not the first Reynaldo that has fallen into
the hands of that dangerous Armida. But I shall break all her enchantments, and
it shall not be long ere I force you, out of her embraces, into my own, a
happiness you will deserve, if you are as constant as I wish you should be, to

Your invisible Mistress.




Don Carlos was ravished to receive this account of his Lady, for whom he had a
real and violent affection. He kissed the Letter till he grew weary of that
divertisement, and returned to the gate, to find out him from whom he had
received it, and to require his kindness with a rich Diamond-ring, off his
finger. He walked a good while longer in the Garden, wondering extremely at the
strange humor of that Princess Porcia, of whom he had heard much, as of a
young Lady of a very great fortune, and descended of one of the noblest Houses
in the Kingdom; and being a person of great virtue, he conceived such an
aversion for her, that he resolved, though with the hazard of his life, to do
all he could to get out of that restraint wherein she kept him.

As he was coming out of the Garden, he met with a young Gentlewoman, unmasked
(for upon the Lady's discovery of her self, orders were given there should be
no more masks seen about the Palace) who asked him, whether he would be pleased
to admit of her Lady's company, to dine with him that day. I leave you to
judge, whether he returned, She should be welcome, or With all his heart, or,
That it was an honor he could not have aspired to. Soon after, dinner was
brought in; the Princess appeared fairer than the Day, and her conversation
took the amorous Spaniard so highly, that it bred in him a secret trouble to
see, in a person of so great quality, such excellent endowments so strangely
misemploi'd. He endeavored all he could to put himself into a pleasant humor,
though his thoughts were continually fixed on his unknown Mistress, whom he was
impatiently desirous to meet with once more at the grate.

As soon as they had taken away, and all the attendants had quitted the room,
the Lady assaulted his constancy one more, in these words. I know not, Signor
Don Carlos, said she, whether I may, from the cheerfulness, which methinks I
have observed in your countenance, derive any hope of some change in your mind,
or presume that my face and carriage, have at least raised in you a
doubtfulness, whether the invisible Beauty, you so much dote on, be more
capable to force your love than I am. I have not disguised what I would have
bestowed on you, because I was not willing you should repent your having
received it; and though a person accustomed to receive Petitions, may easily be
offended at a denial, yet I shall forget all resentment of that which I have
received from you, on condition you repair it, by your future compliance, in
giving me what I conceive my self more worthy of than the invisible and
inaccessible object of your adorations. Let me therefore know your final
resolution, that if it prove not to my advantage, I may endeavor to find a
counter-battery of reasons, strong enough to beat down those which I think I
have had to love you, that I may no longer pursue a vain hope, which will
deceive me at last.

Don Carlos paused a while, to see whether she would have gone on with the
discourse, but perceiving she had given over, and that, with her eyes fastened
on the ground, she expected the sentence he was to pronounce, he persisted in
the resolution he had taken to deal freely with her, and put her out of all
hope that he could ever be her Servant, and so made her this cold and
comfortless Answer. Madam, before I satisfy you, as to what you are so
desirous to know, I am to beg a real discovery of your sentiments concerning
what I shall propose to you, with the same freedom and sincerity, as you
expect I should observe toward you. If your self had obliged a person to offer
up his affections to you, and by all the endearing favors, which a Lady may
grant, without injury or prejudice to her virtue, you had engaged this person
to swear and vow an inviolable constancy to you, would you not account him the
basest and unworthiest of men, if he should not perform the promise he had made
you? And should not I be this very base and and unworthie person, if, though
to obtain one so infinitely deserving as you are, I should forsake a woman,
who has some grounds to presume that I love her?

He would have proceeded with this and other formal arguments, to satisfy her,
but she gave him not the time. I have enough, said she, I perceive what your
Answer will amount to, and cannot forbear admiring your constancy, though it
be so much contrary to my satisfaction. I shall importune you no further, to a
change of the resolution you have taken; you shall be delivered out of your
restraint, only this kindness I shall press you to, that you remain here till
night, to be removed hence, in the same manner as you were brought hither,
assuring my self, that if you ever come to discover where you have been, you
will be so generous as to conceal the design I had upon you, and be moderate in
the triumph of your fidelity. She held a handkerchief before her eyes, while
she spoke those last words, as it were to keep her tears from being seen by the
Spaniard, who, if, on the one side, troubled at what she had said, was, on the
other, so transported with joy at the recovery of his liberty, that he could
not have concealed it, though he had been the greatest hypocrite in the world:
and it is to be imagined that if the Lady had observed, he could not have
avoided her reproaches. I know not whether he thought it long ere night came,
for, as I told you before, I trouble not my self much about the precise
observance of times and hours: you may be assured it came, and that, being
disposed into a Coach, he was brought back to his own lodgings, attended by the
same persons who had waited on him the night before.

Being one of the kindest Masters in the world, his Servants were overjoyed to
see him again; but they enjoyed him not long. He put on armor, and accompanied
by two of them, whose courage he had former experience of, he made all the
haste he could to the Grate, nay his haste was such, that those who attended
him, had much ado to follow him. He had no sooner made the accustomed signal,
but the invisible Deity answered him. They had a long discourse, and that so
full of affectionate tenderness, on both sides, that I never think on it,
without tears. At last, she told him, that, having received some affront in the
house where she then was, she had sent for her Coach, to remove thence; but in
regard it would be long ere it came, and that his might be sooner got ready,
she entreated him to send for it, to conduct her to a place, where he should
not any longer complain of her invisibility. The amorous Gallant staid not for
a longer entreaty, he ran to his Servants, whom he had left at the end of the
street, and sent them for his Coach, which being come, the invisible Lady kept
her promise, and went along with him into it. She gave the Coachman directions
which way he should go, and bid him stop at a great house, into which he drove,
by the light of many torches, which met them at the gate. Don Carlos conducted
the Lady as she directed him, up a large pair of stairs, into a spacious Hall,
where he continued somewhat troubled to find her still masked. At last, several
Gentlewomen richly apparrell'd, coming to receive them, every one with a great
wax candle in her hand, the invisible Lady discovered her self, and taking off
her mask, satisfied Don Carlos, that the Lady at the grate and the Princess
Porcia were but one and the same person.

It were no easy matter for me to tell you, how strangely the Spaniard was
surpised. The beautiful Neapolitan told him, that she had brought him away a
second time, to know his final resolution; that what pretensions soever the
Lady at the grate had to him, were now become hers, with a thousand other
things highly amorous and witty. Don Carlos cast himself at her feet, embraced
her knees, and kissed her hands, and so avoided the uttering of many
impertinences, which people overjoyed are apt to be guilty of. When these first
transportations were over, he rallied together all his wit and gallantry, to
celebrate the pleasant humor of his Mistress, and acquitted himself in
expressions so advantageous to her, that she was further assured of her not
being mistaken in her choice. She told him, that she was unwilling to trust any
but her self in a trial, without which, she could never have loved him, and
that she would never have been any man's less constant than he had shown
himself.

Upon this, the Relations of the Princess Porcia being acquainted with her
design, came in to them. She being one of the most considerable persons in the
Kingdom, and Don Carlos of great quality, it proved no hard matter to get a
Dispensation from the Archbishop, for their marriage. They were married that
very night, by the Parson of the Parish, who being an eminent Preacher, it is
likely, there wanted not a very good Exhortation. Some reported, that it was
very late ere they were stirring the next day, which I am apt enough to
believe. The News was soon divulged, whereat the Viceroy, who was nearly
related to Don Carlos, was so glad, that the public divertisements began
afresh in Naples, where they still talk of the Loves of Don Carlos and his
INVISIBLE MISTRESS.

SCARRON's NOVELS.
The Chastisement of Avarice.
The Seventh Novel.
NOT many years since, a young Lad, poor, to the very lowest degree of poverty,
yet of an ambition exceeding it, and infinitely more desirous to be thought a
Gentleman, than to be accounted, either a rational Creature or a Christian,
came along with his Father out of the Mountains of Navarr, with a resolution
(whether guided by instinct, or encouraged by the directions of some others of
his friends, I could never learn) to plant themselves at Madrid. They had heard
much of the gallantry of that place, and were put in hopes, that they should
meet with those things there, which they could not find in their own Country, I
mean the favors and indulgences of Fortune, which are to be had at the Court,
rather than any where else, yet are seldom obtained, without much courtship,
and excessive importunities. It was the young Lad's good luck, though I know
not by what charms procured, to be entertained a Page by some Grandee, or
rather Prince, (for they have the vanity to think themselves such) a condition,
not thought very honorable in Spain, that is, much at the same rate as that of
Lacqueys in France or England. He was put into the Livery about twelve years of
age, and, no doubt, he looked very prettily in it, such an alteration is the
first smile of good fortune able to make, in one who, till then, had lived no
otherwise than as an unciviliz'd Highlander. It Is possible, some other person
would have grown insolent upon so strange a Metamorphosis; but he was of a
quite different temper, and withal the most frugal Page that ever was, nay,
what is the greatest commendation of a person of his quality, the least
addicted to an Art called the Lightness of the Fingers, as happily having not yet
been long enough in the City, to understand the advantages of his profession.

Having sold his former rags to the Brokers, he began to think himself a rich
man; yet did not his wealth consist so much in the gaudiness of his
accoutrements, as in the greatness of his hopes, and a wretched Bed, disposed
into a small partition of a Garret, which he had taken, not far from his
Master's house, and there he retired in the night, with his Father, rich in
years, since he lived, and, upon that account, raising a compassion in all he
met, some were so charitable as to relieve him. Those charities were his daily
revenue, but so small, that, many times, he went to his Cell, not only
supperless, but hungry. At last the old Man dies, and his Son was glad to see
him so well provided for, out of this reflection, that being disburthen'd of
that charge, he was in a fair way to become a rich man. From the hour of his
Father's interrment, he imposed upon himself so great a frugality, and entered
into so strict and austere a kind of Life, that he spent in a manner nothing,
of that little, which was allowed him every day for his subsistence. It Is true,
it was not without the grumbling and barking of his Stomach, and to the cost of
all those, with whom he could make any acquaintance.

Don Marcos (so was called this remarkable example of penury) was a person of a
stature somewhat below the middle size, and, through pure want of seasonable
nourishment, he, in a short time, became the slenderest, and driest person in
the world. When he waited on his Master at table (which, it seems, was not so
often as he could have wished) he never changed his plate, but that, if there
were any thing left on it, he had the admirable sleight of conveying somewhat
into his pocket, whether it were dry or liquid he mattered not much. But
finding by experience, that, when he secured any thing of the latter kind, it
could not be done without offense, he found out an expedient to prevent that
inconvenience, for having converted into money the wax of a great number of
Torches ends, which he had very carefully kept together, he bought him a pair
of pockets of your Latten-ware, wherewith he afterward did miracles, in order
to the advancement of his fortune.

Most covetous persons are commonly vigilant and careful, and these two
qualities, heightened by the insatiable passion, which Dom Marcos had, to become
a rich Man, raised in his Master such an extraordinary kindness toward him,
that he would not, by any means in the world, have parted with so excellent a
Page. He continued him in his Livery, from the twelfth, as I told you, to the
thirtieth year of his Age, so that, upon the account of his Seniority, he might
have taken place of all the Pages in Spain. But there happened an
inconvenience, which prevailed with his Master to change that resolution, and
that was, that this overgrown Page was obliged to shave himself every day;
whereupon being transformed from a Page into a Gentleman, he was made by his
Master what Heaven would never have made him.

The advantage of this transformation was, that his allowance was advanced, by
a daily addition of some few Ryals; but he, instead of adding any thing to his
expense, rein'd his Purse-strings the more, not regarding how much his new
employment obliged him to betray a proportionable liberality. He had heard
indeed, that some of his Profession, instead of a Boy, to wait them, in the
morning, made use of such as sold Aquavitae, to make clean their rooms, into
which they got them, pretending that they would have drunk of their Water, and
sometimes in the Wintertime, they called up those that sold Wafers and Jumbals
(a sort of people that walk as late as the Bak'd-pipin wenches do about London)
to get off their Clothes; but in regard this could not be done without a kind
of violence, and that our Dom Marcos was of an humor, not to be unjust to any
but himself, he conceived it his best course not to be troubled with any
Servant. Never was there a Candle's end burnt in his Chamber, but he came to it
by slight of hand, and to make it last as long as might be, he began to undress
himself in the street, from the very place where he had lighted it, so that by
that time he was come to his Chamber, he was in a manner ready to get into his
Bed. But considering with himself, that it was possible a Man might go to his
rest with less charge, his inventive imagination found out another expedient,
which was, to make a little hole in the partition, which separated his room
from his next Neighbors, so as that, as soon as he had lighted his Candle, Dom
Marcos opened the hole, and so had light enough to do any thing he had to do at
that time of the Night.

That one side of his Body should not laugh at the other, nor either of them at
the middle of his haunches, he wore his Sword one day on the right side, the
next day, on the left, the third hanging perpendicularly down his back, and all
this, that his Clothes might be equally worn out of all sides, and that the
D^mmage should be the less, being equally divided. Upon the very break of Day,
he stood at his door, with a little Earthen pitcher in his hand, begging a
little water of all the Water-bearers that passed by, and so he supplied
himself with water for many days together. He went many times into a little
Buttery, just at the time that the other Servants belonging to his Master, who
had their Diet in the House, were at Meals, and there he would take occasion to
commend what they had before them, that some body might invite him to taste of
it. He never bought any Wine, yet drunk of it every day, either by tasting what
the public Criers carried about, or staying in the streets those, who had been
buying at the Cabarets, of whom he begged a taste, as if he intended to buy
himself of the same. Coming to Madrid upon a Mule, he cast such a mist before
the eyes of his Hosts, that he kept the poor Beast only with pieces of the
Bed-mats on which he lay, and what other remnants of old Mats he could meet
with.

There happened a necessity, one time, that he must take a Servant along with
him, upon a Journey he had to make; but growing weary of him the first day of
his service, he bethought himself of a pretty device to put him off. Pretending
that he could not drink the Wine at the Inn where he then was, he sent the poor
fellow to another, a good League distant, where he said there was much better.
There was no way but to obey the commands of his new Master; but, before his
return, he was gone away, and had left false directions, where to find him, and
so the poor Boy was forced to get back again to Madrid with a weeping-cross, as
being reduced to play the Pilgrim, and beg all the way, for the Money he had
given him to buy the Wine proved naught. In fine, Dom Marcos became the living
pourtraiture of base thrift and avarice, and was so well known to be the most
covetous Man that ever Spain bred, that, in Madrid, they had no other name for
a miserable fellow, than Dom Marcos.

His Master, and all his Friends, told a thousand pleasant stories of him, and
that even in his presence, for he never troubled himself at their discourse, as
minding his own advantage more than their raillery, though he understood it
well enough, and would put in ever and anon some grave saying or Apothegm. One
of them was, that a Woman could never be handsome, if she loved to receive; nor
ever deformed if she had any thing to give: And that a prudent and thrifty Man
should never go to Bed, till he had made some advantage or other. This
excellent Theory, seconded by as exact a Practice, had brought him in, by that
time he was arrived to forty years of Age, ten thousand Crowns in ready money, a
vast sum for a Gentleman, waiting on a Grandee, especially one of Spain. But
what will not a long process of time bring a Man to, when he robs himself of
all he can, as well as other people.

Dom Marcos having thus acquired the reputation of being rich, without that of
following any evil course or gaming, was soon looked upon as an advantageous
Match, by several Women, who, above all things, and with all the artifices
imaginable, prosecute their own concernments. Among the many who proffered him
their enjoyments and liberty, (for Women in Spain are but a small degree above
Slaves) there was one Isidora, a Woman that went for a Widow, though she had
never been married, and that it was at least forty years since she had been a
Maid. She seemed to be much younger than she was, so well was she versed in the
disguises and artifices, which Women sometimes use, to belly their Age and
Wrinkles. Her fortune was measured according to her expense, which was very
high for a Woman of her condition; insomuch that the common report, which is
ever rash and apt to lie, gave her out to be worth, besides what she might have
in Money and Jewels, three hundred Pounds sterling per ann. and at least ten
thousand Crowns in Household Stuff. He who proposed the match between Dom Marcos
and this Isidora, was a famous Trapanner, one that traded in all sorts of
Commodities, and a Hole-sale-Marchant in the common Druggs of the female Sex.
He gave Dom Marcos such an advantageous account of the Lady Isidora, that it
made his teeth water to be acquainted with her, a curiosity he had never had
for any person before. Nay, he persuaded him so far that she was rich, and the
Widow of a Cavalier, of one of the best Houses of Andalusia, that, upon the
first proposals, he accounted himself as good as married to her. That very day,
this subtle Solicitor of Venereal Causes, whose name was Gamara, prevailed
with Dom Marcos to go along with him to visit Isidora at her house. The
covetous wretch was ravished at the neatness and magnificence of the House,
into which Gamara brought him, but much better pleased, when he conductor
assured him, that both it, and all within it belonged to Isidora. He found
therein such Household Stuff, such Alcoves, Couches, and a profusion of
Perfumes, as might become a Lady of the greatest quality, rather than the
future Spouse of a simple Gentleman, that waited on a Grand Signor of Spain;
and for her own part, he thought her at least a Goddess. Dom Marcos found her
very busy, about some extraordinary Works, sitting between two of her
Waiting-women, both so highly clad, and so handsome, that, notwithstanding the
natural aversion he had for expense, and especially that occasioned by a
superfluous number of Domestics, he would have married Isidora, though 'twere
only out of an ambition he then had, to have, at his command, such beautiful
young Maids, as he took them to be. Isidora's discourse was so excellent, that
it not only pleased, but in a manner enchanted, Dom Marcos; and what made an
absolute conquest of his heart, was a magnificent Collation, at which the
fineness of the Linen, and the sumptuousness of the Plate were answerable to
the other rich Household Stuff of the Lady, at whose charge it was. There was
present at this Collation a proper young Lad, named Augustine, well clothed,
whom Isidora said was her Nephew, and whom his good Aunt, to show her fondness
of him, diminutively called Augustinetto, though he were above twenty years of
Age. Isidora and Augustinetto out-vy'd one the other in their treatment of Dom
Marcos, and were ever presenting him with what they thought best in the
Collation; and while our up-start Gentleman satisfied his half-starv'd Stomach
with provisions for at least one week, at the charge of another, his ears were
charmed by the sweet Voice of the Waiting Woman Marcella, who, to the sound of
a Virginal, sung certain passionate Airs. Dom Marcos forgot his Gentility, and
fed like a Farmer, and the Collation ended with the day, the light whereof
growing deficient was supplied by that of four great wax-candles, in
candlesticks of massy silver exquisitely wrought, which Dom Marcos immediately
resolved within himself to reform into one single Lamp, as soon as ever he were
married to Isidora. Augustinetto took a Gitthar, and played several Sarabands,
which the crafty Marcella, and the other Waiting-gentlewoman Inez, danced
admirably well, exactly answering the sound of the Gitthar with their
Castagnets. The discreet Gamara whispered Dom Marcos in the ear, that the Lady
Isidora went to bed betimes. The civil Gentleman staid not for a second
advertisement, and thereupon addressing himself to Isidora, with such
extraordinary complements, and so great protestations of love and service, as
he had never made to any before, he took leave both of her, and her Nephew
Signor Augustinetto, leaving them at liberty to say what they thought of him.

Dom Marcos being thus deeply fallen in love with Isidora, but much more with
her money, acknowledged to Gamara, who accompanied him to his own lodging, that
the beautiful Widow had smitten him in the more amorous part of his soul, and
that he would have parted with a finger, on condition he were already married
to her; inasmuch as he had never met with any woman that pleased his fancy
better than she did, telling him withal, that after their marriage, she should
not live at such an extravagant rate. She lives rather like a Princess, than
the wife of a private person, says the cautious Dom Marcos to the dissembling
companion Gamara, and considers not, that the household stuff and plate she
has, being turned into money, and that money added to that which I have, might
bring in a considerable yearly rent, which we may lay up for a reserve, and, by
the industry it has pleased God to bestow on me, raise a plentiful estate and
fortunes for the children we may have between us. But if Heaven shall think
fit, that we have no issue, since Isidora has a hopeful Nephew, we will settle
all we shall gather together upon him, provided he answer the expectation I
have of his well-doing.

Dom Marcos entertained Gamara with these discourses, or others to the same
effect, walking still on, till he found himself just at the door of his
lodging. Gamara took his leave of him, after he had promised, that the next day
he would conclude his marriage with Isidora, and given him this reason for his
expedition therein, That affairs of that nature, many times, miscarried as much
by delay as by the death of either of the parties. Dom Marcos kindly embraced
the dear carrier on of his designs, and dismissed him. He went immediately back
to Isidora, to give her an account in what posture he had left her humble
Servant, and in the mean time our amorous Gentleman taking out of his pocket
the end of a wax-candle, he fastened it to the point of his sword, and having
lighted it at a lamp, which burned before a public Crucifix, in a place hard
by, not without making a kind of ejaculatory prayer, for the good success of
his marriage, he opened, with a Mistress-key, the door of the house where he
lay, and laid himself down in his wretched bed, rather to pass away the night
in reflecting on his Loves, than in sleeping.

The next morning Gamara comes to him, and acquainted him with the good news of
the conclusion of his marrirge with Isidora, who referred it to Dom Marcos, to
appoint the day, on which it should be solemnized. The amorous Miser told
Gamara, that though he were married that very day, yet would it not be as soon
as he wished it. Gamara replied, that it depended wholly on himself to
consummate his own happiness: whereupon Dom Marcos, embracing him, desired the
contract might be drawn up that very day. He appointed Gamara to meet him in
the afternoon, as soon as he pleased, after he had waited on his Master at
dinner. They both punctually met at the time and place appointed. They went to
Isidora's house, where Dom Marcos was more nobly entertained than he had been
the time before. Marcella sung; Inez danced; Augustinetto played on the
Gitthar; and Isidora, the principal Actress, gave her future husband an
extraordinary Treatment, whereof she knew who should defray the charge at last.
He devoured all was presented to him with as little remorse as a Wolf
half-starv'd; and yet he could not forbear censuring the superfluity of the
expense in his soul. Gamara was sent for a public Notary; he brought one to
act that part. The Articles of the Treaty of Marriage were soon set down, and
as soon signed on both sides.

There was a motion made to Dom Marcos, that he would play a game at Primero,
to pass away the time. Heaven and all the Inhabitants of it forbid, says Dom
Marcos, I play at any kind of game! No, no; I serve a Master, who would turn me
out of his service within a quarter of an hour, if he should ever hear that I
were a Gamester; and for my own part, I am not so well skilled, as to know the
Cards. How infinitely am I pleased with what Signor Dom Marcos has said,
replies Isidora, I am every day preaching the same thing to my Nephew
Augustinetto, but the world is come to that pass now, that the younger sort
think themselves too wise, to receive the good counsels and admonitions of
their elders, much more to follow them. Go thy ways, unhappy boy, says she to
Augustinetto, go bid Marcella and Inez make an end of their dinner, and come
and divert the company with their Castagnets.

While Augustinetto was gone down to call up the Maids, Dom Marcos, addressing
himself to Isidora, acquainted her with his mind in these terms. If
Augustinetto will do as I would have him, there are two things he must abstain
from, as the most contrary to my nature of any thing in the world, and that is,
Gaming, and being abroad late in the night. I am desirous that all those who
lie within my doors should be in their beds betimes, and that, as soon as it is
dark, the house-doors should be well bolted and locked. Not that I am of a
distrustful humor; nay, on the contrary, I do not think any thing more
impertinent than to be so, especially when a man has an honest and careful
wife, as I am more than in hopes to have: but those houses, where there is any
thing to be taken, can never be too secure from Thieves, and House-breakers,
for if there be but a sink-hole left open, they will make a shift to get in;
and for my part, it would break my heart, if some idle rascal of a Thief,
without taking any other pains, than what it co^^s him to carry away what he
finds, should, in an instant, convey away, what I had much ado ^o get together
in many years. For these rrasons therefore, continues Dom Marcos, I will
absolutely forbid him Gaming and Night-walking, or resign him up to be dealt
with according to the discretion of the Devil, for Dom Marcos shall be no
longer his Tutor.

The choleric Signor spoke these last words with so much transportation, that
it cost Isidora a great many entreaties and submissions, to lay his great
spirit, and reduce him to his ordinary tranquillity. She did as good as fall on
her knees, to desire Dom Marcos, that he would be no longer angry, assuring
him, that her Nephew should give him all the satisfaction he could expect, for
he was but young, and of the most docile and compliant nature of any she had
ever known.

They fell into some other discourse, upon the coming in of Augustine and the
Dancing-women, and they spent some part of the night in dancing and singing.
Dom Marcos, to spare himself the trouble of returning to his own lodging, would
have persuaded Isidora, to condescend, that they might, from that time, live
together, as man and wife, or that at least he might lie in her house, in
regard it was grown later than he had imagined. But she put on a severe
countenance, and earnestly protested, that ever since the unhappy day that had
reduced her to the condition of Widdow-hood, never had any man set his foot
into the chaste bed which had sometime been her dear Lord's, nor should any,
till the Church had interposed her authority, and that, while she were a widow,
no person should ever lie under her roof, but her Nephew Augustine.

Dom Marcos was much pleased with her resolution, notwithstanding his amorous
impatience. He bid her goodnight, returned to his lodging, accompanied by
Gamara, took out of his pocket the candle's end, stuck it to the point of his
sword, lighted it at the Lamp before the Crucifix, in a word, did all he had
done the night before, so punctual was he in all things, unless it were that he
said not his prayers, as he had done, happily because he thought his business
effected, and that he stood not in any need of Heaven's further assistance. The
Banes of Matrimony were soon asked out, for there happened to come two or three
holy days together. At last, the marriage, so much desired on both sides, was
consummated, and the solemnity thereof occasioned a greater expense then was
expected from the penuriousness of the Bridegroom, who, out of a fear of
making any breach in his ten thousand Crowns, borrowed money of his friends. The
chiefest of his Master's servants were at the wedding, and took occasion ever
and anon to commend the good choice he had made. The cheer was extraordinary,
though at the charge of Dom Marcos, who for that time was content to defray
all, and, by a prodigy of affection, had caused very rich clothes to be made
for Isidora and himself.

The Guests departed in good time, and, the coast being clear, Dom Marcos went
himself and locked the doors, and shut to and barred the windows, not so much
for the security of his wife, as that of the Trunks, wherein his money lay,
which he ordered to be brought into his own room and set close by the nuptial
bed. The young couple went to bed, and while Dom Marcos was groping for what he
could not find, Marcella and Inez were grumbling in their own chamber, at the
strange humor of their Master, and blaming the forwardness of their Mistress,
in taking a husband. Inez burst forth into downright swearing, and said she
had rather be a Lay-Sister in a Monastery, than Servant in a house, whereof the
doors were locked up at nine of the clock. And what would you do were you in my
condition? says Marcella to Inez; for your business is to go up and down, to
provide for the house, but for my part, who am a Gentlewoman made up in haste,
I must le^d a retired life, with the chaste spouse of a jealous husband, and,
of all the Serenades, which were given under our windows, I must hear no more
talk, than of the pleasures of the next world. And yet we are not so much to be
bemoaned as our friend Augustinetto, says Inez. He has spent his youth in
waiting as a Gentleman Usher on her whom he called his Aunt, though she were no
more so than I am, and now that he is come to write Man, she puts him under the
tuition of a Paedagogue, who, no less than a hundred times a day, will reproach
him with his diet and clothes, and God only knows and himself, whether he came
honestly by them. Thou tell me in that somewhat I knew not before, replies
Marcella, and I give over wondering at the severity our Mistress pretended to,
when her Nephew ad honores grew a little more familiar with us than she would
have had him. Had I been any thing forward to believe his protestations, I
should soon have deprived the Aunt of the Nephew; but she has bred me up from
a child, and it is a certain gratitude, for us to be faithful to those, whose
bread we eat. To tell thee the truth, continued Inez, I cannot find in my heart
to have any av^rsion for that young fellow, and I must confess, that it raised
a great compassion in me, when I saw him only dis-satisfi'd, and out of
humor, among so many others who enjoyed themselves and were merry.

In these discourses did the two Waiting-women spend the time, after they were
got into bed, and such were their comments on the marriage of their Master.
Honest Inez fell asleep, but Marcella had somewhat else to do. As soon as she
perceived that her companion was asleep, she puts on her own clothes, and made
up a great bundle of those of Isidora's, and some of Dom Marcos's, which she
had slily got out of their chamber, before the over-cautious Signor had locked
the door. Having dispatched her business, she went her ways, and, because she
had no intention to return ag^^n, she left open the doors of that part of the
house where Isidora lived. A while after, Inez awakes, and not finding her
companion a-bed with her, she was very desirous to know what should become of
her at that time of the night. She hearkened a while at Augustine's
chamber door, not without some distrust and jealousy: but not hearing any
noise within, she went to search for her in all those places where she
conceived she might be, and found her not, but all the doors, through which she
had passed, wide open. She went and knocked at that of the new-married couple,
and did it with so much noise as put them into a fright. She told them that
Marcella was run away, that she had left the doors open, and she was afraid,
that she had carried somewhat with her, whereof she intended not ever to make
any restitution. Dom Marcos starts out of bed, as a person out of his wits, ran
to look for his clothes, but could not find them, nor Isidora's wedding-gown.
But what completed his distraction, was, that, after a light was brought into
the room, he found, what he least suspected, his dear spouse of a far different
figure, from that, under which he had been so much taken with her; nay, so
dreadful was the spectacle, that the narrow-hearted fellow was ready to swound.
The poor Lady sitting up half-asleep, half-awake in her bed, never minded, that
her periwig was fallen off. At last, she sees it on the ground, fallen down by
the bedside, and, taking it up, would have put it on; but a thing is never
well, when it is done with too much precipitation. She put on the dress with
that part before which should have been behind, so that her face, which, so
betimes in the morning, had not received all its diurnal ornaments, appeared in
a very odd posture, and painted as it was, seemed so dreadful to Dom Marcos,
that he was afraid it might be some apparition. If he cast his eyes on her, he
saw an uncouth monster, and if he looked about the room, he could not see his
clothes. Isidora, extremely at a loss, made a shift to perceive that some of
her counterfeit teeth were entangled in the long, brushy, and well-bristled
mustachoes of her husband. She went to retrive them thence with much confusion;
but the poor man, whom she had frightened almost out of himself, imagining she
had no reason to put her hands so near his face, out of any other design, than
to take him by the throat, or scratch out his eyes, retreated, and shunned her
approaches, with so much nimbleness, that she, not admitted to close with him,
was at last forced to acknowledge, that his Mustachoes had got away some of her
teeth. Dom Marcos, upon that, began to stroke them up, and having met with his
Wives teeth, which had sometime been those of an Elephant, an original
Inhabitant of Africa, or the East Indies, he flung them at her head with much
indignation. She gathered them together, as well those scattered in the Bed, as
those about the Room, and made her escape into a little Closet, with that
exquisite treasure, and some head-brushes, which she took out of the Bag, where
her Night-cloaths were.

In the mean time, Dom Marcos having sufficiently renounced his Christianity,
set himself down in a chair, where he made most sad reflections on the
misfortune had befallen him, in marrying a woman, who, by the snows of at least
sixty winters, that powdered her shaved pate, had discovered her self to be
older than he was, by twenty years, yet not so well stricken in them, but that
she might spend the other score in his company, nay, happily more. Augustinetto,
who was awaked by the noise, came into the room, with his clothes half off,
half on, and did all lay in his power to appease the Husband of his Aunt by
adoption: but all the Answer the poor Man could make to his remonstrances, was,
to sigh, and sometimes smite his thighs, sometimes his face, with his bare
hand. Then was it, that he bethought him of a noble Gold chain he had borrowed,
to adorn himself withal on his Wedding Day; but all he had left of it, was that
sad remembrance. Marcella had got it in the bundle of clothes, which she had
carried away. He looked up and down for it, with some patience and tranquillity,
very diligently searching every crany about the Chamber: but when he had
wearied himself with searching, and was convinced, that it was lost, together
with all the pains he had taken to look for it, never was there such a conflict
of rage and affliction, as then distracted the poor Dom Marcos. His sighs were
so loud, that, if people had been awake, they might have been heard over the
whole quarter. Upon those doleful lamentations, Isidora comes out of the
closet, but so changed, and so beautiful, that he thought his Wife now the
third time metamorphos'd. He looked on her with a certain astonishment, and
spoke not to her with any indignation. He took out of one of his Trunks the
clothes he wore every day, put them on, and, followed by Augustinetto, went out
to weary himself in running up and down the streets, after the mischievous
Marcella. They sought, and searched, and inquired, but all to no purpose, till
the clock striking twelve minded them of their Dinner, which was made up of
what had been left of the Wedding-feast. Dom Marcos and Isidora fell a
quarrelling, as people that were desirous to eat, and fed as heartily as people
inclining to quarrel. Yet would Isidora now and then put in a word, to pacify
Dom Marcos, and to bring him into his former peaceable humor, speaking to him
with the greatest humility and mildness imaginable, and Augustinetto did all he
could to make an accommodation between them: but the loss of the Chain of Gold
was as great a torment to Dom Marcos, as if he had been run through the Body
with a Dagger.

They were ready to rise from the Table, and only staid for Augustinetto to
make an end, who minded his belly more than their difference, when there came
into the room two men, from the Admiral of Casteel's Steward, to entreat Madam
Isidora, that she would return the Plate he had lent her for fifteen days, and
which she had now kept a month. Isidora knew not any other Answer to make them,
than that it should be forthcoming. Dom Marcos told them that it was now his,
and that he would keep it. One of the men staid in the room, to be in sight of
what they made so much difficulty to restore, while the other went to the
Steward, who immediately came, and reproached Isidora with her unhandsome
carriage, made little account of the opposition of Dom Marcos, and all he had
to say for himself, carried away the Plate, and left the Man and Wife ready to
quarrel, upon this new occasion of quarreling. Their contest was almost brought
to an accommodation, when a Broker, accompanied by his Servants, and some
Porters, came into the room, and told Isidora, that, since she was richly
matched, he came for the Household Stuff she had taken upon hire, together with
the Brokage-mony, unless she had a mind to buy them outright, and so spare him
the trouble of taking them down.

This unexpected accident put Dom Marcos out of all patience; he would have
beaten the Broker; the Broker made it appear that he was a man as able to
return as to receive, and fell a railing at Isidora, who returned him as good
as he brought. He beat her; she revenged her self as well as she could, the
consequence whereof was, that, in a short time, the floor was strewn with the
teeth and hair of Isidora, and the cloak, hat, and gloves of Dom Marcos, who,
though he had little reason for it, would needs take his Wife's part.

While the Combatants gather up the broken pieces of their harness, and the
Broker carries away the goods, and is paid for the use of them, as a Broker,
and that all together make a noise as if Hell were broke loose, the Landlord of
the House, who had Lodgings in some part of it, comes into Isidora's room, and
told her, that he would not have such a stir kept in his House, and that if
they resolved to continue it, they should look out for another Lodging. How
now, you impertinent Coxcomb, says Dom Marcos, do you get out of mine, or I
shall send you hence with more expedition than you came hither. The Landlord
answered him with a box on the ear; he who had received it, being weary of that
kind of engagement, looked about for his Sword or Poniard; but Marcella had
carried them away. Isidora and her pretended Nephew stepped in between them, and
appeased the Landlord, but could prevail little with Dom Marcos, who running
his head against the walls, called Isidora a thousand
damn'd-base-pilfering-impudent-cheating-and-trapanning-Whores. Isidora made him
Answer, weeping, that she could not use too much subtilty, to draw in so
deserving a Dom Marcos as he was, and therefore he should rather applaud her
ingenuity, than beat her, as he had done, adding withal, that a Husband, even
in point of honor, was blameable for beating his Wife. Dom Marcos, swearing
very learnedly, protested, that he knew no other point of honor than his Money,
and that he would be unmarried. Isidora, with an excessive humility, made a
contrary protestation, that she would never consent thereto; swore to Dom
Marcos, that it was not in his power to dissolve the sacred tie of a lawful
Marriage, and advised him to patience.

He was once more appeased, and bethought himself, that a new Lodging must be
taken, the old one being grown too hot for them. Dom Marcos and the Nephew went
out to take one, and so Isidora had a little relaxation. These unexpected
accidents raised a little commotion within her, but when she looked about the
room, and saw, not the Hangings, for those were gone, but the Trunks well lined
with Silver, she took heart, and bore the more patiently the testy disposition
of the Husband which brought them thither.

Dom Marcos took some convenient Lodgings in the same Quarter, where his Master
lived, and sent back Augustinetto to dine with his Aunt, being himself, as he
said, too much pressed with grief, to eat out of the same Dish with that
transcendent Cheat. But in the evening he came to her, with all the day's
vexation, and cruel as a Tygre; not so much out of kindness to the Woman, as to
visit his Trunks, and, by his presence, to secure them. Isidora entertained him
with all the submissions and complacency imaginable; insomuch that they lay
together, and passed away the night without any alarms. In the morning, as soon
as she was dressed, she had the confidence to desire him, to go to the new
Lodgings, there to receive the Goods, which she would order her Nephew and Inez
to see brought thither in a Wagon. Dom Marcos went thither, and, while he was
contriving how to dispose of them into several rooms, the ungrateful Isidora,
the young Rogue Augustine, and the perfidious Inez plotted together, and packed
up all the best things in a Wagon, got into it themselves, leave Madrid, and
take their way toward Barcelona. Dom Marcos grew weary of staying for them,
and went back to his old quarters, where he found the Doors locked, and was
told by the Neighbors, that they were gone away with the Goods many hours
since. He returned to the place from whence he came, imagining he had missed
the Wagon by the way, but found no more than what he had left there. He
immediately marches back again, mistrusting what misfortune might have happened
to him; he breaks open the Door, and found there, only some old Bed-steeds,
Stools, Tables, and Fire-irons, which it seems they thought either too
troublesome, or not worth the carrying away. There was no body to be revenged
on but himself; his venerable Beard and Hair were the first sufferers for his
folly; then his Eyes; he bit his Fingers till the blood gushed out, and had a
great temptation to make away with himself; but the hour was not yet come.

There are not any so unfortunate, but they flatter themselves with some hope:
he ran up and down to all the Inns about Madrid, to find out those, who had
left him so basely in the lurch, but could not meet with any tidings of them.
Isidora had not been so simple as to hire a Wagon that should return thither
any more; she had taken it up at a Village not far from Madrid, and, to avoid
pursuit, had agreed with the Wagoner, that he should make no longer stay in the
City, than were requisite to take in her self, her company, and her goods.
Wea^ier than a Dog, that had run all day after a Hare and mist her, the poor
Gentleman was returning from his searching the Inns about the City and Suburbs,
when it was his chance, to meet Marcella full-but in the streets. He laid hold
of her, Have I met with thee, O thou most mischievous of all thy Sex, said he,
thou shall now restore all thou have stolen from me. O my God, my dear
Creator, replies the crafty Baggage, without the least discovery of any
trouble, how did it always run in my thoughts, that all the mischief would fall
upon my head! My dearest Master, be pleased to hear me, for the Blessed
Virgin's sake: do but give me the hearing, before your dishonor me. I am an
honest Maid, and of good repute, and the least scandal you should force me to
give my Neighbor, would be infinitely prejudicial to me, for I am upon the
point of marriage. Be pleased to go along with me into the Entry of this House,
and afford me but your patient attention for a quarter of an hour, and I will
tell you what is become of your Chain, and all you have lost. I had been
already informed, that I was charged with all that had passed, and I told my
Mistress what it would come to, when she commanded me to do what I accordingly
did: but she was Mistress; I, her Servant. Woe is me! How miserable are they
whose dependence is upon others, and what pains they take, and what mischief
they must sometimes do, to earn a piece of bread.

Dom Marcos was a person guilty of as little malice as any other; the tears and
eloquence of the crafty Marcella prevailed with him, not only to hearken to
her, but also to believe what she said to him. He went therefore along with her
into the entry of a great house, where she told him, that Isidora was an old
decai'd Curtezan, who had ruined all those who were so unh^ppy as to fall in
love with her, yet had not much advantaged her self thereby, by reason of the
vast expenses she was at. She further acquainted him with what she had
understood from her companion Inez, that Augustin^tto was not Isidora's Nephew,
but a kind Night-bird, the Bastard of another Curtezan, of her acquaintance,
and that she maintained him, under the notion o^ her Nephew, to gain her self
the greater authority among those of her own profession, and to revenge her
quarrels. She told him, that she had delivered the gold-chain and the other
things she had carried away, to that young Hector, and that it was by his
order, she had gone away in the night, and without taking her leave, which was
a pure trick put upon her, that she only might be thought guilty of so l^ud an
action.

This plausible story Marcella told Dom Marcos, out of a hope it might procure
her escape out of his hands, or at least to observe the good custom, which most
Servants have, to be very apt to lie, and to tell of their Masters, as well
what they do not, as wh^t they do, know. She concluded her vindication, with a
promise that all things should ^e returned him when he least expected it,
exhorting him in the me^n time to exercise his patience. You speak very well,
says Dom Marcos to her, but I think it as likely, that I shall never see a^y
thing again; there being but little probability, that the perfidious Queen, who
has carried away all I have been gathering together these thirty years, should
ere come back again to make me any restitution. He thereupon told Marcella all
that had happened at Isidora's lodgings since her departure thence. Is it
possible, she should be at such a loss of all conscience, says the lewd
Marcella to him. Ah! my dear Master, now I perceive, it was not without just
grounds, that I pitied your condition; but I durst not tell you so much, for
the very night your t^ings were carried away, I was representing it my
Mist^ess, that it would be unworthily done, to meddle with your chain; but what
bitter words, and blows it cost my poor carcass, he above only knows. I have
told thee but the truth, how all things stand, says Dom Marcos to her, fetching
a deep sigh, and the worst of it is, that I have not the least apprehension of
any remedy. I have then somewhat to propose to you in this extremity, replied
Marcella. There is a certain person in this City, of my acquaintance, who, with
God's permission, will tell you where you may find these people, who have so
highly injured you. He is a person admirable for his deep learning, and one
that has Legions of Devils at his devotion, and comm^nds them with such an
absolute power, as if he were the Prince of darkness himself. And what makes
mo^e for the attainment of your desires, you are to know, that this excellent
man has so great a kindness for me, that I am in hopes ere long to be his wife.

The credulous Dom Marcos entreated her, of all love, that she would bring him
to the sight of this miracle of the Black Art; which Marcella promised she
would do, and appointed him to meet her, the next day, at the same place. Dom
Marcos came, and had not been there long, ere Marcella came also, who
immediately told the besotted man, that the Magician, of whom she had spoken to
him the day before, had already taken some pains, in order to the finding out
of what had been stolen from him, and that, to carry on his work, he wanted
only a certain quantity of Amber, Musk, and some other Perfumes, to entertain
the Spirits he was to invoke, who were all of the first order, and of the best
Houses in Hell. Dom Marcos, without any deliberation, carried Marcella to the
Drugsters, and bought what quantities thereof she appointed him, so infinitely
did he think himself obliged to her, that she had found him out a Magician. She
afterward conducted him to an obscure house, which looked very suspitiously,
where, in a ground-room, or rather a Cellar, wretchedly matted about, he was
received, by a man in a long Cassock, with a huge bushy beard, who spoke to him
with a great deal of gravity.

After a little discourse, the Student of the infernal Sciences, whom Dom
Marcos looked on with abundance of respect and fear, lighted two black
wax-candles, and gave them the frightened fellow to hold, in each hand one;
caused him to sit down in a very low chair, and exhorted him, but too late, not
to fear any thing. He put afterward several questions to him, as to his age,
course of l^fe, and the goods which had been taken away from him; and after he
had looked into a Gl^ss that stood by, and read some time in a certain book, he
told Dom Marcos, who was ready to* -- for fear, that he had found out where the
things were, and thereupon described them, one after another, so exactly,
according to the instructions he had received from Marcella, that Dom Marcos
let the candles fall out of his hands, to go and embrace him about the neck.
The grave Magician blamed him very much for his impatience, and told him, that
the operations of his infallible Art required a serious and reserved composure
of the body, adding withal, that, for actions, of a lower degree of confidence
and familiarity, the Spirits had sometimes beaten, nay strangled some men. Dom
Marcos grew pale at those words, and settled himself again in his chair, after
he had taken up the candles.

The Magician asked for the perfumes, which Dom Marcos had bought, and the
counterfeit Marcella delivered them to him. Till then, she had been a de^out
spectator of the Ceremonies; but, being now upon the point of Invocation, he
ordered her to quit the room, pretending that the Spirits could not endure the
company of womankind, especially if there were any mistrust of the
dilapidation of t^eir Virginity. Marcella, making a low curtzy, went out of the
room, and the Magician taking a copper chaffing-dish, full of coals, made as if
he c^st on them the perfumes, which Dom Marcos had brought, but he had mixed
among them a good quantity of stinking sulphur, which made such a thick smo^k,
that the Magician himself, who had unadv^s^dly bowed down his head too near the
co^ls, was almost choked by it. He cough'd as viol^n^ly as if he had had a
burr in his throat, and so often, that his bushy beard, which was not of the
growth of the Country where it was then planted, and it seems had not been well
fastened, fell down, and discovered the Magician, to be the same pernicious
Gamara, who had trapann'd him into all his misfortunes.

Upon this discovery, Dom Marcos made no difficulty to fling away his magical
candles and to take the Impostor by the throat, which he grasped as hard as he
could, crying out, with a dreadful voice, Thieves, Thieves. The Magistrate,
attended by some Officers, chanced to pass by just at that time; They came into
the house, where they imagined the noise was made, which was the greater, in
regard Gamara, whom Dom Marcos still had by the throat, cried out as loud as
the other. The Officers, at their entrance into the house, met with Marcella,
whom they secured, and, afterward, having broke open the door of the
Necromantical chamber, they found Dom Marcos and Gamara grapled together, and
tumbling up and down the floor. The Magistrate knew Gamara for a person, he had
looked after a long time, and one he had order to apprehend as a notorious
Night-walker, a Pandar, and a searcher of other men's houses without any
Commission. He commanded them all three to prison, and caused an inventory to
be taken of all things found in the room. Dom Marcos was set at liberty the
next day, upon his Master's engagement for him. He was brought in as a witness
against Gamara and Marcella, who were found guilty of having stolen those
goods of his which were named in the Inventory. There were many other things
found, some whereof they had stolen, some taken in, as Pawns, for Gamara was a
Jew, and consequently a Broker, and an Usurer. When he was taken, he was upon
the point of marriage with Marcella, who brought him, as a portion, besides
what she had stoll'n from Dom Marcos, an inclination to steal, not inferior to
that of her future husband; an aptitude to learn any thing he would have taught
her, nay to exceed her Tutor, and a body handsome, wholesome, and young enough,
to be often bought, often sealed and delivered, and likely to weather out, a
long time, all the services and inconveniences of Curtezanism.

The justness of Dom Marcos's cause, supported by the mediation of his Master,
procured him the restitution of all had been stolen from him. Gamara was
condemned to the Galleys for the remainder of his life, unless he should
outlive ninety-nine years; and Marcella was ordered to be severely whipped,
and banished; and the common opinion was, that they were both very favorably
dealt with. As for Dom Marcos, he was not so glad of having recovered some of
his things, and being revenged of Gamara and Marcella, as troubled, that the
cheating Rogue was no real Magician. The loss of his ten thousand Crowns made
him in a manner distracted. He went every day to visit all the Inns about
Madrid, till, at last, he met with certain Mule-drivers, who, returning from
Barcelona, told him, that they had met, within four or five days journey of
Madrid, a Wagon, laden with household stuff, in which there were two women and
a young man, and that they were forced to make some stay at an Inn, because two
of their Mules had di'd by the way, through over-driving. They described the
man and the two women, so as that Dom Marcos presumed they could be no other
than Isidora, Inez, and Augustine. Upon this advertisement, without any further
deliberation, he put himself into a Pilgrim's habit, and having got Letters of
recommendation from his Master, to the Viceroy of Catalonia, and a Decree out
of the Court against his fugitive wife, he took his way toward Barcelona,
sometimes a foot, sometimes on Mules, and got thither in a few days.

He went immediately to the Port, to take up his lodging, and the first thing
he saw, as he came into it, was his own Trunks, carried by Porters into a
Shallop, and Isidora, Inez, and Augustine marching after them, as a Convoy, to
be thence conveyed into a Vessel that lay in the Haven, wherein they were to
embark for Naples. Dom Marcos followed his enemies, and went along with them
into the Shallop, as fierce as a Lion. They knew him not, by reason of his
broad-brimm'd Pilgrim's hat, and took him for one going to our Lady's of
Loretto, whereas the Mariners received him as one of the same company, because
he came in so confidently along with them.

Dom Marcos, being thus got into the Shallop, could not sit still, by reason of
the distraction of his thoughts, not so much out of any reflection what should
become of himself, as what should become of his Trunks. In the mean time, the
Shallop made toward the Vessel, and with such speed, or rather Dom Marcos was
so taken up with what run in his mind, that he was got under the Vessel, ere he
thought himself near her. They began to get up the things; which action
awakened Dom Marcos out of the Lethargy he was in, which yet was not such, but
that he still had his eye on the dearest of his Trunks wherein all his money
wa^* One of the Marriner^ came to fasten that Trunk, with ^ome others, to the
pully, to be drawn up into the Vessel. Then it was, that Dom Marcos forgot
himself; he saw ^he Trunk fastened; though he sat close by, yet was not moved;
but seeing it lifted up in the air, he laid hold on it with both hands, by the
iron rings, whereby it was removed from one place to another, resolved never to
part with it any more. It Is possible, he might have had his desire; for what
will not a covetous person do, to preserve his money? But, as ill fortune would
have it, that Trunk got loose from the other two, which were fastened with it,
and falling just upon the head of the unfortunate Miser, who yet would not let
go his hold, tumbled him into the Sea, and thence into another place ten times
deeper than it. Isidora, Inez, and Augustine knew him, just as he and the Trunk
were falling into the water: but the loss of the one put them into a greater
trouble, than the revenge they feared from the other. Augustine, enraged to see
such a vast sum of money lost, and not able to smother the first eruptions of
his fury, gave the Mariner, who had been so negligent in the fastening of the
Trunks, a hearty blow over the face. The Mrriner returned it with interest, and
prosecuted his revenge so far, till, at l^st, he turned him overboard. As he
was falling into the water, he laid hold on the unfortunate Isidora, who could
not lay hold on any thing, and so was forced to accompany her dear Nephew, who,
much against his will, went to see what was become of Dom Marcos. Inez made a
shift to get up into the Vessel, with what was remaining of the goods, which
she squandered away in a short time at Naples; and, after she had traded, and
lived many years, a Curtezan, she at last di'd like a Curtezan, that is, in the
Hospital.

FINIS.

