THE Grand Assizes: OR, THE Doctrine of the Last General Judgment, with the
Circumstances thereof: Comprised and laid forth In a SERMON Preached at the
Assizes holden for the County of Southampton at Winchester, on Wednesday, July
28, 1652.

By WILLIAM SCLATER Doctor in Divinity, Preacher of the Word of God in
Broadstreet, London.

2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that
every one may receive the things done in his Body, according to that he has
done, whether it be good or bad.

Nemo futurorum metum cogitat, diem Domini, and iram Dei, and incredulis futura
supplicia, and statuta perfidis aeterna tormenta nemo considerat: quod metueret
conscientia nostra, si crederet, quia non credit omnino nec metuit, si
crederet, and caveret, si caveret, evaderet.

S. Cyprian. de Unit. Eccles. sect. 23. London, Printed by E. Cotes, and are to
be sold by John Sweeting at the sign of the Angel in Popes-head-alley, 1653.

To the Honble John Wyld Lrd. Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer, a Patriot
of Justice, and an Exemplary Patron of true Piety; All Heavenly Benedictions.
MY LORD,
IT cannot but be known to your Lordship (being so full and rich a Magazine of
all Learning, and Eloquence) that the two main 1 King. 7.21.
Pillars, which as Jachin and Boaz in Solomon's Temple, do support a Church and
Commonwealth, are Ephesians. 4.12.
Ministry and Ti^. 3.1.
Magistracy; the one upholding Religion, and Divine Worship; the other, Order,
and Civil Justice: Happy is that people which is in Ps. 144.15
such a case, where both of these do not as those twins within Rebecca Genesis
25.22
struggle together, but rather as Righteousness and Peace sweetly Psa. 85.10.
embrace, and kiss each other: It Is very remarkable in Holy Writ, how the
Spirit of Ephesians. 4.3, 4.
Unity (to engage, no doubt, an harmonious accord between them) has been
pleased to denominate the persons 1 Timothy 1.11.
entrusted with either 1 Timothy 3.1.
Office, by one and the same name, styling them (...), Public Romans 15.16. 1
Cor. 3.5. and Romans 13.4.
Ministers of God for good; the one acting as Stewards of the 1 Cor. 4.1.
Mysteries of God; the other as Dispensers of Righteousness and Ames 5.24
Judgment unto men; Both by Gods own Romans 10.15.
sending, and Romans 13.1.
appointment: And methinks, the serious meditation of this their so sacred
institution, might powerfully put to 1 Pet. 2.15.
sil^nce the murmurings whether of 2 Timothy 3 4
heady sons of 1 Sa^. 10.27.
Belial (impatient even of the Matt. 11.30.
easiest The word (...) Belial is of (...) non and (...) jugum, id est absque
juge. Hieren.
yoke of the Lord Christ) against them, or the repinings of other Christians
not well informed, or mistaken about either: Yea, indeed, it might prove a
potent argument to 1 Thessalonians. 5.13. (...).
esteem, or Heb. 13.17.
obey the one, and to be Tit. 3.1.
subject unto the other, even for Romans 13.5.
conscience of God. I can assure your Lordship, that those beams of
encouragement (seconded also by that learned and godly My Lord Ed. Atkins one
of the Justices of the Court of Common pleas.
Judge then in the Western Commission with you) darted, and with so chearing a
diffusion displayed from your splendour, as from a bright star of the greater
magnitude, upon worthy Ministers, whom you have professed to reverence, even
for their 1 The. 5.13.
work sake, owning them (in your solid, religious, and elegant Charges given
upon the public Bench of Judicature) under the title of The Lords 2 Cor. 5.20.
Ambassadors, holding such as are found 1 Timothy 1.12.
Faithful, as the Philippians did Epaphroditus, in Phil. 2.29.
reputation; say those beams, by a sweet reflection, and influence, so warmed
the breasts, and revived the drooping spirits of the godly Ministers, that the
mention thereof proves as an amulet, or even as an (...) against all present
misapprehensions, or future disconsolations: It is that which shall welcome
your approach whithersoever Providence may direct your Judiciary Circuit, and
embalme your Name with Honor, the fragrant odor whereof, shall be resented
with a pious, and gladsome Commemoration in following generations.

How willingly could I now wish my self a Chrysostom, or a Nazianzen, some
Thucydides, or Cicero, yea the Quintessence of all their Oratory united into
one, and that as by some Pythagoricall (...) transmigrated into my breast, that
so I might but in some measure express (it being a skill beyond Apelles
himself graphically and fully to delineate) your eximious endowments and
perfections, which render you first a complete Christian, and so by far the
better and more accomplished Magistrate.

Should I mention your Ethics, or Moral part, if Plato, Aristotle, or the
whole Chorus of the most refined Philosophers had lived in your days, your
practice might have given them exact rules for all their descriptions, or
characters of the Virtues; or if we look unto what is any way perfect in them,
there needs no better Comment on them than your practice, in Justice,
Temperance, Liberality, Mansuetude, and that Architectonicall virtue, which
mainly steers all (for which also Sergius Paulus a governor is comm^nded in
Scripture) Act. 13.7.
Prudence.

In your Theological or religious part, as is recorded of Cornelius, (...),
you are a Act. 10.2.
Devout man, one that fears God with all your house, a lover and frequenter
of all Gods public Ordinances, giving much Alms to the people, and praying to
God always; your retinue also, and attendants qualified after the perfect Canon
of Scripture, with Ps. 101.6, 7.
truth, Tit. 2.10.
fidelity, and Ephesians. 6.5, 6, 7. Col. 3.22, 23.
single-hearted Tit. 2.9.
obedience, and all sobriety.

In your Noble profession, a Promptuary of the laws, a learned Act. 5.31.
Gamaliel had in singular reputation; in the administration of Justice 2 Samuel
23.3.
upright, and Deuteronomy. 1.17.
impartial, and where is a meet Subject capable, full of clemency, bowels,
and indulgence: A terror to none but to the evil, giving Romans 13.3.
praise and encouragement to every good man and work.

All which considered, How can I but excecdingly congratulate unto my self the
so unexpected Happiness of your Lordships favor, and countenance! especially
when I meditate the occasion thereof to have proceeded from your candid
approbation of these my weak endeavors shown in this and some other Sermons,
which you were pleased to desire (where as you might have commanded it) to the
Press: The subject of it was seasonable, I hope, for that occasion, and
generally useful for these times, intended as a Preservative against the
growing malady of this corrupt age, Atheisin; Being straightened by the time, and
your important business ensuing, this copious Theme, as a Camel passing
through a needles eye, was compendiated into a narrow compass: If your Lordship
do look upon it as in it self, it is too mean a present for your acceptance,
but if on the affectionate Heart wherewith it is tendered to your Patronage, you
may judge it a great one: It Is sometimes as Noble to accept small things as to
confer great: such as it is, it prostrates it self at your feet, beseeching
an entertainment, in finding whereof, his Devotions shall be enlarged for your
bliss, Who is

MY LORD, Your Lordships humble Orator and Servant William Sclater.

A SERMON Preached at the Assizes holden for the County of Southampton at
Winchester, on Wednesday, July 28, 1652.
REV. 20.11, 12. And I saw a great white Throne, and him that sat on it, from
whose face the Earth and the Heaven fled away, and there was found no place for
them.

And I saw the Dead, small and great stand before God, and the Books were
opened: and another Book was opened, which is the Book of life: and the Dead
were judged out of those things which were written in the Books, according to
their works.


HONORABLE and BELOVED,
I Cannot but esteem it as the great favor of Heaven, that in the revolution
of a few months, the Divine Providence has brought me again hither, and called
me to this Public service, on the same occasion: I having the happiness to
speak in such a praesence, wherein not the pomp of any elaborate, or quaint
Humane Oratory; but the power of solid and sacred Divinity will be best
regarded: of which whilst I rest persuaded, I shall humbly crave your
Devotions, that the same Hand which gave this opportunity, would add also a
success to this business.

It were a facility (had I a mind to build a large Portall to my narrow house)
to entertain your patience, a while, with a discourse of this Book of the
Revelation, wherein there are so many Rev 5.7.
sealed Mysteries almost, as Words, or Sentences; so Mihi tota Apocalypsis
valde obscura videtur, and talis, cujus explicatio citra periculum vix queat
tentari: fateor me hactenus in nullius scripti Biblici lectione minus
proficere, quam in hoc obscuro vaticinio. Grascrus.
abstruse Aenigma's, as none but a Divine Oedipus can unriddle them: Insomuch
that some of the greatest, and those too most sanctified Scholars have
acknowledged, that they had rather D. Rainolds of Oxford, Divis 4. against
Heart. c. 8.
learn, than teach it: However some others, who to themselves have seemed as
the sons of Number. 13.33
Anak, of tall Imaginations, have yet proved, in the issue, but like Luke 19.3.
Zacheus, little in the stature of sound Judgment; and whilst they have gone
about to give other men eyes to see John's. Visions more clearly, they have
been overtaken, unawares, by their own Job 20.8.
Dreams, and many of them outlived the date of their weak, yet bold, and daring
Interpretations: I cannot but appland the modesty of Cajeian, (none of the
meanest among the Schoolmen) who, after he had Paraphrased the Epistles, and
Acts of the Apostles, professed, thus, Apocalypsin fateor me nescire exponere
juxta sensum literalem, He was posed about the Literal sense of this
Scripture, more meet for his Wonder, than his Exposition: And good reason, for
it consisting of many Prophesies of things to come, and those too clothed with
Allegories, and clad in Metaphors, (...) (to speak with Sophocles in Antig.
Nescia men's hominum fati, sortisque futurae. Virgil.
Sophocles) who could directly tell the sense, till the event was seen? that
being the best Interpreter of dark praedictions.

Nevertheless, since, as it is in our English Proverb, that Bones bring Meat to
town, that is, Difficulties bring Comforts; as, in Sampson's Riddle, Judge.
14.14. Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth
sweetness, that of the Ancient being true, Paseit apertis, excrect obscurts,
as the Lord is pleased to delight us with the clearer, so to exercise us with
the obscurer parts of Holy Writ; and as the Doctor of the Gentiles assures us,
Romans 15.4. Whatsoever was written, was written for our Learning: there being
likewise some rills and brooks for the Lamb to wade in, as well as deeps for
the Elephant to swim in: Give me leave, I beseech you, (since not of curiosity
to feed fancy, but of a zealous disquisition to discover verity, I attempt it)
to withdraw the Curtain, and to set open the Windows of this Text, that so the
2 Cor. 4 6.
light of divine truth, in a bright serenity, may 2 Per. 1 19.
shine in upon your Minds, and Hearts, to illuminate the one, and to inflame
the other, for the best advantage of the whole soul.

And I saw a great white throne, etc. Under which form of words we have, me
thinks, according to St. John's Vision, The Grand Assizes, held upon the Day of
the last general Judgment, described in variety of circumstances, which as the
carving, or enamelling of some curious Watch, do exceedingly illustrate and
adorn the same.

And as in some solemn business of great importance there are usually some
antecedaneous introductories to raise expectation, and win the greater
veneration thereto: so here, we have something observable by way of
praeparation; and something also by way of action, or dispatch: The
Praeparation consists of the supposalls foregoing, Men were dead, and those
dead men again risen, and brought out of the prison of the grave, and set to
the Bar: Death; and the Resurrection from Death praecede the Judgment, I saw
the dead, great and small, stand before God: The matter of Action, or Dispatch,
is the Judgment it self following this Death, and Resurrection, The dead were
judged, according to their works.

The carriage, or managing of this Judgment is, (...), much what after the
similitude of Vt judicii species notior fieret Hominibus, judicandi forma ex
his, quae inter Homines geruntur, assumpta est. Anselm. Comment. in Romans 14.
Humane Judicatures here upon earth; save only with this odds, or difference:
That in this Grand Assizes in my Text, the Judges themselves must then stand
forth before the God of all Judges, even before the most dreadful Tribunal of
the only Potentate, the King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords.

Regum timendorum in proprios greges, Sen. tragoed.

Reges in ipsos Imperium est Jovis.
For, howsoever it be the style of Magistrates in the Scripture, to be called
Gods, Psalm. 82.6. namely, (...), in regard of the Dignity of their office; yet,
though they be sons of the most High, they must die like Men; they being, as
Agapetus in Paraen. ad Justin.
Agapetus told Justinian, (...), in the substance, or nature of their Bodies,
composed of the same brittle materials with other men; though (as I said on
the last like occasion) they be Gods with Men, yet are they but Men with God:
so that all subordinate thrones must then be cast down, Dan. 7.9. all
Commissions given up, and a strict account be taken both of themselves, and of
their stewardship, even before Him, who by Daniel (who was the John of the Old,
as John was the Daniel of the New Testament) is described under the title of
The Ancient of Days, sitting upon his throne [Imperiall and Paramount,] whose
garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like pure wool, his throne
was like the fiery flame, and his wheels like burning fire; A fiery stream
issued, and came forth from before him; Thousand thousands ministered unto him,
and Ten thousand times Ten thousand stood before Him, The Judgment was set, and
the Books were opened: So Daniel.

Now, this great Judicature is, in this Text, described after this manner.

1. By the Judicatory, or Seat of Judgment, with its Epithets, or Adjuncts,
ver. 11. I saw a throne, and that a great, and a white throne. 2. By the Judge
sitting on that throne, who is God himself, set forth under expressions of
Majestic terror; from whose face the Earth, and the Heaven fled away, and
there was found no place for them. 3. By the persons to be judged, and that
impartially, The Dead, small, and great. 4. The Arraignment of all those
persons, They stand before God. 5. The Indictment, The Books were opened. 6.
The Evidence, The things written in those Books. 7. The Sentence, They were
Judged. 8. The Rule, ordering that Sentence, According to their Works. 9. The
means of the Discovery of all this to S. John. and by him unto us, and that was
by revelation, or special vision; so himself acquaints us, (...), I saw, says
he, twice; this vision (as sometime Pharaoh's dream, Genesis 41.32.) was
[doubled,] to show the certainty and assurance of what he thus had seen: I saw
a great, white Throne -- and, I saw the dead, great and small stand before God,
etc.
And these (at least as to my weak observation they occur) are the proper,
and genuine parts of this Scripture; the present measures of my Sermon, and
your Christian patience: Each of them being so important as they are do so
invite your attentions, that I need not to stand courting your ears at all to
obtain them: And so I address my self to my business, and that after this
order, First, beginning with the Divinity, and the explication of the Text; and
then proceeding unto the Morality, or the effectual application of the whole:
Please to favor me with your patience, whilst I am (by Gods blessing) in the
dispatch of my Sermon, I shall be as contracted, as this deep matter, and your
weighty affairs ensuing will give leave.

But before I come directly to the several parts, I must of necessity say a
few words of the supposals foregoing this last and Grand Assizes; and those are
Death, and the Resurrection; Men were Dead, and those Dead men again risen,
(for surely not deadmen, as dead, but as risen) were presented to the Bar,
and there stood before God: (Wherefore the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the
Dead, and of eternal Judgment are conjoined, Heb. 6.2.) I saw the Dead, great
and small stand before God.

Mors a Morsu, says S. August. l. 1. Hypagnost. contr. Pelag. circamed.
Austine; No sooner had the serpent fastened the venom of his teeth on the
Protaplasts, or our first Parents, and his temptation bit them; but they bite
the forbidden Genesis 3.6.
apple, and death immediately bit them again; And so in in Adam all dye, says
the great 1 Cor. 15.22.
Apostle, in as much as he was not Vnus but Vniversitas, as the Schoolmen
express it, not considerable as a single man, by himself alone, but as a
public person, representing the Universality of all mankind, the Nature
whereof being contaminated in the first Fall, that infection runs still as
tainted blood in the veins of Posterity to this day; so that now, (...), says
Damascen, The whole sublunary Creature is become subject to mutation, and as
Phil^, de Mundo.
Philo says, (...), to Generation succeeds a dissolution: Had man indeed
stood in the honor of his first Creation, and not blotted the eximious
pulchritude, and beauty of that Genesis 1.26.
Image, in which he was first stamped, he had needed, as no Jesus to redeem his
soul, so no Aesculapius, or Physician to cure his body, He should have had
temperamentum ad pondus, as the Philosophers speak, so equal a temperature in
the exact symmetry of parts, that no qualities in the Elements, of which he is
compounded, should have contended for such a conquest, as should have routed
him into his grave; For howsoever the Schoolmen (more curious, oft-times, to
raise doubts, than judicious to assoyle them) had a conceit, that if the first
Adam had never fallen; yet the second Adam, (the Lord Christ) had come in the
flesh, ad decus and ornamentum generis humani, for the Honor, and ornament of
the Humane nature; yet that is but the play of some wanton wits, it is not the
plea of any solid judgment; since it disappoints, at least misapprehends the
proper end of Christ's coming in the Flesh, which was, to suffer for, and to 1 Timothy 1.15.
save sinners, even such as by what Names, or Titles soever they are
distinguished above ground, like to the several Chessemen as they stand in the
game, under several notions, on the table, yet being shuffled all together
into one common bag, they have no distinction in the dust at all: But in Mat.
27.33.
Golgotha (as says the Hebrew Proverb) are skuls of all fizes, as well great
as small: (...), says Agapetus, for all have reason to say to Corruption, Thou
art my Job 17.14.
Father, and to the Worms, Thou art my Mother, and my Sister: some Great ones,
perhaps, like Teeth, may here dwell as in the mouth of Honor, eat up or
oppress a man and his Mic. 2.2.
heritage, as the Prophet speaks, grinding the face of the poor; or as Sapor
King of Persia write Brother to the Sun and Moon; or as the twelve Caesar's
divide the twelve months between them, washing their steps in Job 29.6.
Butter, housing themselves like snails, in their golden shells, and painting
the earth as they pass with their silver slime, and on the Theater of this
world act their parts so, as they can blast with their breath, thunder-strike
with their frown, and crush with their singer; but the Interlude will end anon,
and then they must all get them along down to Death's tiring House, as well as
others, as well Alexander as Dametas, fair Nereus as deformed Thersites; there
is no remedy, they must unstrip, they must uncase, and be all uncloathed, they
must exchange their Canopies of state for costins, their Ivory couches for
graves, their Palaces for charnell houses, their Tapestry for shrowds, and all
their embroidered Mantles for coverlets of dust; Sic in non Hominem vertitur
omnis Homo; Dust at the first was man's Composition, and into dust at the last
will be his resolution, Genesis 3.19. Homo ab Man is named in Hebrew (...) ab
(...) Adam, of Adamab, the earth, or, the red earth.
Humo; and whilst even the best men carry about them a Romans 7.24.
Body of death, they must unavoidably (for the abolishing of the remainders of
Corruption, the Law in their members) expect the death of the body, for the
wages of Sin is Death, Romans 6.23. They say there stands a Globe of the world at
one end of a great Library, and the Sceleton of a man at the other end; which
may not unfitly be thus moralized, though a man were Lord of all that he sees
in the Map of the world, yet he must dye, and become himself a map of
morttlity; even provant for worms to revell with in the grave: It Is true indeed
what Stitius lib. 9. Theb.
Statius utters in his losty verse, Mill modis Lethi miseros mors una fatigat.

Though there be many ways to one, and the same Solomon, Eccles. 12.5. calls
the grave (...) Domum seculi the House of age.
long home, yet we must all meet together at last in the same Job 30.23.
House, and in the chambers of death must be our dwelling: that Grammarian who
can decline a Noune in every Case, yet cannot decline Death in any Case: In
short, this being a Doctrine which more needs application, than proof, since, as
In ortu adhue suo, ad finem nativitas proper at. S. Cyprian. contr. Demetrian.
Tract. 1.
one says, Naseimur morituri, we are no sooner born, but instantly we begin to
dye; as M^ses had no sooner wrote his Book of Genesis, but soon after his Book
of Exodus; we dye from infancy into childhood, from childhood into youth, from
youth into age, and from age into old age, and perhaps into dotage, and at
length into the grave: surely, it were well, if every one of us could (as one
observes) out of the Acrostick Letters in the four degrees, or steps of man's
Age, to wit, Puerit a, Juventus, Virilitas, Senectus, experimentally make up
Pius; that piety might be the golden thread to run through all; that we would
dye before we do dye, so that when we do dye, we may not dye; that is, that we
would dye daily unto Romans 6.7. 1 Pet. 2.24.
sin by continual mortification of all our vile, and corrupt affections,
before we do dye into our graves, by a natural dissolution, so that when we do
dye a natural death, we may not dye the death eternal; which death eternal
does not consist in the annihilation, or utter abolition of the Body and Soul
in regard of their being, or subsistence, as the Epicures might sancy, 1 Cor.
15.32. but only of the cessation of their well-beeing, in regard of the
everlasting separation of both from the gracious and glorious 2 These. 1.9.
presence of Almighty God, and withal of the plunging of both into the sense
of torments in both unto all eternity, even for ever and ever: By this
occasion, since we are sure we must dye Heb. 9.27.
once, and but once, as the day has but one star, but it is the Sun, the
Lioness but one young one, but it is a Lion; so we having but one death, it
had need be a good one: We perhaps securely contemplate our Natural
complexions, having milk in our breasts, and Job 21.24.
marrow in our bones, blithe, and buxom at the present, may be apt to say to
the summons hereof, as sometimes Felix did to S. Paul reasoning of
righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, Act. 24.25. (...), Go, thy
way for this time, till a more convenient season; whereas, it may be, in
respect of the Lords Divine Praescience, according to which from aeternity
every man's days are Job 14.5, 14.
appointed, it may be this night, before we know what Prove. 27.1. Jam. 4 14.
to morrow may bring forth, our Luke 12.20.
souls may be taken from us: But yet, if we consummate, and finish a good life
before Death seize on us, so that the thought of our Deuteronomy. 32.29. Eccles. 7.36.
end be still at the end of our thoughts; it will not be to the godly in
insidiis, as a snare, but always in januis, under expectation as at our doors:
the stroke of Death can never be too sudden, when to a mortified soul it is
always under expectation; Thus, qui moritur, non moritur, quando moritur, as
S. August. lib. 65. quaest. qu 32.
Austine made his riddle, so prepared, he does not dye, when he does dye.

Yea, he so dies, that he both is, and shall be sure to live, and rise again:
and so shall all others of all sorts whatsoever: None ever but a Luke 10.27.
Sadduce, or men infected with the same leaven, denied it: those dry bones in
Ezekitl, chap. 37. which being made to live again, having breath, and sinews,
and flesh drawn over with skin, did immediately indeed represent new vigor to
be shortly put into the dead hopes of the Jews; but yet by many, or most
Divines taken notice of likewise as Peter Martyr. loc. Com. Class. 1. p. 82.
number. 24.
a Type of the Resurrection: foredenoted, say some, in Aaron's rod, which being
plucked up by the roots, withered and dry, Numb. 17.8.
budded afresh; so Rabanus Maurus Comment. in Ierem. cap. 1. fol. 7.
Rabanus Maurus; hanselled it was also in those raised under the Old Testament,
as the 2 King. 4.36.
Shunamites son. and the man 2 King. 13.21.
who touched the bones of Elisha, etc. and some others raised by Christ, under
the New Testament, as Joh. 11.44.
Lazarus, the widows Luke 7.15.
son of Naim, the Mar. 5.42.
daughter of Jairus, those Candidates of immortality, as one calls them; and in
express texts, there is enough in both Testaments to evince it; both the Cant.
4.5.
breasts of the Spouse yield us milk, which we may thence Isa. 66.11.
suck out, and be satisfied with as with the breasts of consolation: so Isa.
26.19. Thy dead men shall live, and the earth shall cast out the dead; the
almost whole fifteenth chapter to the Corinthians is spent on the same subject:
yea, some Christian Philosophers have attempted to draw as much for the thing
it self from grounds of regulated reason; even from the very desire that the
separated soul has to be reunited again to the body; for, confider the foul,
not as absolutely in it self, a spiritual, immortal substance: but
respectively, and with relation to the body, as it was forma informans, or, as
by Aristot. lib. de Anima.
Aristotle, under that notion, it is called, (...), that specificall form, or
first act which gave individuation to that body, which in toto composito, in
conjunction with it self, denominates the reasonable creature Man: now, in this
respective consideration, the soul, under separation from the body, which it
did inform, during that state, subsists in an imperfect kind of being: Now, as
all things naturally desire to be preserved in being, so also in the most
perfect kind of being, suitable to the end of their first Creation; so the soul
desires naturally a reunion again with that body which it did inform, ratione
Termini, in regard of the Term, or end of that desire; although indeed ratione
modi, in regard of the manner, and means, how this should be accomplished, this
is supernatural, and requires a divine power to effectuate: The sum is, (for
I must hasten to my main intention) thus all both Saints, and Castawayes shall
be raised up, at the last day, the one sort by the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8.11.
for Christ himself being the Ephesians. 4.15.
Head of the Church, quod praecessit in Capite, sequetur in Corpore, He being
the First Fruits of them that sleep in him, 1 Cor. 15.20. Cumeadem sit ratio
primitiarum, and tetius cumuli, as Beza glosseth it, there being the same
reason of the whole lump as of the Deuteronomy. 26.
First Fruits, in point of Consecration, all Resurrexit Christus, ut
resurrecturum se, non dubitet Christianiae. S. August. ser. 162. de Temp.
members of Christ's Mystical Body must, and shall be raised also from their
dormitories, and beds of rest to take possession of their Glory: and the other
sort by the power of Christ, (being Lord both of the dead, and living, Romans
14.9.) shall be summoned likewise from their graves, as Malefactors are
startled from their dungeons to be Joh. 5.29.
brought forth to their Executions: Both these sorts like to the Letter of
Litera Pythagorae discrimine secta bic^^^ Humanae vitae speciem prefer
videtur.
Pythagoras, (the letter Y) having two ends divided at the top, they are raised
up, but unto several ends, according to what we read most oppositely to this
purpose, Dan. 12.2. Job. 5.28, 29. (with which saying I shall now close up all
that I have now to say of these two supposals, or praecedaneous praeparatives
to my main business) Marvel not at this, says our Savior; for the Hour is
coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice; and shall
come forth, they that have done good, unto the Resurrection of Life, and they
that have done evil, unto the Resurrection of Condemnation. And thus far of
what was observable by way of praeparation to this great Assizes: we now come
to the matter it self of Action, or of Dispatch therein.

In my discourse of which I shall follow the order wherein the words are here
set down by S. John, and then, the first particular, that as Abraham in his
Tent, stands here in the Genesis 18,1.
door of the Text, to invite your observation, is the means of Discovery, by
which S. John came to have the knowledge of all this, and that was by
Revelation, or by special vision; for he says, (...), I saw: where we must
take notice by the way, that he does express himself, more Prophetico, after
the manner of the Prophets, in the Praetertence, speaking by way of
anticipation, of a thing as it were already past, though it was wholly future,
and to come, to show the certainty thereof, assuredly to come to pass, as if
it had been actually past already, and over.

But the point that we have here offered to our consideration is this; viz.

ways of extraordinary revelations mentioned in the Scripture, concerning the
will of God, or the issues, and events of things.

These were either Vid. Pet. Martyr. loc. Commun. sect. 6. p. 8.
Oracles, or Signs, or Urim, or Lots, or Prophets, or Dreams, or Visions.

Oracles were, when by Act. 7.38. (...).
lively voice God was pleased to inform his servants of his will, as in the
Sanctuary from betwixt the two Cherubims, Exed. 25.22. God was pleased, in the
exigents of his Church to reveal his will unto his people, by the High Priest;
in this manner spoke He to Abraham, to Moses, to Samuel, and to other eminent
and eximious Saints recorded for Heaven's favorites, in holy writ.

Omina, or Signs, by which men might understand his will; as in the instance
of Genesis 22.
Abraham's offering up his only son, in a Heb. 11.19.
type of Christ's own oblation of himself, Heb. 10.14. and Heb. 9.28.
once for all; in Moses typical lifting up the Number. 21.9. Ioh. 3.14.
brazen serpent in the wilderness; in Gideons Judge. 6.37.
fleece; in Jeremiah's, and Ezekiel's using of Ier. 27.2.
yokes, and Ezekiel. 7 23.
chains, and such like visible repraesentations of what should, under certain
terms expressed, ensue.

Urim, whereof we read, Exodus 28.30. Numb. 27.21. 1 Samuel 28.6. a stone, or
stones in the Breast Plate of the High Priest, which (as some out of Josephus
Antiq. l. 3. c. 9.
Josephus, and Suidas conceive) if it became shining, it boded victory, or good
success, if of a bloody color, war, and if black, death.

Lots were sometimes used to determine doubtful issues, or elections, Prev.
16.33. as in the choice of Matthias the Apostle, Act. 1.26.

That of the Prophets is known, who sometimes in Numb. 12.6.
Dreams had by the Lord represented to their fancies, or minds what he would
have believed, or done, or expected.

And the last way was by Genesis 1.15. Psalm. 89.19. Prove. 29.18. Isa. 1.1.
Visions, when the Lord, either to the understanding, or to the imagination, or
else Act. 10.11.
visibly to the fight was pleased to exhibit the representation, or semblance
of what he purposed to effect; which kind of Revelation Ezekiel, Daniel,
Zachary, and here St. John were acquainted with.

Now, as concerning all the former sort in use during the dispensations under
the Old Testament, I suppose the question is out of question with us all about
their cessation:

Genesis 1.2.
light before the Sun and Moon were made; yet we have reasons many to persuade
us, that the Lord now deals not by Visions, or Revelations extraordinary; and
whosoever do pretend such directions, it is to be feared, they are but vain,
delusive apparitions, or dangerous, and Satanicall impostures.

My reasons are these. 1. Because the Lord has now made perfect the Gal. 6.16
Phil. 3.16.
Rule of Faith, and Life, and given us an absolute Canon of Doctrine, to which
there may nothing be added, nor from which the least Iota be detracted, 2 Timothy
3.15, 16. So that to instruct us in a matter of faith, or moral practice,
Visions are all now unnecessary.

2. For particular Events, and accidents of the Church of God, which were the
usual matter of Visions and Revelations, he has given us reason to think,
that he will no longer instruct his Church by that means extraordinary, because
the charge runs so precisely, to add nothing to the words of the Prophecy of
St. John's Book, under penalty of having addition made to our plagues, Rev.
22.18. He would intimate in that charge, that by that Prophecy he has fully
instructed his Church in all things convenient for it to know, unto the end of
the world.

3. Even then, when was place for Visions and Revelations, the Rule was, to
Isa. 8.20. Act. 17.11.
examine all by the Word of God; so that if any thing came under color of
Divine Revelation, obtruded upon the Church of God, that held not current at
that Touchstone, it was, as a probation (in Gods permission) of his people,
Deuteronomy. 13.13. So, in it self, and in the issue, a fanaticall Isa. 66.4.2 These.
2.11.
delusion, like to some Meteor, or Comet, fed only by unwholesome exhalations,
which speedily vanish without heat or light; it was no say of the true Mal.
4.2. Rev. 12.1.
Sun Christ Jesus, in whose Psalm. 36 9
light alone it is, that the Saints of God do see the solid light of the
Truth; Wherefore, says the Prophet, Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to the
Testimony; if they speak not according to this Quae libeo legis non cominem us,
ca nec nosse debemus. Hilar.
Word, it is because there is no light in them.

And yet those grand Impostors of Rome, to this day, boast of I know not what
lumen Propheticum, continued in their Church; and for most of their paradoxes
in the questions of Purgatory, Prayer for the Dead, Invocation of Saints, etc.
when other arguments drawn from dark, Allegorical texts, or Apocryphal books
fail them, at length, they come to Visions, and Apparitions of Souls, that
have appeared to the living, and testified, some, their tortures, some, their
deliverances, by prayers, and suffrages of the Living: others pretending the
lively voyee of the blessed Virgin from Heaven, as that, Benede me scripfisti,
Thoma, applauding what Thomas had written of her: at another time, speaking
through her image, or statue in the Temple, giving the Good morrow to St.
Bernard, who yet to confute the imposture, gave answer, that she had forgotten
St. Paul's rule, It was not lawful for a woman to speak in the 1 Cor. 14.34
Church: But I forbear to offend your patience with these vanities; I only
touched at them in my way, the more to fasten on all Gods holy people (truly
such) the persuasion, to keep themselves praecisely to the written Word
inspired by, and joined with the Spirit of all truth. Isa. 59.21. even that
[sure] Word, 2 Pet. 1.19. as St. Peter, that Word of Truth, as St. Paul calls
it, 2 Timothy 2.15. Gal. 2.5.

This of St. John was an Apostolical, Personal privilege, (not to be drawn
into common imitation, or into ordinary expectation) He being immediately
acquainted of this secret of the manner of the last Judgment, by Vision
extraordinary: It is not privilegium, but pravilegium, not a warrantable favor
to be expected, but a praesumptuous tempting of God to be avoided; if ordinary
Christians, with sleighting, or omission of the Word written, do for their
direction, expect Visions now, after the prophecy of St. John's Book is
finished.

And thus much, if not too much, of the means, by which St. John first came to
have to him revealed, for the general information of the Church of God, this
carriage of the Grand Assizes: It was by Vision; so we read in the Text, (...),
I saw.

And so I hasten to the sight it self, or to what he did see, and that is here
described, first, to be the Judicatory, or Seat of Judgment it self, with its
Epithets, or Adjuncts, I saw a throne, and that a great, and a white throne.

A Throne, is a Seat of majesty, and glory; as when Solomon would be seen in
his might, ascends his royal 1 King. 10.19, 20.
throne, supported by twelve Lions, the emblemes of power, and of undaunted
courage: Now, whether St. John saw any Vid. Geyard. e. 5. ^om. 6. sect. 58.
created Seat, visibly in some shining clouds, in the which Christ shall come,
any material Throne, or rather such a semblance of majesty presented to him,
is no point of curious disquisition: under this expression of a Throne, or of
the Throne of his glory, mentioned here, and in St. Matthew, chapter 19.28. and
25.31. I apprehend is meant the Dieteric. In Festo Convers. Pauli, p. 180, 181.
glory, the mighty power, and justice of the Lord Christ; in the manisestation
of himself as the 2 Timothy 4.1.
Judge of Quick and Dead, in his glorious appearing, as St. Paul calls it, Tit.
2.13. or in the praesence of his glory, as St. Jude, v. 24 It has the Epithet
of Great, to denote his Majesty; and of White, to declare his Purity, and the
Psalm. 51.4. Romans 3.4.
clearness of his just proceedings Venit Christus S. August. l. 3. c. 8. de
Symb. ad Catech.
occulte judicandus, veniet and manifest judieaturus, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. or thus,
Great, to show his Severity, White, to denote his Lenity, even in the midst
of that Severity; and both these exercised, when Actually [upon] his throne,
namely, when Seated, when the Judgment, as Daniel speaks, was Dan. 7.10.
set, commonstrating thereby the wise deliberation observed in this final
Judicature: I might speak to each of these, and as the Disciples, by Luke 6.1.
rubbing of these ears, come to the solid grain, by discoursing on them find
out the very Psa. 63.5.
marrow and sweetness therein contained: First, for the severity of this
Judge, it is to the life resembled by Daniel, chapter 7.9, 10. when he says, that
his throne was like the fiery flame, a fiery siream issued, and came forth from
before, him, and so in his wrath God is said to be a consuming fire, Heb. 12.
ult. and the Psalmist, to express it, in the Actual execution, compares it to
the Hills melting like wax at the presence of the Lord: at the presence of the
Lord of the whole earth, Psalm. 97.5. To this purpose tends that expression, in
the person of the Lord Christ, Those mine enemies that would not that I should
reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before my face, Luke 19.27. Nor is
it more then equal, that those, who in the fury and rage of their impetuous
corruptions Psalm. 2 3.
tear the bonds of Christ's injunctions in sunder, (at least in their
attempts), should when he is advanced, and got into his throne, bind them fast
in Psa. 149.8.
chains, yea and though they were Nobles themselves, in links of iron; the
meaning is, to crush them as Christ, an anointed Psalm. 2.6.
King; who refused him for a Jesus, a redeeming Savior.

And yet, if ye peruse Rev. 4.3. ye shall there read, that howsoever He who
sat upon the throne, was to look upon, like a Jasper, and a Sardinstone, which
sparkled with radiant, blazing, and dazeling colors, or coruscations; yet even
then he had a rainbow round about that throne, in sight like unto an Emerald;
the Genesis 9.13.
rainbow was a sign of the Covenant of favor, after the great deluge of the
old world; and the Emerald being green, and fresh, delights the eyesight:
Whereto tends all this? but to show a strong propensity to mercy even in the
Hab. 3.2.
midst of severity; yea, the very damned in hell find this, for though a
greater judgment could not befall them Extensive, in regard of Continnance,
for it is Everlasting; yet Intensive, he could lay more upon them then they
suffer: It Is an old word in Orthodox Divinity, God rewards Ultra condignum,
punishes citra condignum, Ezra 9.13. Christ is said in the Revelation, 1.13.
to wear his girdle about his paps, or breast; we, about our loins; we, about
our loins Luke 12.35.
the seat of Concupiscence, to curb that; Christ, about his breast, these at of
Anger, to restrain it, to wit, in point of Execution; the motion of anger in
Christ's bosom was like the stirring of pure water in a crystal glass,
without all disorderly His girding about the paps and breasts signifies, that
there is no defect, or aberration in any motion, or affection in our Savior
Christ; but every thought, and inclination of his heart is kept in order by the
fullness of the Spirit. Mr. Ed Leigh Annot. ib
perturbation, such as is in the defiled, muddy, and polluted breasts of sinful
men; indeed, the Lord is so propense to snew There is a sweet expressio^ in
ludg. 10.6. His soul was [grieved] for the misery of (...) he does not afflict
[willingly] nor grieve the children of men, Lam 3.33 In all their affliction
he is afflicted, Isa. 63.9. Atque delet quoties cogitur esse serox: Therefore
in the Psalms we read that God as he had a red to Correct, so withal a staff
to Support, Psalm. 23.4.
the acts of benignity rather, than the contrary of extreme rigor, that even
when he is proceeding to the very act of Execution, his very Heart is turned
within him, and his repentings are kindled together, making many expostulations
both with the sinner, and with his own mercy, How shall I give thee up,
Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee, Israel? etc. Hos. 11.8. Justice and Mercy
strive, as it were, which shall first manifest it self; Justice like Zarah, one
of Tamars twins, Genesis 38.28. puts out the hand, on which is bound a scarlet
thread of a bloody color; but it draws back the hand again, till Mercy like to
Pharez breaks forth before it, and carries the priority, ver. 29, 30. But I
must hasten, ye see here in the Text, as the Throne was Great, to strike
terror into the hearts, even of the mightyest Potentates upon earth; so also it
was White, the color, as of Clearness, and Innocence; so, of Lenity,
Kindness, and of Indulgence.

And, (which must not be passed over) both these exercised, when actually upon
his Throne, Seated there; not, in any posture of haste, as on any sudden to
pass sentence, before due pawsing, examination, or conviction; He first sits
down, and ponders the whole cause; As much as this was intimated in the Lords
proceeding with Sodom, Genesis 18.21. the enormities whereof, though they were
exceeding clamorous, and cried to heaven for judgment; yet before the execution
of fire and brimstome upon them, he is said, first, to go down, and see
whether all things answered that loud and lewd report of their unnatural and
most prodigious crimes: I saw (says St. John) a great while throne; Great, for
Terror, and Severity; White, for Lenity, and Moderation; a Throne, for Counsel,
and sage Deliberation.

And so I come to the next particular, which the Text in order presents us
with, and that is the Judge fitting on his throne, who is here said to be God
himself, set forth under expressions of Majestic terror, from whose face the
earth and the heaven flee away, and there was found no place for them.

God himself then is the Judge, seated upon his throne; so is his style, Heb.
12.23. God the Judge of all, even Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Trinity in
Unity, and Unity in Trinity; which howsoever distinguished in regard of
Personal subsistence, and peculiar appropriations of operations, yet are still
but One, and the same in Essence, and divine Being; even as if you take water,
and ice, and snow, though in Apprehension distinct things, yet put together
into one vessel, and dissolved, all prove but one water: or, as Gregor. Nyssen
Catech. 15.
Gregory Nyssen makes the observation, in Abraham, Genesis 18.2, 3. who though, as
it is said, He saw three men from his tent door, yet he called all but [my]
Lord, in the fingular; as for the device of the Rabbis, that these three Men
were three Archangels, Michael, who foretold the birth of Abraham's Son;
Raphael, who healed him of his wound received in his Circumcision; and Gabriel,
who rescued Lot out of Sodom; this conceit we may reckon among those which St.
Paul calls (...), foolish and unlearned questions, 2 Timothy 2.23. the mystery
of the Text is to represent the Trinity of Persons, in the Unity of the divine
Essence: so Isa. 33.22. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the
Lord is our King, this threefold repetition of the word Jehovah, implies the
mystery of the Holy Trinity, as Ioh. Gerard. loc. Com. tom. 9. c. 3. sect. 26.
tract. de Extremojudicio.
Gerard apprehends it: To the Father judgment is given, Psalm. 9.8. The Lord
has prepared his throne for judgment, and he shall judge the world in
righteousness; and Joh. 8.50. There is one that judges, says Christ of his
Father; compare we 1 Pet. 1.17. To the Son it is ascribed, Act. 10.42. 1 Cor.
4.4. 2 Timothy 4.1.8. to the Holy Ghost, Isa. 4.4. called the Spirit of Judgment:
The ground of this is that known Maxim in Divinity, Opera Trinitatis ad extra
sunt indivisa, look as the Essence of the three Persons is aequall, individed,
and the same, so is the power, and work one, in relation to the Creature.

And yet, howsoever this be orthodox truth, that the whole Trinity do judge,
in regard of their (...), or consubstantiality, Authoritatively; nevertheless,
the whole execution of this Judgment, (...), in regard of Dispensation, is
committed unto the Son; the Father, and the Spirit judge, but by the Son; so
Dan. 7.13, 14. Act. 17.31. He has appointed a day, in the which he will judge
the world in righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained, So Romans 2.16.
God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ; in which respect, the
Judgment Seat is said to be Christ's, Romans 4.10. 2 Cor. 5.10. And this is also
an Article of our Creed.

The reasons of it are principally these two.

1. First, because the proceedings of the last Judgment being to be Visible,
it seemed good to the blessed Trinity, to appoint the managing thereof to the
man Christ Jesus, that so the Judge might be seen in Majesty; hence it is said,
Joh. 5.27. He has given him Authority to [execute] judgment also, [because] He
is the Son of many (...), as Pelargus in lo^. p. 62.
Pelargus expounds it, that is, according to his Humanity; for, this particle
(...), because, in this place, is not Aitiologicall, Causall, for the Humane
nature is not the Cause, of which that Judiciary power does depend; but it is
(...), Demonstrative, showing the Nature, in respect of which that power is
said to be communicated unto Christ, the second Person: Now, the Godhead being
invisible, 1 Timothy 1.17. and 6.16. it is said truly, Matthew. 24.30. They shall
[see] the Son of man coming in the clouds of Heaven, with power and great
glory; and Zach. 12.10. compared with Rev. 1.7. They shall [looke] on him, whom
they have pierced; so likewise Act. 1.11. This same Jesus which is taken up
from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner, as you have [see] him go
into Heaven. 2. Secondly, because it is a part of the recompense of his
Humiliation, I am sure an especial part of his Regal authority, by virtue
whereof all the enemies of his Spiritual Kingdom shall be forced to submit to
the aequity of his Sentence, Romans 14.11. Every knee shall how to him, and at
his Name, Phil. 2.10. that is, all Creatures shall yield him homage, and be
forced to acknowledge his power, scepter and sovereignty: The Apostles indeed,
Matt. 19.28. are said to judge the world, by their solid Doctrine, and eminent
Example, convincing them of their error, and ungracious courses; and all the
Saints in general likewise, 1 Cor. 6.2. shall judge even the Angels; however,
not by Original, and Supreme authority; yet, as Ephe. 2.6.
Assessors with the Lord Christ, as it were upon the same Bench, by
approbation, applauding the Rev. 19.1.
Justice of him, who being, as Abraham styles him, Genesis 18.25. the Judge of all
the earth, cannot but do right.
Now, for the majesty under which he is here described, in these words; From
whose face the earth and the Heaven flee away, and there was found no place for
them; many are the conjectures for the sense; some understanding it of the
abolishing, and utter annihilation of the whole frame of this present Universe,
being totally dissolved, and melted by the fire of Conflagration at that day:
some modern Expositors incline to this, for that they read, Rev. 21.2. I saw a
new Heaven, and a new Earth; for the first Heaven, and the first Earth were
passed away, and there was no more Sea: though S. August. de Civ. cap. 14. and
16. Ambros. Primas. Bid, Arethas, Ribera, ad loc. P. Lombard. l. 4. Did. 47.
D.
others, with as much judgment, apprehend it only to be an (...), not a (...),
a mutation, or alteration, in respect of qualities, and the present species, or
corrupt form, not of the actual destruction of their Essence, or Being; a
change of them into a melioration, not an abolition by annihilation; and they
expound it by that in the Psalmist, Psalm. 102.25, 26. Of old have thou laid the
foundation of the earth, and the Heavens are the work of thy hands, they shall
perish, but thou shall endure; yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment,
as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed: As a Vesture]
Now, you know the substance of the Body may remain the same, though the Vesture
that covers it be exchanged from an old [ 1 Cor. 7.31. (...).
fashion], to a new: Now as a Diamond is not so well cut as by a Diamond, no
more is the Scripture interpreted comparably, as by it self: And to the same
purpose is that, we read in 2 Pet. 3.13. where is mention made of new Heavers,
and a new Earth, after those that now are, verse. 7. being reserved unto fire,
are purged by it: Which fire at the last day, as Bonaventur. ad 4 sent. D. 48.
qu. 1.
Bonaventure Durand. in 4. sent. D. 47. qu. 3.
, Durandus, and Schooltmen are of opinion, shall not, (even as the waters were
not in the old deluge) be anew created, as a new material Element; But, it
shall be only Ignitio quaedam elementi purgandi, A certain fiery inflammation,
even as iron is made hot by a vehement heat, not by receiving any new
substantial form of fire into its self; By virtue of which Ignition, the old
dross which sin had contracted over the face of the Creation, shall be
defaecated, and repurged, and a new, fresh face, or beauty restored to it.

And yet, notwithstanding all this, under the favor of more deep judgments,
me thinks, by this flying away of the Heaven and Earth from before the face of
this great Judge, is, as by a Periphrasis expressed, in effect, no more but
this; namely, how the whole Creation shall be overwhelmed, after a sort, and
vanish, as it were, at the glorious Presence, and clarity of the Lord Christ:
They shall see the Mat 24.30. Bellarm. l. 2. cap. 28. de Imag. so Maldonat.
Co^el. a Lap.
sign of the Son of man, by which the Papists generally underrstand the ensign
of the Cross, by which he got the victory over all his Enenties; others, some
See the elaborate Annotations collected by Mr. Edward Leigh, a choice Linguist,
of various learning, and of great industry, on Mat. 24.30.
bright signal testimony of his dreadful, and majestic approach to
judgment, when the powers of heaven shall be See Heb. 12.26, 27.
shaken, the earth tremble, the mountains be overturned: 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.8.
the stars shall fall from Heaven, though not really (for if one star be
bigger then the whole globe of Earth, as Astronomers acquaint us, what shall
receive them all, in their fall?) but seemingly, as it were frighted from their
stations; and the Sun shall lose its light, though not in regard of its innate
Being, yet in regard of the more glorious splendour of Christ's appearance; even
as S. Paul comparing the Gospel with the Law, the Spirit with the Letter,
says, 2 Cor. 3.10. Even that which was made glorious, bad no glory in this
respect by reason of the glory that excels: In a word, as the Psalmist has
it, Psalm. 98.7. The sea shall roar, and the fullness thereof, the world, and
they that dwell therein, before the Lord, for he comes to judge the earth;
with righteousness shall he judge the world, and the people with equity; yea,
and that impartially, even without respect of persons.

Which leads me to the next particular, that here the Text in order presents us
with, and that is the consideration of the persons, thus impartially to be
arraigned, before this formidable, and majestic Judge: and these are small,
and great; I saw the dead, small and great stand before God.

Small and Great] that is, as well young, as old, as Ribera: poor and rich, so
Dionysius Carthusianus l. 2. c. 5. de quatuor Novissimis.
Dionysius Carthusianus, Kings and Caesar's, as well as Subjects, and Pesants;
in which regard, we may say as the Psalmist, Psalm. 49.1, 2. Hear this all ye
People, give ear all ye Inhabitants of the world, both low and high, rich and
poor together; even men of low degree, and men of high degree, Psalm. 62.9. all
the Heathen round about, Joel 3.12. all nations, Mat. 25.32. All must appear
before the Judgment seat of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.10. Christians and Pagans; yea,
the righteous, as the wicked, Eccles. 3.17. Romans 14.12. Whether 2 Timothy 4, 1.
quick, that is, whom the last day shall find alive, or by a 1 Cor. 15.51.
change, aequivalently dead, and revived again; or else having indeed been
dead, are raised up again, even all the world, Psalm. 98.9.

Judicium faciet gestorum quisque suorum,
Cunctaque cunctorum cunctis arcana patebunt.
There is no respect of persons with God, Romans 2.11. 1 Pet. 1.17.

Some curiosities there are coined in the Mint of quaint heads, (as they would
be accounted) about this universality of appearance in Judgment: As, in what
age, or stature, Infants, and others very young shall arise from the dead; and
they have taken the boldness to determine, that it shall be about that Age,
wherein Christ was in his fullness upon earth, to wit, about 33; misapplying to
this purpose that Text, Ephesians. 4.13 They shall all come, (...), to the measure of
the stature of the Fullness of Christ; or of the Age (as the original bears
it) of the Fullness of Christ; whereas that place (if in my poor understanding,
I misapprehend not) is more genuinely meant of that spiritual proficiency,
which under the power of the Ordinance, by the work of the Ministry, must by
be Believers improved to the highest degree: Another conceit of the
Pontificians is, that Infants dying unbaptized appear not in Judgment, and
their fancy is thus drawn out; Then, there shall be made a distribution into
Sheep, and Goats; but such being unbaptized cannot be reckoned among the Sheep,
by reason of their sin original, nor among the Goats, for the want of actual
sin; whereas yet the Text says, that S. John saw (...), as well as (...),
small and little, as well as great and grown: Besides, that opinion is founded
on a false supposall, to wit, of the absolute necessity of the work done in
Baptism; so, as if, without the external application of the water in the
Sign, there were an impossibility of sharing in the thing fignified; against
the orthodox Judgments of the Reformation, according to the Scriptures.
Another tiffany dispute is this, How Solomon says, Eccles. 3.17. That the
righteous, as well as the wicked shall be judged; whereas it is said, that the
Saints themselves shall be Judges of the world, as ye heard but now? To which
the Resolution may be this, that the very Saints themselves, as well as others,
shall in respect of Gerard.
presentation be first presented before the Tribunal of Christ; but having
received the Romans 2.5.
Declarative sentence of their absolution, of Come ye Blessed, they then meet
the Lord in the air; partly, by the assistance (happily) of Angels, and
partly, by the agility of their own glorified bodies, being caught up to be
Assessors with Christ, in the splendid Clouds of his glorious appearance, as
the Judge of all men, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.

But to speak my mind freely, I am, in such Vbi de re obscurissima disputatur,
non adjuvantibus Divinarum Scripturarum certis, clarisque documentis, cohibere
se debet Humana praesumptio, nihil faciens in alteram partem declinando. S.
August. lib. 2. de Peccat. merit. cap. ult.
abstruse mysteries as these, of opinion, that it is safer to offend of too much
modesty (if at least, that be an offense) then of too much audacity, and
praesumption to determine: Quo modo atque or dine illud sit suturum magis tunc
docebit [experientia] quam nunc valet consequi ad perfectum Hominum
intelligentia. S. August. lib. 20. de civ. Dei, cap. 30.
Experience must, and will be, in this, the surest Umpire, in that great, and
glorious Day of Revelation: In the mean time, in this grave assembly, I shall
not present fine-spun opinions, as ornaments to be worn only in the ear; rather
think it my duty to enforce the evidence of my Text; which is clearly, to
convince us, that all, and every, small and great, shall impartially, and
without respect of persons be presented before this awful, and majestic Judge
of all the earth; For so says expressly S. John in the Text, I saw the dead
small and great stand before God.

Which now brings me next in order to that part, which I styled the Arraignment
of all persons, of what rank and condition soever they be, noted from this
expression, They stand before God.

(...), that is, as the word imports, as before the face of God; so that,
whatsoever cunning Artifice there may be, to contrive Maeanders, or crafty
fetches of wit, or machinations to conceal the hidden and forbidden things of
darkness; saying with those in the Psalm. 10.11.
Psalm: Tush, the Lord shall not see; yet then all those pavilions, all those
mantles of Darkness shall be to no purpose at all, nor of any more advantage
to hide them from the al-seeing eye of this piercing, soul-searching Judge,
then were those Genesis 3.7.
fig leaves to cover Adam's first nakedness, or that bush in Paradise, to
shelter him from the voice, or wrath of Heaven: (...) [(...)], says the great
Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appear, or [be made manifest] as the word
imports, before the Judgment Seat of Christ: In this great Harvest day of the
Lord, the Angels, as Gods Reapers, shall from all the four corners of the
world gather up all Nations, and then, as it is Matthew. 25.32. Before him shall
be gathered all Nations, all must come forth, as St. John expresses it, Joh.
5.29. When the Lord comes, says Paul, 1 Cor. 4, 5 he both will bring to light
the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the
hearts: And again, Romans 2.16. God shall judge the [secrets] of men by Jesus
Christ; neither is there any Creature, that is not manifest in his sight, but
all things are naked, and open unto the eyes of him, with whom we have to do,
Heb. 4.13. (...), it is in that Text by a Metaphor borrowed from Anatomists,
who, to discover how Psalm. 139.15.
curiously the Lord had wrought all the parts of Nature within a man, are wont
to dissect him even from the neck, per spinam dorsi, down through the very
chine bone, and so the very inmost cells, and closets, every nerve, and vein,
and artery, and vessel is discovered, and laid open to the eye, and view of
the dissector: Even so is the whole man, in his closest thoughts, imaginations,
and intentions to the Lord the Judge: and the extent of this reaches as well
to the good, as to the bad, Eccles. 12.14.

Godly men are, in this life, under a threefold cloud, hidden, Psalm 83.3. and
as it were unobserved, because obscured: The first is a cloud of Hypocrisy:
it is an old word, Mundus universus exercet Histrioniam; as Players upon the
Stage come on disguised under the habits of several Persons, they being
nothing less indeed, then what they seem to be in show; and yet, till they be
all unmasqued, are mistaken for what they only seem to be; by which occasion,
tinsell often passes for silver, and copper for gold, Hypocrisy for
sincerity, a wooden leg with a silken stocking, a dunghill covered with snow,
are taken for sound, and fair, till the sun discover the quite contrary: or, as
Maginus writes, in his Geography, of the river Jordan, which arises at the
foot of the mountain Libanus from a double head, the one being called Jor, and
the other Dan, which glideth along in a sweet, and silver stream, pleasant to
behold, but it emptieth it self at last, in mare mortuum, into the dead sea; so
these hollow professors seem to Isa. 12.3.
draw water, and to be refreshed from the Word and Sacraments, as from the two
springs of Jor and Dan, and swim along in a stream of complacency to all
beholders, not to be detected till, in the upshot, and See 1 Cor. 4.5.
end of all, (which will be their trial) they empty themselves out into the
dead sea of Apostasy: and indeed usually it proves true, whosoever begins in
Hypocrisy ends in Apostasy: But yet till the Scene is over, and the Act done,
during the time of the stage, it had need be a Lyncean eye to discriminate a
true Nathanael, an Israelite indeed, from an opposite in disguise. And since it
has so pleased the Lord of the field to suffer tares to grow together with the
wheat, until the Harvest, the nettle, and the myrtle, the hemlock, and the
rose in the same garden, good fish and bad to be in the same Net, clean and
unclean beasts in the same Arc, Simon Magus, and Simon Peter in the same
Church among visible Professors, till the last Mat. 3 12.
fan make a final Mat. 25.23.
separation, the godly will be here under a cloud, by Hypocrisy.

The second is a cloud of Sin and Corruption, which like a Josh. 15.63. and
23.13.
Jebusite in Canaan will not out of their coasts, that Hydra of original evil
will still be repullulating; as in the womb of Rebecca, so in the wills of the
best men, Carnal Esau's often Genesis 25.22.
struggle with Spiritual Jacob's; and, to speak with Tertullian. l. 1. c. 5.
contr. Nationes.
Tertullian in his African style, Caelum ipsum nulla serenitas tam colata
purgat, ut non alicujus nubeculae flocculo resignetur, In the clearest serenity
of the Firmament, some speckling cloud may be discovered, as a mole was in the
very face of Venus, or a foil nigh set to some precious Diamond; some blots,
oft-times, in the face of the Church, as in the face of the Moon, to which she
is resembled, Cant. 6.10. Yea, many times, when we would wind up our thoughts
to the sweetest meditation upon God, they do like the pegs of an instrument,
slip down between our fingers, and prove untunable; Now it falling out so, that
the Gal. 6.1.
slips of the Saints, though but of infirmity, being more both watched, and
observed, then their firmest standing, these set them often under a cloud, and
they become obscured.

The third and last is a cloud of sorrows, and afflictions, to which they are
appointed, Act. 14.22 A Christians life is not like the Hill Olympus, (...),
wholly clear, without Clouds; Christianus is quasi Crucianus, as one says, it
comes from Crux, as well as Christus; nor can there be a truer inscription,
wherewith to incircle so despised a coin as the Church is, then that in Can.
2.2. As a Lilly among Thorns, so is my Love among the Daughters, sure to be
torn by Adversity: she is like to the bush of Moses, preserved from Exodus 3.2.
consuming, yet seldom out of the flames of Trial by sufferings; or, as the
Arc of Noah, though saved from finking, yet tossed in a sea, and Genesis 7.17.
upon the billows of sorrow: and during that state, she is often beclouded
under showers, and storms.

But now, when the day shall come, wherein men make their general appearance,
before this great Tribunal, in the Text; then shall all these clouds be
removed, (...), Mat. 13.43. Then, shall the righteous shine forth as the Sun,
in the Kingdom of their Father: They shall not only come [to] Judgment, but
be able also to stand [in] Judgment; yea, to lift up their heads with joy, and
with alacrity stand before the Son of man, Luke 21.28, 36. But, as for the
ungodly, it is not so with them, They shall not stand in the judgment, Psalm.
1.5. but, when the last shril Trump shall blow, and the Dead arise, they shall,
though all in vain, endeavor to hide their heads for horror, calling for
rocks and mountains to Rev. 6.16.
cover them from the presence of the Judge, who then shall set all their sins
(though never so secret) in order Psalm. 50.51.
before their faces; even then, when they shall be dragged from the prison of
their graves, shackled in the chains of guilt, and so arraigned, and set to the
Bar of Justice, to stand before God.

And so I pass from what I termed the Arraignment, to that, which in the order
of Judicature, is called the Indictment, which here stands entered upon record,
The Books were opened.

I saw the Dead, small and great, stand before God, and the Books were opened.

I hasten.

By these Books thus here, and in Dan. 7.10. said to be opened, we may not
apprehend any Si hic liber carnaliter cogitetur, quis ejus magnitudinem, aut
longitudinem valeat aestimare? etc. S. August. de Civ. Dei c. 4.
material Volumes presented before the Lord, with a Catalogue of the Names, or
actions of all men to be Judged, as if the Lord did stand in need of any such
Information; Lo, says the Prophet, Psalm. 139.5. Thou O Lord, have beset me
behind and before, searched me, and known my thoughts, words, and actions;
Psalm. 11.4. The Lords Throne is in Heaven, his eyes behold, his eyelids, try
the children of men: to the same purpose, Job 34.21. Hesiod. lib 1. (...).
(...), as the Poet has it; (...), said an old Poet Philemon, mentioned by
Justin. Martyr. lib. de M^narchia Dei.
Justin Martyr; the Platonists therefore called him (...), the inspector of all
things; and some Critics in the Greek tongue are of an apprehension, that
(...), signifying God, is derived (...), of a word which denotes an Universal
seeing, or beholding of things: This searcher of all men's hearts does alone
Hooker l. 3. p. 82. Eccles. Polit.
Intuitively know who are his, says learned Hooker; The Lord Christ knows
all things, says Peter, Job. 21.17. and 2.25. to the same purpose are those
many other Texts, Jer. 17.10. and 23.24. 1 King. 8.39. Psalm Cor and renes in
occulto latitant: significatur ergo Deum abscondita cogitationum nostrarum
scire.
7.9. Job 42.2, 3. But these Books are only (...), ascribed to the Lord, by way
of dignation, or gracious condescension, God speaking after the manner of men,
that men might the better conceive of the things of God; and the meaning of
them is, that all things thought, or said, or done by men, stand all as it were
upon record, and are all exactly remembered by the Lord, and brought likewise
afresh unto the memories of all men, Psalm. 50.21. Setting them all in order
before their eyes; so that Austin thinks thereby, quaedam vis est intelligenda
divina, a certain power of God is understood, by means, or by virtue whereof
all the deeds of men are in a wonderful serenity recalled to the remembrance,
ut accuset, vel excuset scientia conscientiam, that, according as they prove to
be, science may either accuse, or else excuse conscience: And they are all
called Books, in the plural number, not, in respect of the mind, or of the
knowledge of God, which is a most pure, and simple act; but, in respect of the
variety of the objects, or diversity of the things therein inscribed.

And yet Divines both for order, and distinction sake, have given several
Titles to these my sticall, and spiritual Books.

1 The first is the Book of Nature, or of Providence, whereof Psalm. 139.16. In
thy Book are all my members written.

2 The second is of Gods Remembrance, Mal. 3.16. Psalm. 56.8.

3. The Book of Man's Conscience, which is Volumen grande, as one calls it, a
large volume, wherein all things are written by the style of Verity, and for
the amending of which Book all other Books were invented; so S. Ambros. ad
Psalm. 1.
S. Ambrose, What are these Books opened, says he, but Conscience? Non
atramento scripti, sed vestigiis delictorum, and flagitiorum inquinamento? not
written with Ink, but stamped with the Impression of black Sins, and most
ugly Offenses.

4. The Book of Life, Phil. 4.3. Rev. 3.5. by which is understood Catalogus
Savandorum, the Catalogue of the Elect, whom God in Christ has chosen from all
Eternity unto Salvation; who though they now be unknown, yet shall then be more
manifestly declared.

5. To which some add, fifthly, the Books of the Scriptures, the Two Testaments.

All of these Books shall be, perhaps, at that day brought forth, bound up
together in one volume, which being unclasped shall discover all matters, how
they have been transacted, managed and done in the body, 1 Timothy 5.25, 26. Some
men's sins are open beforehand, going before to Judgment, and some men they
follow after; likewise also the good works of some are manifest beforehand,
and they that are otherwise cannot be hid; that is, some evil deeds are
punished in this world, to give notice that there is an eye of Providence that
observes them here; and some likewise are reserved for hereafter, to show that
there is a Judgment to come: The good works likewise of some follow them, Rev.
14.13. that is, the reward of their good works shall be imparted hereafter: In
sum, The general resolve in this matter is, that by these Books opened are
mainly meant the Consciences of all men; the office of which is to Romans 2.14,
15.
accuse, or to excuse, according to the Dr. Field l. 4. c. 33. of the Church.
privity that the soul has to things good or ill, known to none, but to God,
and it self: the Conscience being, as it were, Gods Register Book, wherein all
the sins of the Impenitent, and Unregenerate, or Castawayes, with all their
several circumstances of aggravation, are kept under their guilt uncancelled,
unstruck-out: It Is true indeed, that Actus transit, but Reatus permanet, the
act of Sin was transient, and momentany, not so the guilt; no, that is written
with a Jer. 17.1.
pen of Iron, and with the point of a Diamond, and graven (as it were in
characters indeleble) upon the table of their heart, Jer. 17.1. And this is the
Act of Conscience, to be its own Testimony, yea, a thousand witnesses against
it self: Hence was that saying of Lactant. l. 6. c. 24.
Lactantius, Quid prodest non habere Conscium, habenti Conscientiam? It is a
true word of the Apostle, God is greater then our Conscience, 1 John 3.20. and
surely none but He: Yet under that great God, the Supreme power on earth,
(within a man) is the Conscience: In this Microcosme of Man, (says a devout B.
H. Soliq. 51. edit. 1651.
Divine) there is a Court of Judicature erected, wherein, next under God, the
Conscience sits as the Chief Justice, from which there is no appeal; if that
condemn us, or our actions, in vain shall all the world besides acquit us, and
if that clear us, all other doom on earth is frivolous, and ineffectuall: O the
agonies of a guilty bosom unacquitted within it self! like Pashur, it is a Jer.
20.4. and Psalm. 73.19.
terror to it self: yea, very Ethniques many experimenting sometimes the stroke
but of Natural Conscience, were wont to set it forth by their Erinnes, or
Hellish Furies pursuing the flagitious with flaming firebrands, tormenting with
all extremity; the noise of a leaf Lev. 26.36.
shaken startles them, being afraid, alas! where no fear is; For Wickedness
(says Wisdom, chapter 17.11.) condemned by her own witness is very timorous, and
being pressed with Conscience, always forecasteth grievous things, that fear
being nothing else but a betraying of the succors, which Reason offers:
Guiltiness can never think it self secure; if there were no Fiends to torment
it, like a Bosome-devil, it would like trembling Dan. 5.6.
Belshazzar, and as Cain the Genesis 4.15.
marked vagabond, ever torture it self; There is no peace, says my God, to the
wicked, Isa. 57.21. Aut si pax, bello pax ea deterior; yea, the wicked are like
the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire, and dirt: all
the winds in the world, from without, cannot make a mountain shake, but the
imprisoned vapors that are within: Truly spoke one, once, All the world for a
clear Conscience! wonder we at the wish? A wounded Spirit, says Solomon, who
can bear? Prove. 18.14. On the other side again; I say, on the other side, (For,
we Mar. 1.17.
Fishers of men must have our Cork, as well as our Lead; our Cork, to boy up
penitent souls from finking in the mighty waters of Despair, as well as our
Lead to sink them into hell, who persevere incorrigible) O the tranquillity of
a spotless breast! when these Books are opened, and the characters of guilt
are found to be expunged, no sin at all Psalm. 32.1.
imputed to so blessed a soul: Beloved Christians, there is but one remedy of
the forementioned malady, but one principal Receipt to eat out, or to fret
away that canker which sin has brought into the spirit, or rather to wash away
the spots which Tit. 1.15.
defile the Conscience, and that is in Heb. 9.14. the blood of sprinkling, even
the precious blood of the Lamb 1 Pet. 1.19.
without spot, even the blood of Jesus Christ, which cleanses from all sin, 1 John 1.7. even that blood which Heb. 12.24.
speaks better things then the blood of Abel, the one cried to Heaven for
Judgment, but the Lord Christ's for Mercy; one line, or as it were but one red
struck of his blood drawn through that Book, clears and acquitteth all: Let
such an one be arraigned, let him be indicted, yea, perhaps by the grand
Accuser of the Brethren, Rev. 12.10. accused before God, day and night; yet
bring him to the Test, and the proof will be all, According to the Evidence.

And so I proceed in order, to the next particular, which after the Indictment,
I styled the Evidence, the things written in the Books; The Dead were judged
out of those things which were written in the Books.

In all regular, or legal Judicatures, before the Sentence, there goes
Conviction, and that grounded upon some clear Evidence, according to some rule
of Law, which directs, and orders Justice in that respect: Now, that which
directs the business in the Text, is no other then the Word of God, the
observation, or the violation of the commands whereof, clears, or charges the
Conscience, to receive the Sentence of Absolution, or of Condemnation,
according to the Evidence: Do not think, says our Savior, (the Judge in my
Text) that I will accuse you to the Father, there is one that accuses you,
even Moses, in whom ye trust, Joh 5.45. by Moes he means the Writings of
Moses, ver. 47. Again, Joh. 12.48. He that rejects me, and receives not my
words; has one what judges him, the Word that I have spoken, the sam shall
judge him at the last day: Compare Jam. 2.12. and it is therefore said to be
Organically, or Instrumentally, A discerner of the thoughts, and of the intents
of the heart, Heb. 4.12. and Romans 2.16. God shall judge the secrets of men by
Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel, that is, in a general acception of the
Word, according to the whole systeme of Doctrine preached by Christ, his
Prophets, and Apostles, epitomized into the Gospel: The righteous shall be
judged, specially, (says Gerard. sect. 70. ubi supra.
one) according to the terms of the Gospel, and be absolved; the wicked, out
of the Law, (collustrated by the light of the Gospel) thereby being convinced
of sin and infidelity, and be condemned; and indeed, Divines are of opinion,
that there shall not be in the last day any other norma, or rule to order, or
to direct the Judgment, then what is already passed before in the Ministry of
the Word: The Conscience is Joh. 10.23. Matthew. 18.18
bound or loosed Before, as the Keys are rightly applied: The Sentence of the
Judge at the last day, is not a new making of Salvation, or Damnation; but
only a solemn, and public testification, propalation, or definitive
ratihabition of what was before passed in the particular Judgment by the Word,
or instantly after Death, Heb. 9.27. Wherefore the last day is styled the
[Revelation] namely, public, of the righteous judgment of God, that is, of
that particular, righteous Judgment, passed upon discussion, between God and
the Conscience, before, Romans 2.5. thus we read the sentence of the word to be
this, Tribulation, and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil, but
glory, honor, and peace to every one that works good, Romans 2.9, 10. and 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7. all which, in the aequivalent, is declared, and more openly
ratified in the Come ye Blessed; and in the Go ye Cursed, at the last day;
each of these, according to the Evidence, out of what is written in the Books.

Upon this occasion, I have read of one much retired, and given to devotion,
who being asked, what book he was most of all seen in, and accustomed to read,
made answer, That he read especially one, and that was a book of three leaves,
a red lease, a black lease, and a white leaf; in the red lease he read the
Passion of Christ; in the black lease, the Punishment of the Damned; and in the
white lease, the joys of the Blessed; by perusal, and meditation of which
three leaves, he more profited, then if he had evolved all the Philosophers in
the world.

And thus, at length, we are come to the Judgment, or Sentence-giving it self,
in the next words, (...), The Dead were judged.

This Doctrine of the Judgment to come was never more needful to be preached
then now among us, upon whom the 1 Cor. 10.11.
ends of the world are come; all the lees and dregs of former times seeming to
be about to settle, in this last, and corrupt age; wherein, alas! whilst
Atheism, like the Jon. 4.7.
worm in Jonah's gourd, has eaten out the sap of Religion, and almost damped
the very life, and power of godliness, we meet with those (...) from (...)
quod significat ludo pueriliter (...), veluti puer, puerorum more; such as make
children play of the Terrors of the Lord. M. L.
(...), those scoffers, of whom S. Peter makes mention, 2 Pet. 2.3, 4. also
Jude, v. 18. walking after their own lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of
his coming? vainly, and scoffingly putting Jam. 1.22. (...).
paralogismes, or deceivings upon themselves, sophistically reasoning from the
delay of the time to a Nullity of the thing it self, and because Sentence is
not executed speedily against their evil works, therefore, as Solomon long
ago observed, Eccles. 8.11. the heart of the sons of men are fully set in them
to do evil; and so believe the Doctrine of the Judgment to come to be but
fabulous, together with the torments of Hell that follow after it, upon all
such mockers: To whom I shall only now say thus much, Vae quibus haec
experienda sunt prius, quam credenda, as Granatense tom. 2. Conc. d. Temp.
Conc. 1.
Granatensis expresses it, Woe be to those besotted, and impenitent
miscreants, whose sad experience may anticipate their Credulity in this, and
prevent their Faith! O how well had Felix (that corrupt Governor) answered his
name, and been happy, if as the reasoning about this truth made his conscience
to tremble, he had instantly reformed his practice, and shunned the danger of
it, Act. 24.25.

But, for the attestation of this Doctrine, the Firmament is not more
bespangled with stars, then the Scriptures are stored throughout with proofs
thereof: Enoch the seventh from Adam prophesied hereof, says Jude, v. 13, 14.
Behold, the Lord comes with Ten thousand of his Saints, to execute Judgment
upon all, both for their deeds and speeches: From whence St. Jude had that
Prophecy, whether by undoubted tradition, as Paul is said to have received the
names of Jannes and Jambres, the Magicians that withstood Moses, 2 Timothy 3.8. or
by some Vid. Scalig. in notis ad Eusebius. p. 244. etc.
book written of the translation of Enoch, extant in that Apostles days, but
since intercepted by time; (though I am praecisely of S. August. lib. 18. de
Civ. Dei, cap. 38.
Austin's opinion, that however some records might be lost, which did pertinere
ad ubertatem Cognitionis, appertain to the plenty of Knowledge; yet the Church
has been so faithful a Keeper of the sacred Canon, that nothing is escaped
her custody, which does belong ad Authoritatem Religionis, to the Authority of
Religion) It Is most likely S. Jude might receive it, by Apostolical and
immediate Revelation: some praeludiums whereof were seen in the destruction of
the old world by Genesis 7. 2 Pet. 3.6.
Water, and of the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah by Genesis 19. 2 Pet. 2.6. and S.
Jud. ver. 7.
Fire; the two colors in the Rainbow figure it; the caerulean color minds us
of the watery Deluge past, and the flame color, of the 2 Pet. 3.10.
fiery Conflagration to come.

It would be a large, if not a tedious task for me to enumerate all those
Texts, which in Moses, in the Psalms, in the Prophets, and almost in each page
of the New Testament make mention hereof, and prove the Doctrine: Two places
(which I have also named already) may be in stead of all, Act. 17.31. 2 Cor.
5.10. and the manner of it is expressed in the 24, and 25. Chapters of S.
Matthew: But yet to say something of it. 1. This may be proved from what has
been already seen in those particular Judgments inflicted, in the course of
Gods providence upon impenitent sinners inwardly, and outwardly, as upon Cain,
Ahitophel, Judas, Herod, whom God was pleased to make visible Examples here,
and thereby also to give intimation of what, in the last day of wrath, is like
to be inflicted on such, as committing like sins are [reserved] with the
apostate and damned Angels to the day of Judgment to be punished, 2 Pet. 2.9.
2. Besides this, the justice of God, and the truth of his promise, in regard of
the righteous requires it, whose afflicted estate in this life shall be
recompensed with a glorious one hereafter, and all their persecutors have shame
and consusion poured upon their faces forever, 2 Thessalonians. 1.5. 3. That there may
be a public acknowledgment of the Lord Christ's Dominion, purchased by his
passion to himself, over men, and Angels, so that every knee shall bow, and
every tongue confess unto him, and own his Sovereign power, Romans 14.9, 10, 11.
4. Equity requires it, that though the soul and body be separated in death,
yet having sinned or obeyed together, they should accordingly be tormented or
rejoice together unto all eternity. In a word, some of the wiser Heathen have
discoursed of a future reward, upon trial of men's actions, after death, making
mention of Pluto, Minos, Rhadamanthus, etc. as grim Judges, supposing the
flakes of Aetna, to smell of the sulphur of Hell: and moreover, what they also
speak of the Elysian fields, implies an apprehension of some future estate of
Happiness in another world. What need I add more to this proof, since it is an
express Article of our Creed, that Christ shall come again to judge the quick
and the dead? proved also, 2 Timothy 4.1. and 1 Pet. 4, 5. Heb. 6.2.

Now, (which I thought not amiss to mention, on this occasion) howsoever our
Savior interdicted his Disciples the curious in quisition after the times, and
seasons, Act. 1.7. since the Father has put [that] in his own power; yet there
have been found some, in all ages, very adventurous, who (as Bullinger lib. 2.
advers. Anabap. c. 1.
Bullinger writes of some Enthusiasts) have presumed to define a set time for
this general Assizes: though the Scripture indeed mention a set day determined
by God for the same, as Act. 17.31. 2 Pet. 2.9. and as St. John acquaints us,
Rev. 1.10. that, as there is Dies Dominica, the Lords day; so St. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2. that there is Die^s Domini, the day of the Lord, or the day of God,
2 Pet. 3.12. In the one, it is for us to give him, here, the Glory of his
Public service; in the other, himself will give us that believe, then, and
there, his Glory for our reward. Though this be said in the general, yet of
the very Day, and Mar. 13.32.
Hour beforehand, no man, no not the Son of man (as man) himself knows, at
least, thinks it not fit to acquaint us with so much.

There is, as Pet. Galatin. lib. 4. c. 20.
Petrus Galatinus well styleth it, a Thalmudisticall tradition, but no true
Prophetical prediction, (and yet it is mentioned almost by all, who treat on
this subject) of one Elias, who undertook to foretell that the world should
last just 6000 years, 2000 before the giving of the Law, 2000 under the Law,
and 2000 under the Gospel; gathering it, they say, from David, Psalm. 90.4. and
from Peter, 2 Pet. 3.8. that a thousand years with the Lord are but as one day,
and one day as a thousand years, and so allowing one day of the week for a
thousand years, by way of a resembling computation, the time is made up; and
the seventh day, as it was sometimes a day of a Spiritual (but of a Temporary)
rest, so then it should be an everlasting and glorious rest to all true
Belcevers: and the same, say men of that apprehension, was after a sort
presigured in the Translation of Enoch; for the six persons, who were before
him dying after the usual manner of dying, Enoch being the seventh, as S. Jude
says, dyed not after the ordinary way, but was translated, as it were in a
figure hereof, extraordinarily, by God himself, Genesis 5.24.

Thus have these men spunne a thread upon the wheel of their own imaginations,
not uttered an opinion upon sufficient warrant from Gods Word: for this cannot
be proved to be the Prophecy of 1 King. 17.1.
Elijah the Tishbite, who prophesied under King Ahab, about the Three thousand
and fortyeth year of the World, and Nine hundred and odd years before
Christ, as some Vid. Gerard. ubi supra, tom. 9. sect. 77. ca. 7.
Chronologers compute it; but of one Elias, a Jewish Rabbi, about some Two
hundred years before Christ: But (by the way a little) if this conceit should
be Authentic, and hold right, then that other opinion of the Chiliasts, or
Millenaries, first mentioned by one Euscb. lib. 3. Ecclesiast. Hist. cap uli.
Nicephor. Hist. c. 20. and Hieronym, in Catalogo Scriptor. in vita Papiae. vid.
Ribcram Comment. in Apocal. c. 20. v. 6. p. 380, 381. etc.
Papias of Hierapolis, (as Irenaeus reports it) but much exploded in that age,
yet of late taken up again by many, who have found more leisure to raise
doubts, then (under that odd affectation of Singularity) declared any
satisfactory resolves unto them hereabout; that opinion I say, must vanish:
They pretend, that Christ shall come personally, and visibly to reign a
thousand years upon earth, before the Day of the last general Judgment: and
all those who dyed Patriarchs, or Prophets, or Apostles, Martyrs, or
Confessors, or any eminent Saints, and Israelites, and Christians Joh. 1.47.
indeed, shall then be raised up from the dead to reign with him; and this they
think is understood by the first Resurrection, Rev. 20.6. Thus an Error; or, in
a modest expression, a Mistake confutes a Praesumption; for if Christ must
reign a thousand years visibly upon earth, before the day of Judgment, and
that first Resurrection being not yet past, then, of necessity, the world must
continue above 6000 years, for that we are now within 400 years expiration of
those 6000, and yet that bodily Resurrection is not come to pass.

But, as to this latter opinion, besides the known maxim in Divinity,
Scriptura symbolica non est argumentativa; many sound, orthodox Divines do
conceive it to have in it too worldly, and too carnal an apprehension of the
Nature of Christ's Kingdom, since Himself has said it, that it was not of this
world, Job. 18.36. in the outward Act. 25.23. (...).
fantasies and pomp thereof; but Christ's Kingdom is within, Romans 14.17. in
the inner man, spiritual and mystical: And it is no new thing in the
Scriptures to call our New birth in grace a Resurrection, by arising
spiritually out of the graves of our Natural corruptions to a life of
Holiness, even so it is understood, Col. 3.1. Besides, this were to make some
addition to the Articles of our Creed, which neither mentions, nor implies
three visible Comings of the Lord Christ; but only two, the one at his first
appearance in the Flesh to be Judged, and the other in Glory to Judge the
world; even so the Holy Ghost expressly by his Divine Apostle, Heb. 9.18. He
shall to them that look for him appear (...), [the second] time, without sin,
unto salvation: Christ comes but D. Tailor.
twice Corporally, once to merit salvation, and again, to perfect it.

But I must contract this discourse, and all I have to add more under this
Head is a double advise; The one, not to search beyond a praecept after a
Revelation unrevealed, Noluit Deus prsdicari, quod videbat non utiliter seiri,
says S. August. Epist. 80. ad Helychaum.
Austin, God would not have it known, beeause He saw it more profitable
unknown: Neo tamen negatum est ad Detrimentum, quod ignoratum tribuit
inerementum, as Hilar. l. 9 de Trin.
Hillary: If God had foreseen it advantageous for us, He would undoubtedly have
revealed it unto us, Deuteronomy. 29.29. But this He has assured us of, that there is
such a day, and that it shall come as a thief in the night, suddenly, 2 Pet.
3.10. and S. James is express, chap. 5.8, 9. That the coming of the Lord
draws nigh, and (in most of the Read Mat. 24 and 2 Thessalonians. 2 3.
praecursory signs thereof) it is evident, that the Judge stands before the
door, as it were, now ready to sound the last Trump, sommoning all to the last
general Tribunal. Well then, what others give to a curious indagation of the
time, let us (by casting off thoughts of security) bestow upon a serious, and
hourly praeparation against that time, and hour, whenever it shall be, or how
long soever that day shall continue, (which some have also unsatisfactorily, if
not praesumptuously discoursed upon) or wheresoever it shall be, whether in the
vale of Jehoshaphat, or in the Center of the earth; let us, I say, leaving
these unrevealed, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
secret things to God, get into the Arc before the flood come, that we may be
safe, when it does come: Praeveniendus est Dies, qui praevenire consuevit,
says a Father in a kind of Prophecy, praevent that day by a sedulous 2 Pet.
3.12.
expectation, which may otherwise praevent us, and come upon us as at Luk 21.34.
unawares, Latet ultimus Dies, ut chserventur omnes Dies. S. August. l. 50.
Hom. 13.
thinking every day to be it. The Rabbis have a Proverb, Qui colligit in
vespere sabbati vescetur in Sabbato, Who so gathers his Manna before the
Sabbath come, in the Eve, shall be fed with the same Manna, in the morrow, when
the Sabbath is come: to which purpose give me leave I beseech you, to offer to
your considerations a Vide librum, cui Titu. lus est Destru^orium vitiorum, a
quodam no nine Carpentero conscriptum, sub. 41.6.
story of a religious King, sometimes of Hungaria, who took a resolution to
retire himself, and so to take an exact survey of himself, and of his actions,
how he should give up the last Luke 16.2.
account of himself, and of his great stewardship, both as a Christian, and as
a King, in that Act. 2.20. Rev. 6 17.
great day, when after that general Audit, he must be no longer Steward: The
Nobles about his Court Amos 6.3, 4, 5, 6.
chanting it to the noise of the violl, drinking wine in bowls, inventing to
themselves instrumen's of music, anointing themselves with the chief
ointments, and stretching themselves upon Ivory couches, these put far from
them the thought of this great day: (in like sort as many of our supine
Christians every where, who have it often in their lips, upon any mis-accident,
Alas! they thought no more of it, then of their Dying Day; no nor or Doomsday
neither; an ill-beseeming expression!) I say these joviall gallants about the
Court would needs by a vehement instigation stir up the Duke the Kings
brother to adventure to the Kings closet, to interrupt, or to remove the sullen
fits of his melancholy, to persuade him to mind his greatness, to take the
liberty of his pleasures, and forget sorrows: To this advise the King, for
that instant, makes him no returns of answer, or of reply: but soon after makes
an edict, and gives it abroad, that at whose door a Trumpet should sound, that
man should immediately be put to death: accordingly it sounded at his Brothers
lodgings, and the Sergeants apprehend him for execution; at which unexpected
surprisall being startled, he makes his way to the King, becomes prostrate at
his feet, implores pardon, and mercy: under that prostration, and posture,
then, (and not till then) the King speaks to him, and said, Ah my brother, are
you so afraid of my Trumpet, who can but Luke 12.4.
take the body, or afflict the outward man; and shall not I tremble, and be
afraid under the apprehension of that great Day, and of that dreadful
Tribunal of the supreme Potentate, the Lord of Lords, and the 1 Timothy 6.15.
King of Kings, when I shall be summoned thither by the last, and terrible
These. 4.16.
Trumpe of the Archangell? Which saying was enough to have appalled his ranting
brother, yea to have put bowels into a rock, and have taught marble the art of
relenting: I presume the application to be easy: Wherefore, to end this part,
it shall be not my admonition only, but my prayer also, that every one of us
may always bear in remembrance that not more known, then serious saying of S.
Hiecome, Sive comedam, sivebibam, sive aliud quid agam, semper videtur tuba
illa terribilis insonare auribus meis, Surgite mortui, and venite ad judicium,
that is, Whether I eat, or drink, or whatsoever else I am about, me thinks that
terrible Trumpet sounds this saying in mine ears, Arise ye Dead, and come to
Judgment: which the learned Vossius disputat. Theolog. p. 234 edit. 1628.
Vossius has, for memory sake, turned into this Distich, Seu vigilo intentus
studiis, seu dormio, semper
Judicis extremi nestras Tuba personat aures.


And thus, at length, I am come to the last observable (at least according to
my division) in this Text, and that is the Regulation of the final sentence it
self, whether of Absolution, or of Condemnation; and this is expressed in the
last words, According to their Works.

The Quaere here is, whether Thoughts; and Words, and Omissions come not into
account with the Lord, at the last Day? The Quaestion is out of quaestion,
undoubtedly they shall all, however the denomination here be given to the more
noted part: For the Thoughts it is clear, 1 Cor. 4.5. Mal. 3.16. Eccles. 12.14.
Psalm. 50.21. For the Words, Mat. 12.36. S. Jud. v. 14. For sins of Omission
it is evident from the form of the sentence, Mat. 25.42, etc. You did not feed
me, etc. And for all other Works, 2 Cor. 5.10. Even for whatsoever men have
done in the Body: yet with this difference or odds, to the godly, and to the
wicked; to the godly it shall be secundum, non propter opera; not [for] their
Works, as if the merit of them did deserve a recompense of bliss, as a
meritorious cause of salvation; for all [that] merit, is in Christ their Head,
and mediator: and indeed, of all their most accomplished works of the greatest
Saints it may be said, as Andrew did of the five Loaves, and two Fishes, (...);
Alas! Lord, Joh. 6 9. It was the saying of Luther, Cave non tanturn a peccatis,
sed etiam a bo nis operibus. see Isa. 64 6. Vae etiam laudabili justitiae
lominum, si remota inisericerdia discutins eam, S. Austin.
what are these (...) if laid in the balance they would be found too lighty
and thy Justice would infinitely praeponderate; but Christ with the Rev. 8.3.
incense of his merits has perfumed the performances of the Saints unto an
acceptance with God: the faith of the Righteous lays them as John in the Joh.
13 23
bosom of Christ, and their good Works as S. Mat. 26.58.
Peter follow Rev. 14.13.
after them, as the evidence, and manifestation of their Faith: But with the
wicked, and impenitent reprobate the case is otherwise, because the sentence is
pronounced upon them, propter opera, for their wicked, and sinful Works. Nor
will this seem strange, if we shall consider what it is; that makes sins
culpable of damnation; what our weak services capable of heavenly glory: we
shall discover great odds, men's sins are culpable of death by their own Nature
being committed against an endless Majesty, that cannot be satisfied but by a
punishment commen surate and proportional to his infinite Justice: but good
Works become capable of their reward, 1 By the graoious promise of God, (
promittendo se fecit debitorom, says Augus. de verbu Apost. ser. 16.
Austin) who by promise only has made himself a debtor. 2 By the merit of
Christ, that has purchased unto us a cover of their blemishes, and that they
might be capable of aeternall glory. Now, for the sins of the obstinate,
incorrigible, and impenitent, the Lord has received no satisfaction in the
blood of Christ, which they Heb. 10.29.
trampled under feet; so that they lie still under the guilt of all their sins,
and of all the several aggravatlons of the same, together with all the wrath,
and formidable curses, which the Lord has in store for all ungodly miscreants,
who by the abuse of Gods patience, and their own impenitent hearts have so
treasured up to themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of
the righteous Judgment of God, who will render to every man according to his
deeds, Romans 2.5, 6.

To conclude this part; in a just dispensation of the several rewards of both;
the great Heb. 12.23.
Judge of all adorned with majesty, attended with the glorious retinew of Heb.
12.22.
innumerable Angels, and glorified Dan. 7.10. S. Jud. v. 14.
Saints, seated upon his royal glorious throne, with Mat. 25.31. Mat. 24.30.
power, great glory, shall call the one Sheep, and the other Goats, and making
a final, and everlasting Mat. 25.31, 32.
separation between them shall say unto the one, Come ye blessed, inherit the
Kingdom praepared for you, from the beginning of the world; and to the other,
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire; and these shall go away into everlasting
punishment, but the righteous into life eternal.

The sum of all I find to be epitomized into these four Latin verses: Quam
tristis vox est, Vide hos versus apud Ioh. Gerardum, tom. 9. c. 4. sect. 60.
cum Iudex dixerit, Ite,
Tam duleis vox est, cum dixerit Ille, Venite.
Mortis, vel vitae breve verbum est, Ite, Venite,
Dicetur Reprobis, Ite; Venite, Piis.


So that this sentence is like to that pillar of the cloud which was darkness
to the Egyptians, but light to the Israelites, Exodus 14.20. The word, or
sentence of Life, or Death eternal it is but short; yet curt and sharp to the
Reprobate, or Castawayes; but short, and sweet to all Gods Elect, and Christ's
redeemed precious Holy ones.

2 Timothy 2.15.
approve my self to God, the Heb. 12.23.
Judge of all, in the discharge of my conscience.

And now, if any look that I should, in the first place, assume the boldness
to advise, or admonish these learned, and reverend Judges, who like Castor and
Pollux appearing [together] promise good to the Commonwealth, as that
Asterisme does to the Mariners at Sea; I shall disappoint that expectation,
since their great abilities, and their cordial both aims and endeavors to do
Justice [for Justice sake] are so well known to the chiefest seats of
Judicature, and to this Nation already: I shall therefore in stead of exhorting
them, take this occasion to persuade all you that hear me this day, to be
enlarged toward God in thankfulness, that by his propitious providence, he
has furnished the seats of public Justice with so accomplished Magistrates
as these are: seeing therefore that by you we enjoy great Act. 24.2, 3.
quietness, and that very worthy deeds are done unto this Nation by your
providence; we accept it always, and in all places, (Honorable Lords) with
all thankfulness.

My Admonitions must be directed unto all such, who enjoy the benefit, and
blessing of government, which in the just administration thereof is a Terror
to the wicked, lawless, and ungodly; and an encouragement to those that be
good, Romans 12.3, 4. Yea, a Xenophon (...).
Xenophon expresses it, (...), Those who are good men, by beholding the
dishonor cast upon vicious persons (by the Justice of the Magistrate) for
their unlawful deeds, and their illegal perpetrations, do by sarre more
cheerfully follow, and embrace virtue; and not only so, but exemplary Justice
upon some proves a common terror unto all; When a scorner is smitten, the
simple will beware, says the wise man, Prove. 19.25. or, as Moses expresses
it, When any praesumptuous sinner was punished, all Israel must hear, and fear,
and do no more praesumptuously, Deuteronomy. 17.12.13.

To all the people in general, then, let me say as Elisha the Prophet did by
the mouth of Gehazi his servant to the Shunamitish woman, 2 Kin. 4.13. Behold
thou have been careful for us with all this care; What is to be done for thee?
So say I, Behold our Governors have been careful for you with all the care
they can take, that you may every one dwell safely under your own 1 King. 4.25.
Zech. 3.10.
Vines, and Fig Trees, in peace and quietness; that there may be no Psalm.
144.12, 13, 14.
leading into captivity, nor complaining in your streets, but that your sons
may grow up as Plants, and your daughters as the polished corners of the
Temple, that your sheep may bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in your
streets, etc. If ye ask me then, What is to be done for the Magistrates? I
answer, They must be spoken for: If ye desire to know, to whom? I answer, To
the King of Heaven, even to that 1 Timothy 6.15.
King of Kings, of whose Kingdom there can be Dan. 7.14 Luke 1.33.
no end. If ye demand further, How this King of Heaven must be spoken to for
them? I answer, or rather the great Apostle for me, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. In
supplications, and Prayers, and intercessions: If you would know, for what?
that same Text resolves you; namely, that we may lead a quiet, and peaceable
life, in all godliness, and honesty; intimating hereby, that men in lawful
authority are, (or should be) the prime supporters both of Religion; and moral
Honesty, and therefore being subject to many temptations, and undergoing many
difficulties, they stand in need of many, and those too the most fervent
Prayers of all those good people, who expect protection, support, encouragement
from them: Yea, if men did seriously ponder but the weight of the Magistrates
office, they would double the zeal of their devotions for them: some of the
Rabbis went so high in their expressions this way, as to say, qui funguntur
magistratu non veniunt in judicium, as Paulus Paulus Fagius. senttenanor. 3.
Ben Syra.
Fagius acquaints us to have been the sentence of Rabbi Ben Syra, that is, such
as conscientiously undergo the office of Magistracy, were exempted from the
Judgment to come; as if their present vigilance, care, study, travel, and
other laboriousnesse, which they underwent for the good, and weal of Community,
had been so great, that it had after a sort, excused them, for all things else:
but we will take notice of this as an hyperbolicall expression, and an
excessive speech in the Rabbi: Yet, nevertheless, we read in Scripture that
Moses (however then the Number. 12.3.
meekest man upon earth) being in the office of a Governor, found cause to call
it a [ Number. 11.11. confer, Exodus 18.22.
Burthen] yea, and to call out too for some Number. 11.14.
help to stand under it: Pray we then to the God of wisdom Isa. 28.6.
to be for a spirit of Judgment to them that sit in Judgment, to inspireour
Psalm. 105.22.
Senators with a spirit of wisdom, and counsel, to direct all their
consultations so, as they may in the issue tend to the glory of God, the credit
of the Gospel, the discovery, 2 King. 20 19.
and suppression of Blasphemy, Haeresie, Atheism, with the Authors of it, and
for the establishing of Zech. 8.19.
Truth, with public Peace, in the Nation.

Secondly, To the Magistrates there is due Honor belonging, to be (besides in
the inward awful thoughts of their power) manifested in Reverentiall speeches,
and External homage; you must nor revile the Gods; or as it is in your margin
the Judges, nor curse the Ruler of the people; it was the charge of Moses a
Prophet, Exodus 22.28. Wherefore, when Paul had overshot himself, in a sudden
passion, that way, and given the nickname of a Whited wall to the High Priest
(then his Judge), he, upon advertisement thereof, gave himself a check for it,
upon the consideration of that very text, Act. 23.5. Moses a chief Governor is
styled by Joshua [My Lord] Moses, Number. 11.28. and the people in taken of civil
homage, and observance, [bow the knee] to Joseph, when a Governor in Egypt,
Genesis 41.43. And moreover (which for some reasons, I will not omit to note on
this occasion) for the greater gracefulness of their Office and Persons, they
have been, in all Ages, arrayed in robes of Majesty, and honor before the
people; chiefly when placed in the Seat of Judicature, and under the actual
execution of their so honorable Function; which may be gathered from 1 King.
22.10. Matthew. 6.29.

Render then honor to the Magistrate, to whom it is so many ways due, Romans
13.7. and it is well observed by Chrysostom, that the Apostle says not simply,
(...), Give, as if the thing were Arbitrary; but (...), See Matt. 22.21. and
Luke 20.25.
render it, as of Duty, in all obedience to Authority.

Thirdly, there is due to the public Magistrates Matt. 17.25. Romans 13.7.
Tribute, and Custom, appertaining to them for all their public care,
providence, protection; (...), they attending continually upon this very same
thing, carrying public spirits in their public places, being contented not
only to spend, but to be 2 Cor. 12.15.
spent for the good of the Community the words in the original Greek, (...),
and (...), put for Tribute, and Custom, in a generality of use are oft-times
confounded, and indifferently put to signify any kind of payment made to the
Governors; yet critically say some learned Authors, Tribute is of that which
arises out of what is grown within the land, (...), from being carried, or
brought into the Exchequer, or Treasury appointed: Custom is that which is
paid for what is, according to Contracts in Traffic, imported or exported,
into, or out of a Nation, (...), so Strabo. lib. 17.
Strabo calls such things (...), and so the Latin word vectigal has its name
ex vectura: But before so learned an Auditory, I may not waste time about
words: Bodinus, l. 6. c. 2. de Republ.
Bodinus reckons up diverse kinds of both; the determination of the manner, or
of the measure of either, whether ordinary, or extraordinary, is left to the
prudence and piety of lawful Superiors, according as the state of important
affairs, the faculty and ability of the people, or the necessity of Subsidiary
supplies, for the support, honor, and safety of a Commonwealth may require:
Now, an obedient people may assure themselves, that aequall, just, and godly
Governors, will not turn Judgment into gall, Amos 6.12. but remember, that God,
(for Chr. 19 6.
whom they judge) is pleased to style them Isa. 44.28. Numb. 27.17.
Shepherds, whose office is not to Mic. 3 3. Ezekiel. 45.
flay off the skin from off the backs of the flock, but to shear the sheep so
for their own use, that withal the wool may grow again for the warmth of the
flock it self; even as it is reported to have been the saying of Tiberius, A
good Shepherd should tondere pecus, non deglubere, as Sueton in (...).
Suetonius records it: Oppression (says Solomon) makes even a wise man
Eccles. 7.7.
mad, yea, and it may make a good man Exodus 2.23. Psalm. 12.5.
sigh: But when (as I noted in my former Sermon) these things are expected, and
imposed, after the old Charter of England, salvo contenemento, in a tender
moderation, Tribute must be rendered to whom it is due; our Savior himself paid
it, Matthew. 17.25. and such payment was in use even in the days of King Solomon,
1 King. 4.6.

In sum, who do, or should, carefully guard your Religion, your Possessions,
but Governors? Who protect you by land, and fense you by sea, but they? And
what can you bethink to purchase a solid peace on the land? or to fortify your
wooden walls at sea? And if Governors lay out themselves for the good of
Community, so that themselves shall become a general, and a public good; it
will be a great Ingratitude in those who reap the comfort, not to yield such
all lawful assistance.

And thus having shown the duties of the people at large, in their relation to
Governors, and to Government: It only remains, that I add but a few words
more, suitable to the present season, and occasion of this meeting.

And here I might begin my advice to Mr. High Mr. John Trott of Laverstake Esquire
Sheriff: but why should I go about to paint a Diamond, or to enamell a
pearl? whose modesty whilst it declined Honor, it overtook him: He has set a
fair Copy for his Successors in that Office, and Authority, to write after: I
shall only desire him to continue doing as he does do, and then both his
Cant. 1.3
Name, and his Actions shall be as an Ointment poured forth to persume
Posterity as with some fragrant odor, that may provoke Imitation.

I might next direct my Exhortation to the Gentlemen of the Grand Inquest, upon
whose Information, Advice to the Grand Jury.
and Presentiments depends almost the main transaction of the present
proceedings in Judicature, for the Gal. 5.12.
cutting off of incorrigible Malefactors, and the reformation of all disorders,
and illegal irregularities; If you would be esteemed as the Eyes of your
whole Country, you had need to see clearly; but if in any particulars you
would defire to be of Lyncean, and discerning eyes indeed, Let me desire you to
have special regard to the Violators of Gods sacred, and precious 1 Cor. 11.2.
Ordinances, in the promoting whereof, as you shall advance the glory of God,
and therein your own felicity, so (as I am assuredly persuaded) extremely
gratify these learned, and religious Judges, to whom nothing is more dean,
then the promotion of Gods 1 Samuel 2.30.
Honor: one thing, above many others, that I might mind you of, is the
Discovery of those Artifriall, and Grand Impostors, or Church-cheaters, the
Jesuits, by whose cunning in sinnations, (under the several habits, or
shapes, as well of Mechanics, as otherwise) it is more than probable, that all
the combustions, at the present, in the Christian world are raised, and not a
little in Great Britany; if you have your own souls, the prosperity, and
welfare of the Church, and State of England, use your best endeavors to
detect, and to present those Stygian, and Infernal Emissaries, for their
mature extirpation; Take heed, and do it.

And as for you Jurors of another order, Advice to the Petty-Jury and Witnesses.
and all those who are in any kind of Causes to give Evidence; I hope none of
you are become Antinomians, to reject, Psalm. 119.126.
or evacuate the Moral law of God, if not, then be mindful of the Third
Commandment, wherein you cannot but take notice, how upon no terms, the Lord
has protested to hold him Exodus 20.7.
guiltiesse, who by rash, or Zech. 8.17.
false Oaths shall dare to take his Name in vain, or contest his dreadful
Omniscence to an injustice: against all 1 Timothy 1.10.
[perjured] persons the Law stands in full force, and vigor, 1 Timothy 1.10. The
very Heathens had their (...), Perjury-revenging Gods, to whose vindictive
powers they left the Violators of their Deities, as if themselves were at a
loss how to proportion a punishment to so foul a crime: And grave men are of
opinion, that in taking Oaths men are to look to the sense of the Imposer,
otherwise they do (...), swear falsely; and if they perform not what is sworn
by them, they do (...), forswear and perjure themselves: It Is sad, when
amongst Christians that Apophthegme in Plutarch stall be made use of, in good
earnest, (...), that Children are to be consened with Rattles, and Men with
Oaths: But I hope Heb. 6.9.
Better things of you.

I had prepared also some more viands for some other The Lawyers.
guests, but finding them not present, it is possible their stomachs are not up
so early, or, perhaps, with some of them durum potabile may go down sweeter,
then the gold of the Sanctuary, to which Gods word is resembled Psalm. 19.10.

To my reverend Brethren of the Ministry, To the Clergy.
I shall not presume to say much, only to the learned, and godly among them be a
short Remembrancer of persisting in the great and important Labor of Col 4.17.
Fulfilling their Ministry, in which regard I wish from my heart, that we might
be all as so many Colossian Cor. 4.17.
Archippusses: Times have been, when with too many sound Preaching has been
esteemed, but a sound of Preaching; and whereas S Paul professed of himself,
and of his fellow laborers, We 2 Cor 4.5
preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus and him 1 Cor 3.11 Gal. 6.14.
Crucified, the saying might have been inverted, we our selves preach not; and
yet, (upon what pretense who knows?) like some Anticks in old buildings they
with Issachar Genesis 49.14.
couched down, and bended the shoulders, as if the whole stresse of
Ecclesiastical building had layn upon their shoulders.

Let us have not only our Exodus 28.33.
Bells, but also our Exodus 28.34
Pomegranates, our Bells to tole, and call men into the Temple of piety, but our
Pomegranates as emblemes of our fruitful conversations; and as Aaron the
Priest had the names of the twelve Tribes engraven upon his Exodus 28.21.
Breastplate, thereby to intimate the dear, and hearty affection, that, as one
that Heb. 13.17.
watched for their souls, he should bear to them all; so let us have all the
people committed to our charge, in our 1 Thessalonians. 2.8.
hearts, as if our very 1 Thessalonians. 3.8.
life, and welfare were bound up in their spiritual 1 Thessalonians. 4.1.
Proficiency: The Schoolmen are somewhat divided in opinion about Theology, or
Divinity, whether it be a Science? and if so, of what kind? Thomas makes
Theologiam, speculativam; Scotus, practicam; Hales, affectivam; but, as when
three stars are in conjunction, there usually follows some admirable
effect, so where there is a concurrence of all these, they make up an
accomplished Divine: Well then, let us lift up our voices like Isa. 58.1.
Trumpets, as the Prophet speaks; and why like Trumpets? are there not other
sounds as loud? Lo, the Psalm. 29.3.
Thunder of the Lord gives out a Ps. 77.17, 18.
voice, and that a mighty voice; yea, the Sea Ps. 93.7.
roars, and makes a very loud noise; yet not like Thunder, nor like the Sea,
which both are louder, but lift up we our voices like Trumpets, because in
sounding of Trumpets, the Hand is used, as well as the Mouth, to intimate, that
a preacher must take heed to 1 Timothy 4.16. Read Ho ker lib. 5. Eccles. polit.
sect. 81. per tot.
himself in matter of Action, as well as to his Doctrine, in matter of
Elocution; as Noah is observed to have taught the old world as well by his Heb.
11.7.
hand, in building the Arc, as by his lips in forewarning their destruction,
and both conjoined gave him the denomination of a Preacher of Righteousness, 2
Pet. 2.5. Verbum sapientibus; and I crave pardon for this boldness.

To end this Discourse, and lest I be further Act. 24.4.
tedious unto you: To all this people in general, let me say, as S. Jan. 2.12.
So speak ye; and so do, as they that shall be judged by the Law of liberty: ye
have heard the certainty, and impartiality of all your Dissolutions, and the
same likewise of all your Resurrections: ye have heard moreover of Books, and
Registers wherein stand recorded all your thoughts, words, and actions
whatsoever done in the Body, and according to what is written in those Books,
ye must all be Judged at the last day: so then, be exhorted all of you, from
the highest to the lowest, to labor to keep these Books, these lasting Records
clear; and remember, that here Heaven is either won, or lost; after death men
are, say Schoolmen, Extra statum merendi, and demerendi, out of a condition to
procure any thing by acting, as who are then in a state, or condition to
receive their several 2 Cor. 5.10.
rewards, whether of good, or ill, according as they have done before in the
body: wherefore as our Savior, Let us work the works of God, whilst it is
Day, Joh 9.4. that is, as Chrysostom expounds it, (...), during the
continuance of the Day of this Life: Take notice that your Time, and your Day
is Ps. 39 4, 5.
short, your account large, and the Judge before whom this Romans 14.12.
Account is to be given up, Mat. 25.24.
strict, and 2 Timothy 4.8.
just, and no 1 Pet. 1.17.
Respecter of persons at all.

In one word, to close up all; act vigorously for God, for his Christ, for his
Gospel, and that as well in the Praecepts, and Duties thereof, as in the
Privileges, and Promises of the same; be as well resolved to have Christ for a
Lord to rule thee, as for a Jesus to savethee: In sum, as I said in the
conclusion of my last Sermon, in this very place, on the same occasion; So
live, and strive for holiness, as if thou had no mean of salvation but that;
I mean, in regard of zealous earnestness, and Christian endeavors: And yet so
rest, and rely upon the merits of Jesus Christ, as if, in point of self-desert
(which is nothing) thou had no holiness at all: This, this alone is the way,
by grace to arrive at glory.

Amen, Amen. Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 5. lin. 38. read Protoplasts. p. 11. l. 3. r. mortality. p. 11. l. 3 r.
apposite. p. 19. l, 4. r. (...). p. 23. l. 6. r. must be by believers. p. 28.
l. 25. r. for serenity, dexterity. p. 43. l. 19. r. Romans 13.3, 4. and as
Xenophon. p. 48. l. 23. r. Omniscience.


