AN ORDER Published by the Command of the Duke of Schonberg, IN THE CAMP AT
DUNDALK, For Establishing the Rates and Prizes of Provisions in the ARMY.
Licensed

October 24. 1689. J. F.

Greeting,
WHereas it is evidently apparent, That several Forestallers, Retrograders, and
others, have, and still do manifest Injuries, to the great Prejudice of Their
Majesty's Officers, Soldiers, and others their Subjects, by forestalling the
Markets, and raising the Rates and Prizes of Provisions for the Army, contrary
to the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom in that behalf made and provided. And
for prevention whereof for the future, It is hereby Ordered, That from
henceforth no Sutlers, Victuallers, Bakers, Brewers, and Butchers, or any other
Person or Persons whatsoever, presume to sell any Bread, Meat, Butter, Cheese,
Milk, Ale and Beer, Brandy, Oatmeal, Soap and Candles, at any other Rates and
Prizes than hereafter is limited, mentioned, and expressed; That is to say,
Wheat yiedling twenty shillings the Barrel, the penny white Loaf one penny half
penny, (according to the Assiize for Bread in that behalf provided) and the
penny Loaf Ransick Bread, likewise a penny halfpenny, and the two penny Loaf
three pence, and so accordingly to all other Bread of several Sizes; the dest
Beef two pence the pound, the best Mutton two pence halfpenny the pound, the
best Butter at 3 pence halfpenny the pound, Cheese at two pence halfpenny the
pound, Milk two pence the Quart, the best Beer or Ale two pence halfpenny the
Quart, Brandy at ten shillings the Gallon, Oatemeal at one penny halfpenny the
Quart, and Soap and Candles at four pence the pound, and not more, or exceeding
the said Prizes. And if any Person, or Persons whatever offend in the
Premises, they shall be proceeded against with all Rigor, according to the
said Statute against Forestalling of Markets, or otherwise the execution of the
Punishment, for Expedition, against such Offenders, to be inflicted by the
Army: Whereof all Persons concerned are to take Notice at their several Perils
Incumbent.

Given under my Hand and Seal of the Office, this Third Day of October, 1689.
JOHN SMITH, Esquire

Bailiff of the Borough of Dundalk and Liberties thereof.
London, Printed for James Dover, near West-Smithfield, 1689.


