THE Discovery of Witchcraft: PROVING, That the Compacts and Contracts of
WITCHES with Devils and all Infernal Spirits or Familiars, are but Erroneous
Novelties and Imaginary Conceptions. Also discovering, How far their Power
extends in Killing, Tormenting, Consuming, or Curing the bodies of Men,
Women, Children, or Animals, by Charms, Philtres, Periapts, Pentacles, Curses,
and Conjurations.

WHEREIN LIKEWISE The Unchristian Practices and Inhumane Dealings of Searchers
and Witch-tryers upon Aged, Melancholy, and Superstitious people, in extorting
Confessions by Terrors and Tortures, and in devising false Marks and Symptoms,
are notably Detected.

And the Knavery of Juglers, Conjurers, Charmers, Soothsayers, Figure-Casters,
Dreamers, Alchymists and Philterers; with many other things that have long lain
hidden, fully Opened and Deciphered.

ALL WHICH Are very necessary to be known for the undeceiving of Judges,
Justices, and Jurors, before they pass Sentence upon Poor, Miserable and
Ignorant People; who are frequenly Arraigned, Condemned, and Executed for
Witches and Wizzards. IN SIXTEEN BOOKS.

By REGINALD SCOT Esquire.

Whereunto is added An excellent Discourse of the Nature and Substance OF
DEVILS and SPIRITS, IN TWO BOOKS: The First by the aforesaid Author: The Second
now added in this Third Edition, as Succedaneous to the former, and conducing
to the completing of the Whole Work: With Nine Chapters at the beginning of
the Fifteenth Book of the DISCOVERY.

LONDON: Printed for Andrew Clark, and are to be sold at Mris. Cotes's near the
Golden-Ball in Aldersgatestreet, 1665.

To the Honorable, mine especial good Lord, Sir ROGER MANWOOD Knight, Lord
Chief Baron of Her MAJESTY'S Court of the Exchequer.
IN-so-much as I know that your Lordship is by nature wholly inclined, and in
purpose earnestly bent, to relieve the Poor; and that not only with Hospitality
and Alms, but by diverse other devises and ways tending to their comfort:
having (as it were) framed and set your self to the help and maintenance of
their Estate, as appears by your charge and travel in that behalf. Whereas
also you have a special care for the supporting of their right, and redressing
of their wrongs, as neither despising their Calamity, nor yet forgetting their
Complaint; seeking all means for their amendment, and for the reformation of
their disorders, even as a very Father to the Poor. Finally, for that I am a
poor member of that Commonwealth, where your Lordship is a principal person; I
thought this my travel, in the behalf of the poor, the aged, and the simple,
might be very fitly commended unto you; for a weak house requires a strong
stay. In which respect I give God thanks, that has raised up unto me so mighty
a friend for them as your Lordship is, who in our Laws have such knowledge, in
Government such discretion, in these Causes such experience, and in the
Commonwealth such authority; and never the less vouchsafe to descend to the
consideration of these base and inferior matters, which minister more care and
trouble, than worldly estimation.

And insomuch as your Lordship knows, or rather exercises the office of a
Judge, whose part it is to hear with courtesy, and to determine with equity;
it cannot but be apparent unto you, that when punishment exceeds the fault,
it is rather to be thought vengeance than correction. In which respect I know
you spend more time and travel in the conversion and reformation, than in the
subversion and confusion of Offenders, as being well pleased to augment your
own private pains, to the end you may diminish their public smart. For in
truth, that Commonwealth remains in woeful state, where fetters and haltars
beat more sway than mercy and due compassion.

Howbeit, it is natural to unnatural people, and peculiar unto Witchmongers, to
pursue the poor, to accuse the simple, and to kill the innocent; supplying in
rigor and malice toward others, that which they themselves want in proof and
discretion, or the other in offense or occasion. But as a cruel heart and an
honest mind do seldom meet and feed together in a dish; so a discreet and
merciful Magistrate, and a happy Commonwealth cannot be separated asunder. How
much then are we bound to God who has given us a Queen, that of Justice is not
only the very perfect image and pattern, but also of Mercy and Clemency (under
God) the mere fountain and body it self? Insomuch as they which hunt most after
blood in these days, have least authority to shed it. Moreover, since I see
that in cases where lenity might be noisome, and punishment wholesome to the
Commonwealth, there no respect of person can move you, no authority can abash
you, no fear, no threats can daunt you in performing the duty of Justice.

In that respect again, I find your Lordship a fit person to judge and look
upon this present Treatise. Wherein I will bring before you, as it were to the
bar, two sorts of most arrogant and wicked people; the first, challenging to
themselves; the second, attributing unto others, That Power which only
appertains to God: Apoc. 4.11. Romans 8 Act. 5. Apoc. 2. Luke 16. Dan. 2.28, 47
Psalm. 72. and 136. Jerem. 5. Job 5. and 36. Sam. 12. 1 King. 8. 2 King. 3.
Isai. 5. Zac. 10. and 14. Amos 4 7. Job 1. Isai. 42.8.
who only is the Creator of all things, who only searches the heart and reins,
who only knows our imaginations and thoughts, who only opens all secrets,
who only works great wonders, who only has power to raise up and cast down,
who only makes thunder, lightning, rain, tempest, and restrains them at his
pleasure, who only sends life and death, sickness and health, wealth and woe;
who neither give nor lends his glory to any creature.

And therefore, that which grieveth me to the bottom of my heart, is, that
these Witchmongers cannot be content to wrest out of Gods hand his Almighty
Power, and keep it themselves, or leave it with a Witch: but that, when by
drift of argument they are made to lay down the bucklers, they yield them up to
the Devil, or at the least pray aid of him, as though the rains of all men's
lives and actions were committed into his hand, and that he sat at the stern,
to guide and direct the course of the whole World; imputing unto him power and
ability enough to do as great things, and as strange Miracles, as ever Christ
did.

But the Doctors of this supernatural doctrine, say sometimes, That the Witch
does all these things by virtue of her Charms; sometimes, that a Spiritual;
sometimes, that a Corporal Devil does accomplish it; sometimes they say, that
the Devil does but make the Witch believe she does that which he himself has
wrought; sometimes, that the Devil seems to do that by compulsion, which he
does most willingly: Finally, the Writers hereupon are so eloquent, and full of
variety, that sometimes they write, that the Devil does all this by God's
permission only; sometimes, by his license; sometimes, by his appointment: so
as (in effect and truth) not the Devil, but the high and mighty King of Kings,
and Lord of hosts, even God himself, should this way be made obedient and
servile to obey and perform the will and commandment of a malicious old Witch,
and miraculously to answer her appetite, as well in every trifling vanity, as
in most horrible executions; as the revenger of a doting old woman's imagined
wrongs, to the destruction of many innocent children, and as a supporter of her
passions, to the undoing of many a poor soul. And I see not, but a Witch may as
well inchant when she will, as a liar may lie whey he list; and so should we
possess nothing, but by a Witches license and permission.

And now forsooth it is brought to this point, that all Devils, which were wont
to be spiritual, may at their pleasure become corporal, and to show themselves
familiarly to Witches and Conjurors, and to none other, and by them only may be
made tame, and kept in a box, etc. So as a malicious old Woman may command her
Devil to plague her neighbor; and he is afflicted in manner and form as she
desires. But then comes another Witch, and she bids her Devil help, and he
heals the same party. So as they make it a kingdom divided in it self, and
therefore I trust, it will not long endure, but will shortly be overthrown,
according to the words of our Savior, Omne regnum in se divisum desolabitur;
Every kingdom divided in it self shall be desolate.

And although some say, that the Devil is the Witches instrument to bring her
purposes and practices to pass: yet others say, that she is his instrument, to
execute his pleasure in any thing, and therefore to be executed. But then
(methinks) she should be injuriously dealt withal, and put to death for
another offense: for actions are not judged by instrumental causes; neither
does the end and purpose of that which is done, depend upon the mean
instrument. Finally, if the Witch do it not, why should the Witch die for it?
But they say, that Witches are persuaded and think, that they do indeed those
mischiefs; and have a will to perform that which the Devil commits, and that
therefore they are worthy to die. By which reason every one should be executed,
that wishes evil to his neighbor, etc. But if the will should be punished by
man, according to the offense against God, we should be driven by thousands at
once to the slaughterhouse or butchery: Prove. 5.
For, whosoever loatheth correction shall die. And who should escape execution,
if this lothsomness (I say) should extend to death by the Civil Laws! Also, the
reward of sin is death: Howbeit, every one that sins, is not to be put to
death by the Magistrate. But, my Lord, it shall be proved in my book, and your
Lordship shall try it to be true, as well here at home, in your native
country, as also abroad in your several circuits, that (besides them that be
Veneficae, which are plain Poysoners) there will be found among our Witches
only two sorts; the one sort being such by imputation, as so thought of by
others (and these are abused, and not abusers) the other by acceptance, as
being willing so to be accounted, and these be mere Coseners.

Insti. lib. 5 cap. 8. sect. 6. Item upon Deuteronomy. c. 18
Calvin treating of these Magicians, calls them Coseners, saying That they
use their Juggling knacks only to amase or abuse the people, or else for Fame;
but he might rather have said for Gain. Erastus himself, Lib. de lamiis, page 5.
being a principal writer in the behalf of Witches omnipotency, is forced to
confess, that these Greek words (...), are most commonly put for illusion,
false-packing, cosenage, fraud, knavery, and deceit: and is further driven to
say, That in ancient time, the learned were not so blockish, as not to see that
the promises of Magicians and Inchanters were false, and nothing else but
knavery, cosenage, and old wives fables; and yet defends he their flying in
the air, their transferring of Corn or Grass from one field to another, etc.

But as Erastus disagreeth herein with himself and his friends: so is there no
agreement among any of those Writers, but only in cruelties, absurdities, and
impossibilites. And these (my Lord) that fall into so manifest contradictions,
and into such absurd asseverations, are not of the inferior sort of Writers;
neither are they all Papists, but men of such account, as whose names give more
credit to their cause, then their writings. In whose behalf I am sorry, and
partly for reverence suppress their fondest errors and foulest absurdities;
dealing specially with them that most contend in cruelty, Isa. 59.7. Romans 3.15.
Eccles. 27.5. Prove. 1.16. Jerem. 2.34. Psalm. 30.15. Isa. 33.15.
whose feet are swift to shed blood; Striving, (as Jesus the son of Sirach
says) and hasting (as Solomon the son of David says) to pour out the blood of
the Innocent: whose heat against these poor wretches cannot be allayed with any
other liquor then blood; and therefore I fear that under their wings will be
found the blood of the souls of the poor, at that day, when the Lord shall say,
Depart from me ye blood-thirsty men.

And because I know your Lordship will take no counsel against innocent blood,
but rather suppress them that seek to imbrew their hands therein, I have made
choice to open their case to you, and to lay their miserable calamity before
your feet; following herein the advice of that learned man Brentius, In
Epistola ad John Wier.
who says, Si quis admonuerit Magistratum, ne in miseras illas mulierculas
saeviat, eum ego arbitror divinitus excitatum; that is, If any admonish the
Magistrate not to deal too hardly with these miserable wretches, that are
called Witches, I think him a good instrument raised up for this purpose by God
himself.

But it will perchance be said by Witchmongers; to wit, by such as attribute to
Witches the power which appertains to God only, That I have made choice of
your Lordship to be a Patron to this my Book, because I think you favor mine
opinions, and by that means may the more freely publish any error or conceit of
mine own, which should rather be warranted by your Lordships authority, then by
the Word of God, or by sufficient argument. But I protest the contrary, and by
these presents I renounce all protection, and despise all friendship that might
serve to help toward the suppressing or supplanting of Truth: knowing also
that your Lordship is far from allowing any injury done unto Man; much more an
enemy to them that go about to dishonor God, or to embeazel the title of his
immortal glory. But because I know you to be perspicuous and able to see down
into the depth and bottom of Causes, and are not to be carried away with the
vain persuasion or superstition either of Man, Custom, Time or Multltude, but
moved with the authority of Truth only: I crave your countenance herein, even
so far forth, and no further, then the law of God, the law of Nature, the law
of this Land, and the rule of Reason shall require. Neither do I treat for
these poor people any otherwise, but so, as with one hand you may sustain the
good, and with the other suppress the evil: wherein you shall be thought a
Father to Orphans, an Advocate to Widows, a Guide to the Blind, a Stay to the
Lame, a Comfort and Countenance to the honest, a Scourge and Terror to the
Wicked.

Thus far I have been bold to use your Lordships patience, being offended with
my self, that I could not in brevity utter such matter as I have delivered
amply; whereby (I confess) occasion of tediousness might be ministered, were it
not that your great gravity joined with your singular constancy in reading and
judging be means of the contrary. And I wish even with all my heart, that I
could make people conceive the substance of my writing, and not misconster any
part of my meaning. Then doubtless would I persuade my self, that the company
of Witchmongers, etc. being once decreased, the number also of Witches, etc.
would soon be diminished. But true be the words of the Poet, Haudquaquam
poteris sortirier omnia solus;
Namque aliis divi bello pollere dederunt,
Huic saltandi artem, voce huic cytharaque canendi:
Rursum alii inseruit sagax in pectore magnus
Jupiter ingenium, etc.


And therefore as doubtful to prevail by persuading, though I have reason and
common sense on my side; I rest upon earnest wishing, namely, To all people an
absolute trust in God the Creator, and not in Creatures, which is to make flesh
our arm; that God may have his due honor, which by the undutifulness of many
is turned into dishonor, and less cause of offense and error given by common
received evil example. And to your Lordship, I wish, as increase of Honor, so
continuance of good health and happy days.

Your Lordships to be commanded Reginald Scot.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir THOMAS SCOT Knight, etc.
SIR,
I See among other Malefactors, many poor old Women convented before you for
working of Miracles, otherwise called Witchcraft; and therefore I thought You
also a meet person to whom I might commend my Book. And here I have occasion to
speak of your sincere administration of Justice, and of your dexterity,
discretion, charge and travel employed in that behalf, whereof I am oculatus
testis. Howbeit I had rather refer the Reader to common fame, and their own
eyes and ears, to be satisfied; then to send them to a Stationers shop, where
many times lies are vendible, and truth contemptible. For I being of your
house, of your name, and of your blood; my foot being under your table, my hand
in your dish, or rather in your purse, might be thought to flatter you in that,
wherein (I know) I should rather offend you than please you. And what need I
curry-favour with my most assured Friend? And if I should only publish those
virtues (though they be many) which give me special occasion to exhibit this my
travel unto you, I should do as a Painter, that describes the foot of a
notable personage, and leaves all the best features in his body untouched.

I therefore (at this time) do only desire you to consider of my report,
concerning the evidence that is commonly brought before you against them. See
first whether the Evidence be not frivolous, and whether the proofs brought
against them be not incredible, consisting of guesses, presumptions, and
impossibilities contrary to Reason, Scripture, and Nature. See also what
persons cemplain upon them, whether they be not of the basest, the unwisest,
and most faithless kind of people. Also may it please you to weigh what
accusations and crimes they lay to their charge: namely, She was at my house of
late: She would have had a pot of Milk, she departed in a chafe because she had
it not; she railed, she cursed, she mumbled and whispered; and finally, she
said, She would be even with me: and soon after my Child, my Cow, my Sow, or my
Pullet dyed, or was strangely taken: Nay (if it please your Worship) I have
further proof; I was with a wise Woman, and she told me I had an ill neighbor,
and that she would come to my house ere it were long, and so did she; and that
she had a mark about her wast, and so had she: and God forgive me, my stomach
has gone against her a great while. Her Mother before her was counted a Witch;
she has been beaten and scratched by the face till blood was drawn upon her,
because she has been suspected, and afterward some of those persons were said
to amend. These are the certainties that I hear in their evidences.

Note also, how easily they may be brought to confess that which they never
did, nor lies in the power of Man to do: and then see whether I have cause to
write as I do. Further, if you shall see that Infidelity, Popery, and many
other manifest Heresies be backed and shouldered, and their professors animated
and heartened, by yielding to creatures such infinite power, as is wrested out
of Gods hand, and attributed to Witches: Finally, if you shall preceive that I
have faithfully and truly delivered and set down the condition and state of the
Witch, and also of the Witchmonger, and have confuted by Reason and Law, and by
the Word of God it self, all mine abversaries Objections and Arguments; then
let me have your countenance against them that maliciously oppose themselves
against me.

My greatest adversaries are young ignorance and old custom. For what folly
soever tract of time has fostered, it is so superstitiously pursued of some,
as though no Error could be acquainted with custom, But if the Law of Nations
would join with such custom, to the maintenance of Ignorance, and to the
suppressing of Knowledge, the civilest Country in the World would soon become
barbarous, etc. For as knowledge and time discovers Errors, so do
superstition and ignorance in time breed them. And concerning the opinions of
such, as wish that Ignorance should rather be maintained, than Knowledge busily
searched for, because thereby offense may grow: John 5. Prove. 15.1.
I answer, that we are commanded by Christ himself to search for Knowledge:
For, it is the Kings honor (as Solomon says) to search out a thing.

Aristotle said to Alexander, That a mind well furnished, was more beautiful
than a body richly arrayed. What can be more odious to Man, or offensive to
God, than Ignorance; Act. 3. Prove. 9.
for, through ignorance the Jews did put Christ to death. Which ignorance
whosoever forsakes, is promised life everlasting: and therefore among
Christians it should be abhorred above all other things. For even as when we
wrestle in the dark, we tumble in the mire, etc. so when we see not the Truth,
we wallow in Errors. A blind man may seek long in the rushes ere he find a
needle; and as soon is a doubt discussed by Ignorance. Finally, truth is no
sooner found out in ignorance, then a sweet savor in a dunghill. And if they
will allow men knowledge, and give them no leave to use it, men were much
better be without it than have it: Matthew. 25. Matthew. 5. Luke 8.
For it is, as to have a talent, and to hide it under the earth; or, to put a
candle under a bushel: or as, to have a ship, and to let her lie always in the
dock: which thing how profitable it is, I can say somewhat by experience.

But hereof I need say no more, for every may sees, that none can be happy who
knows not what felicity means: For, what avails it to have riches, and
not to have the use thereof? Truly the Heathen herein deserved more
commendation than many Christians; for they spared no pain, no cost, nor travel
to attain to Knowledge. Pythagoras traveled from Thamus to Egypt, and
afterward into Crete and Lacedaemonia: and Plato out of Athens into Italy and
Egypt, and all to find out hidden secrets and knowledge; which when a man
has, he seems to be separated from mortality. For precious stones, and all
other creatures of what value soever, are but counterfeits to this jewel; they
are mortal, corruptible, and inconstant; this is immortal, pure and certain.
Wherefore if I have searched and found out any good thing, that ignorance and
time has smothered, the same I commend unto you: to whom though I owe all that
I have, yet am I bold to make others partakers with you in this poor gift.

Your loving Cosen Reginal Scot.

To the Right Worshipful his loving Friends, Master Doctor Coldwell Dean of
Rochester; AND Master Doctor Readman Archdeacon of Canterbury, etc.
HAving found out two such civil Magistrates, as for direction of judgment, and
for ordering matters concerning Justice in this Commonwealth (in my poor
opinion) are very singular persons, who (I hope) will accept of my good will,
and examine my book by their experience, as unto whom the matter therein
contained does greatly appertain: I have now again considered of two other
points; namely, Divinity and Philosophy, whereupon the groundwork of my book
is laid. Wherein although I know them to be very sufficiently informed, yet
does not the judgment and censure of those causes so properly appertain to them
as unto you, whose fame therein has gotten preeminence above all others that I
know of your callings: and in that respect I am bold to join you with them,
being all good neighbors together in this Commonwealth, and loving friends
unto me. I do not present this unto you, because it is meet for you; but for
that you are meet for it (I mean) to judge upon it, to defend it, and if need
be to correct it; knowing that you have learned of that grave Councellor Cato,
Not to shame or discountenance any body. For if I thought you as ready, as
able, to discharge me from mine insufficiency; I should not have been hasty
(knowing your learning) to have written unto you: but if I should be abashed to
write to you, I should show my self ignorant of your courtesy.

I know mine own weakness, which if it have been able to maintain this
argument, the cause is the stronger. Eloquent words may please the ears, but
sufficient matter persuades the heart. So as if I exhibit wholesome drink
(though it be small) in a terrene dish with a faithful hand, I hope it will be
as well accepted, as strong wine offered in a silver bowl with a flattering
heart. And surely it is a point of great liberality to receive a small thing
thankfully, as to give and distribute great and costly gifts bountifully: for
there is more supplied with courteous answers than with rich rewards. The
tyrant Dionysius was not so hated for his tyranny, as for his churlish and
strange behavior. Among the poor Israelites sacrifices, God was satisfied with
the tenth part of an Ephah of flour, so as it were fine and good. Christ liked
well of the poor widows mite. Lewis of France accepted a Rape-root of clownish
Conan. Cyrus vouchsafed to drink a cup of cold water cut of the hand of poor
Sinaetes: and so it may please you to accept this simple book at my hands,
which I faithfully exhibit unto you, not knowing your opinions to meet with
mine: but knowing your learning and judgment to be able as well to correct me
where I speak herein unskilfully, as others when they speak hereof maliciously.

Some be such dogs as they will bark at my writings, whether I maintain or
refute this argument: as Diogenes snarled both at the Rhodians and at the
Lacedaemonians: at the one, because they were brave; at the other, because they
were not brave. Homer himself could not avoid reproachful speeches. I am sure
that they which never studied to learn any good thing, will study to find
faults hereat. I for my part fear not these wars, nor all the adversaries I
have; were it not for certain cowards, who (I know) will come behind my back
and bite me.

But now to the matter. My question is not (as many fondly suppose) Whether
there be Witches, or nay? but, Whether they can do such miraculous works as are
imputed unto them? Good Master Dean, is it possible for a man to break his fast
with you at Rochester, and to dine that day at Durham with Master Doctor
Matthew; or can your enemy maime you, when the Ocean Sea is betwixt you? What
real community is betwixt a spirit and a body? May a spiritual body become
temporal at his pleasure? Or may a carnal body become invisible? Is it likely
that the lives of all Princes, Magistrates, and Subjects, should depend upon
the will, or rather the wish of a poor malicious doting old fool; and that
power exempted from the wise, the rich, the learned, the godly? etc. Finally,
is it possible for a man or woman to do any of those miracles expressed in my
book, and so constantly reported by great Clerks? If you say, No; then am I
satisfied. If you say, that God absolutely, or by means can accomplish all
those, and many more, I go with you. But Witches may well say they can do these
things, howbeit they cannot show how they do them. If I for my part should say
I could do those things, my very adversaries would say that I lied.

O Master Archdeacon, is it not pity, that that which is said to be done with
the Almighty power of the most high God, and by our Savior his only Son Jesus
Christ our Lord, should be referred to a baggage old Woman's nod or wish? etc.
Good Sir, is it not one manifest kind of Idolatry, for them that labor and are
laden to come unto Witches to be refreshed? If Witches could help whom they are
said to have made sick, I see no reason, but remedy might as well be required
at their hands, as a purse demanded of him that has stolen it. But truly it is
manifold Idolatry, to ask that of a creature, which none can give but the
Creator. The Papist has some color of Scripture to maintain his Idol of
Bread; but no Jesuitical distinction can cover the Witchmongers idolatry in
this behalf. Alas, I am sorry and ashamed to see how many die, that being said
to be bewitched, only seek for Magical cures, whom wholesome diet, and good
medicines would have recovered. I dare assure you both, that there would be
none of these cosening kind of Witches, did not Witchmongers maintain them,
follow them, and believe in them and their Oracles; whereby indeed all good
learning and honest arts, are overthrown: For these that most advance their
power, and maintain the skill of these Witches, understand no part thereof; and
yet being many times wise in other matters, are made fools by the most fools in
the world.

Me thinks these Magical Physicians deal in the Commonwealth, much like as a
certain kind of Cynical people do in the Church, whose severe sayings are
accounted among some such Oracles, as may not be doubted of; who in stead of
learning and authority (which they make contemptible) do feed the people with
their own devices and imaginations, which they prefer before all other
Divinity: and laboring to erect a Church according to their own fancies,
wherein all order is condemned, and only their Magical words and curious
directions advanced, they would utterly overthrow the true Church. And even as
these enchanting Paracelsians abuse the people, leading them from the true
order of Physic to their Charms: so do these other (I say) dissuade from
harkening to learning and obedience, and whisper in men's ears to teach them
their Fryer-like traditions. And of this sect the chief author at this time is
one Brown, a fugitive, a meet cover for such a cup: as heretofore the
Anabaptists, the Arrians, and the Franciscan Friars.

Truly not only nature, being the foundation of all perfection; but also
Scripture, being the Mistress and director thereof, and of all Christianity, is
beautified with knowledge and learning: For as nature without discipline does
naturally incline unto vanities, and as it were suck up errors; so does the
word, or rather the letter of the Scripture without understanding, Romans 2.27. 2
Cor. 3.6.
not only make us devour errors, but yields us up to death and destruction;
and therefore Paul says, he was not a Minister of the letter, but of the
spirit.

Thus have I been bold to deliver unto the world, and to you, those simple
notes, reasons, and arguments, which I have devised or collected out of other
Authors; which I hope shall be hurtful to none, but to my self great comfort,
if it may pass with good liking and acceptance. If it fall out otherwise, I
should think my pains ill employed. For truly, in mine opinion, whosoever shall
perform any thing, or attain to any knowledge; or whosoever should travel
throughout all the Nations of the world, or (if it were possible) should peep
into the heavens, the consolation or admiration thereof were nothing pleasant
unto him, unless he had liberty to impart his knowledge to his friends.
Wherein, because I have made special choice of you, I hope you will read it, or
at the least lay it up in your study with your other Books, among which there
is none dedicated to any with more good will. And so long as you have it, it
shall be unto you (upon adventure of my life) a certain Amulet, Periapt,
Circle, Charm, etc. to defend you from all Enchantments.

Your loving Friend, REGINALD SCOT.

To the READERS.
TO you that are wise and discreet, few words may suffice; Isa. 11. Prove. 1.
for such a one judges not at the first sight, nor Reproves by hearsay; but
patiently hears, and thereby increases in understanding: which patience
brings forth experience whereby true judgment is directed. I shall not need
therefore, to make any further suite to you, but that it would please you to
read my Book, without the prejudice of time, or former conceit; and having
obtained this at your hands, I submit my self unto your censure. But to make a
solemn suit to you that are partial Readers, desiring you to set aside
partiality, to take in good part my writing, and with indifferent eyes to look
upon my Book, were labor lost, and time ill employed: For I should no more
prevail herein, then if a hundred years since I should have entreated your
predecessors to believe, that Robin Good Fellow, that great and ancient
Bull-begger, had been but a cosening Merchant, and no Devil indeed.

If I should go to a Papist, and say, I pray you believe my writings, wherein I
will prove all Popish Charms, Conjurations, Exorcisms, Benedictions and Curses,
not only to be ridiculous, and of none effect, but also to be impious and
contrary to God's Word: I should as hardly therein win favor at their hands,
as herein obtain credit at yours. Nevertheless, I doubt not, but to use the
matter so, that as well the Massemonger for his part, as the Witchmonger for
his, shall both be ashamed of their Professions.

But Robin Good Fellow cease now to be much feared, and Popery is
sufficiently discovered. Nevertheless, Witches Charms, and Conjurors Cosenages
are yet though effectual. Yea, the Gentiles have espied the fraud of their
cosening Oracles, and our cold Prophets and Inchanters make us fools still, to
the shame of us all, but specially of Papists, who conjure every thing, and
thereby bring to pass nothing. They say to their Candles, I conjure you to
endure for ever; and yet they last not a Pater Noster while the longer. They
conjure water to be wholesome both for body and soul; but the body (we see) is
never the better for it, nor the soul any whit reformed by it. And therefore I
marvel, that when they see their own Conjurations confuted and brought to
naught, or at the least void of effect, that they (of all other) will yet give
such credit, countenance, and authority to the vain cosenages of Witches and
Conjurors; as though their Charms and Conjurations could produce more apparent,
certain, and better effects then their own.

But my request unto all you that read my Book shall be no more, but that it
would please you to conferr my words with your own sense and experience, and
also with the Word of God. If you find your selves resolved, and satisfied, or
rather, reformed and qualified in any one point or opinion, that heretofore you
held contrary to truth, in a matter hitherto undecided, and never yet looked
into; I pray you take that for advantage: and suspending your judgment, stay
the sentence of condemnation against me, and consider of the rest, at your
further leisure. If this may not suffice for to persuade you, it cannot prevail
to annoy you: and then, that which is written without offense, may be
overpassed without any grief.

And although mine assertion, be somewhat differing from the old inveterate
opinion, which I confess has many gray hairs, whereby mine adversaries have
gained more authority then reason, toward the maintenance of their
presumptions, and old wives fables; yet shall it fully agree with God's glory,
and with his holy Word. And albeit there be hold taken by mine Adversaries, of
certain few words or sentences in the Scripture that make a show for them; yet
when the whole course thereof makes against them, and impugneth the same; yea,
and also their own places rightly understood, do nothing at all relieve them: I
trust their glorious title and argument of Antiquity, will appear as stale and
corrupt as the Apothecaries Drugs, or Grocers Spice, which the longer they be
preserved, the worse they are. And till you have perused my Book, ponder this
in your mind, to wit, that Sagae, Thessalae, Striges, Lamiae (which words and
none other being in use do properly signify our Witches) are not once found
written in the old or new Testament: and that Christ himself, in his Gospel,
never mentioned the name of a Witch. And that neither he, nor Moses ever spoke
any one word of the Witches bargain with the Devil, their hagging, their riding
in the Air, their transferring of Corn or Grass from one field to another,
their hurting of Children or Cattle with words or charms, their bewitching of
Butter, Cheese, Ale, etc. nor yet their transubstantiation; insomuch as the
writers hereupon are not ashamed to say, Mal. Malef. part. 2. quaest. 2.
That it is not absurd to affirm, that there were no Witches in Jobs time: The
reason is, that if there had been such Witches then in being, Job would have
said, he had been bewitched. But indeed men took no heed in those days to this
doctrine of Devils; 1 Pet. 4.1.
to wit, to these fables of Witchcraft, which Peter says, shall be much
regarded and hearkened unto in the latter days.

Howbeit, how ancient soever this barbarous conceit of Witches Omnipotency is,
Truth must not be measured by Time; for every old Opinion is not sound. Verity
is not impaired, how long soever it be suppressed: but is to be searched out,
in how dark a corner soever it lie hidden; for it is not like a cup of Ale that
may be broached toe rathe. Finally, Danaeus in suo prologo.
time bewrays old errors, and discovers new matters of truth. Danaeus
himself says, that this question hitherto has never been handled; nor the
Scriptures concerning this matter have never been expounded. To prove the
antiquity of the cause, to confirm the opinion of the ignorant, to enforce mine
Adversaries Arguments, to aggravate the Punishment, and to accomplish the
Confusion of these old women, is added the vanity and wickedness of them which
are called Witches; the arrogance of those which take upon them to work
Wonders; the desire that people have to hearken to such miraculous matters,
unto whom most commonly an impossibility is more credible than a verity; the
ignorance of natural causes; the ancient and universal hate conceived against
the name of a Witch; their ill-favored faces; their spiteful words; their
curses and imprecations; their charms made in rhyme, and their beggary; the
fear of many foolish folk; the opinion of some that are wise; the want of Robin
Good Fellow and the Fairies, which were wont to maintain that, and the common
peoples talk in this behalf; the authority of the Inquisitors; the learning,
cunning, consent, and estimation of Writers herein; the false translations and
fond interpretations used, specially by Papists, and many other like causes.
All which toys take such hold upon men's fancies, as thereby they are led and
enticed away from the consideration of true respects, to the condemnation of
that which they know not.

Howbeit, I will (by God's grace) in this my Book, so apparently decipher and
confute these Cavils, and all other their Objections, as every Witchmonger
shall be abashed, and all good men thereby satisfied. In the mean time, I would
wish them to know, that if neither the estimation of God's Omnipotency, nor the
tenor of his Word, nor the doubtfulness, or rather the impossibility of the
case, nor the small proofs brought against them, nor the rigor executed upon
them, nor the pity that should be in a Christian heart, nor yet their
simplicity, impotency, or age, may suffice to suppress the rage or rigor
wherewith they are oppressed; yet the consideration of their sex or kind, ought
to move some mitigation of their punishment. For if nature (as Pliny reports)
has taught a Lion not to deal so roughly with a Woman as with a Man, because
she is in body the weaker vessel, and in heart more inclined to pity (which
Jeremiah in his Lamentations seems to confirm) what should a Man do in this
case, Lam. 3. and 4. verse. 10. 1 Cor. 11.9. verse. 7. Genesis 2.22.18. Arist. lib.
Problem. 2.9. Virg. Georg.
for whom a Woman was created as an help and comfort unto him? In so much as
even in the law of Nature, it is a greater offense to stay a Woman than a Man;
not because the Man is not the more excellent creature, but because a Woman is
the weaker vessel. And therefore among all modest and honest persons, it is
thought a shame to offer violence or injury to a Woman; in which respect Virgil
says: -- Nullum memorabile nomen
Foeminea in poena est.


God that knows my heart is witness, and you that read my Book shall see,
that my drift and purpose in this enterprise tends only to these respects.
First, that the glory and power of God be not so abridged and abased, as to be
trust into the hand or lip of a lewd old Woman; whereby the work of the Creator
should be attributed to the power of ae Creature. Secondly, that the Religion
of the Gospel may be seen to stand without such peevish trumpery. Thirdly, that
lawful favor and Christian compassion be rather used toward these poor souls,
than rigor and extremity. Because they which are commonly accused of
Witchcraft, are the least sufficient of all other persons, to speak for
themselves; as having the most base and simple education of all others; the
extremity of their age giving them leave to dote, their poverty to leg, their
wrongs to chide and threaten (as being void of any other way of revenge) their
humor Melancholical, to be full of imaginations, from whence chiefly proceeds
the vanity of their confessions; as that they can transform themselves and
others, into Apes, Owls, Asses, Dogs, Cats, etc. that they can fly in the Air,
kill Children with Charms, hinder the coming of Butter, etc.

And for so much as the Mighty help themselves together, and the poor Widows
cry, Ecclus. 35.15.
though it reach to heaven, is scarce heard upon earth; I thought good
(according to my poor ability) to make intercession, that some part of common
rigor, and some points of hasty judgment may be advised upon. For the world is
now at that stay (as Brentius in a most godly Sermon in these words affirms)
that even as when the Heathen persecuted the Christians, if any were accused to
believe in Christ, the common people cried Ad Leonem: So now, if any Woman, be
she never so honest, be accused of Witchcraft, they cry Ad Ignem. What
difference is between the rash dealing of unskilful people, and the grave
counsel of more discreet and learned persons, may appear by a tale of Danaeus
his own telling; wherein he opposes the rashness of a few Townsmen, to the
counsel of a whole Senate; preferring the Folly of the one, before the Wisdom
of the other.

At Orleance on Loyre (says he) there was a Man-witch, not only taken and
accused, but also convicted and condemned for Witchcraft, who appealed from
thence to the high Court of Paris: Which accusation the Senate saw
insufficient, and would not allow, but laughed thereat, lightly regarding it;
and in the end sent him home (says he) as accused of a frivolous matter: And
yet for all that, the Magistrates of Orleance were so bold with him, as to hang
him up within a short time after, for the same or the very like offense. In
which example is to be seen the nature, and as it were the disease of this
cause; wherein (I say) the simpler and undiscreetor sort are always more hasty
and furious in judgments, than men of better reputation and knowledge.
Nevertheless, Eunichius says, that these three things, to wit, what is to be
thought of Witches, what their Incantations can do, and whether their
punishment should extend to death, are to be well considered. And I would
(says he) they were as well known, as they are rashly believed, both of the
learned and unlearned. And further he says, That almost all Divines,
Physicians and Lawyers, who should best know these matters, satisfying
themselves with old custom, have given too much credit to these fables, and too
rash and unjust sentence of death upon Witches. But when a man pondreth (says
he) that in times past, all that swarved from the Church of Rome, were judged
Heretics; it is the less marvel, though in this matter they be blind and
ignorant.

And surely, if the Scripture had been longer suppressed, more absurd fables
would have sprung up, and been believed. Which credulity though it is to be
derided with laughter, yet this their cruelty is to be lamented with tears: For
(God knows) many of these poor wretches had more need to be releived than
chastised; and more meet were a Preacher to admonish them, than a Jailer to
keep them; and a Physician more necessary to help them, than an Executioner or
Tormentor to hang or burn them. For proof and due trial hereof, I will requite
Danaeus his tale of a Man-witch (as he terms him) with another Witch of the
same sex or gender.

Cardanus from the mouth of his own Father reports, That one Bernard, Lib.
15. cap. 18. de varietatib. rerum.
a poor servant, being in wit very simple and rude, but in his service very
necessary and diligent (and in that respect dearly beloved of his Master)
professing the Art of Witchcraft, could in no wise be dissuaded from that
profession, persuading himself that he knew all things, and could bring any
matter to pass; because certain Countrey-people resorted to him fof help and
counsel, as supposing by his own talk, that he could do somewhat. At length he
was condemned to be burned; which torment he seemed more willing to suffer,
than to lose his estimation in that behalf. But his Master having compassion
upon him, and being himself in his Princes favor, perceiving his conceit to
proceed of Melancholy, obtained respit of execution for twenty days. In which
time (says he) his Master bountifully fed him with good fat meat, and with
four eggs at a meal, as also with sweet Wine: which diet was best for so gross
and weak a body. And being recovered so in strength, that the humor was
suppressed, he was easily won from his absurd and dangerous opinions, and from
all his fond imaginations: and confessing his error and folly, from the which
before no man could remove him by any persuasions, having his pardon, he lived
long a good member of the Church, whom otherwise the cruelty of judgment
should have cast away and destroyed.

This history is more credible than Sprengers fables, or Bodins bables, which
reach not so far to the extolling of Witches Omnipotency, as to the derogating
of God's glory. For if it be true, which they affirm, that our life and death
lies in the hand of a Witch; then is it false, that God makes us to live or
die, or that by him we have our being, our term of time appointed, and our
days numbered. But surely their Charms can no more reach to the hurting or
killing of Men or Women, that their imaginations can extend to the stealing and
carrying away of Horses and Mares. Amos 3.6. Lam. 3.38. Isa. 45.9. Romans 9.20.
Neither has God given remedies to sickness or griefs, by Words or Charms, but
by Herbs and Medicines, which he himself has created upon earth, and given
Men knowledge of the same; that he might be glorified, for that therewith he
does vouchsafe that the Maladies of Men and Cattle should be cured, etc. And if
there be no affliction nor calamity, but is brought to pass by him; then let us
defy the Devil, renounce all his works, and not so much as once think or dream
upon this supernatural power of Witches, neither let us prosecute them with
such despite, whom our fancy condemns, and our reason acquitteth: our
evidence against them consisting in impossibilities, our proofs in unwritten
verities, and our whole proceedings in doubts and difficulties.

Now because I mislike the extreme cruelty used against some of these silly
souls (whom a simple Advocate having Audience and Justice, might deliver out of
the hands of the Inquisitors themselves) it will be said, That I deny any
punishment at all to be due to any Witch whatsoever. Nay, because I bewray the
folly and impiety of them, which attribute unto Witches the power of God: these
Witchmongers will report, that I deny there are any Witches at all; and yet
behold (say they) how often is the word [Witch] mentioned in the Scripture?
Even as if an Idolater should say, in the behalf of Images and Idols, to them
which deny their power and godhead, and inveigh against the reverence done unto
them, How dare you deny the power of Images, seeing their names are so often
repeated in the Scriptures? But truly I deny not that there are Witches or
Images; but I detest the Idolaters opinions conceived of them; referring that
to God's work and ordinance, which they impute to the power and malice of
Witches; and attributing that honor to God which they ascribe to Idols. But as
for those that in very deed are either Witches or Conjurors, let them hardly
suffer such punishment as to their fault is agreeable, and as by the grave
judgment of law is provided.

A Catologue of AUTHORS used in this Book.
Forain Authors.
AELianus. Actius. Albertus Crantzius. Albertus Magnus. Albumazar. Alcoranum
Franciscanorum Alexander Trallianus. Algerus. Ambrosius. Andradias. Andraeas
Gartnerus. Andraeas Massius. Antonius Sabellicus. Apollonius Tyanaeus.
Appianus. Apuleius. Archelaus. Argerius Ferrarius. Aristoteles. Arnoldus de
Villa nova. Artemidorus. Athanasius. Averroes. Aagustinus episcopus Hip.
Augustinus Nipus. Avicennas. Aulus Gellius. Barnardinus de bustis.
Bartholomaeus Anglicus. Berosus Anianus. Bodinus. Bordinus. Brentius. Calvinus.
Camerarius. Campanus. Cardanus Pater. Cardanus Filius. Carolus Gallus.
Cassander. Cato. Chrysostomus. Cicero. Clemens. Cornelius Agrippa. Cornelius
Nepos. Cornelius Tacitus. Cyrillus. Danaeus. Demetrius. Democritus. Didymus.
Diodorus Siculus. Dionysius Areopagita. Diascorides. Diurius. Dodonaeus.
Durandus. Empedocles. Ephesius. Erasmus Roterodamus. Erasmus Sarcerius.
Erastus. Eudoxus. Eusebius Caesariensis. Fernelius. Franciscus Petrarcha.
Fuchsius. Galenus. Gerropius. Gallasius. Gemma Phrysius. Georgius Pictorius.
Gofridus. Goschalcus Boll. Gratianus. Gregorius. Grillandus. Guido Bonatus.
Gulielmus de sancto Clodoaldo. Gulielmus Parisiensis. Hemingius. Heraclides.
Hermes Trismegistus. Hieronymus. Hilarious. Hippocrates. Homerus. Horatius.
Hostiensis. Hovinus. Hypertus. Jacobus de Chusa Carthusianus. Jamblichus. Jaso
Pratensis. Innocentius 8. Papa. Johannes Anglicus. Johannes Baptista
Neapolitanus. Johannes Cassianus. Johannes Montiregrus. Johannes Rivius.
Josephus ben Gorion. Josias Rimlerus. Isidorus. Isigonus. Juba. Julius
Maternus. Justinus Martyr. Lactantius. Lavaterus. Laurentius Ananias.
Laurentius a Villavicentio. Leo II. Pontifex. Lex Salicarum. Lex 12. Tabularum.
Legenda Aurea. Legenda longa Coloniae. Leonardus Vairus. Livius. Lucanus.
Lucretius. Ludovicus Coelius. Lutherus. Macrobius. Magna Charta. Malleus
Maleficarum. Manlius. Marbacchius. Marbodeus Gallus. Marsilius Ficinus.
Martinus de Arles. Mattheolus. Melancthonus. Memphradorus. Michael Andraeas.
Musculus. Nauclerus. Nicephorus. Nicolaus 5. Papa. Nider. Olaus Gothus.
Origenes. Ovidius. Panormitanus. Paulus Aegineta. Paulus Marsus. Persius.
Petrus de Appona. Petrus Lombardus. Petrur Martyr. Peucer. Philarohus.
Philastrius Brixiensis. Philodorus. Philo Judaeus. Pirkmairus. Platina. Plato.
Plinius. Plotinus. Plutarchus. Polydorus Virgilius. Pomoerium sermonum
Quadragesimalium. Pompanatius. Pontificale. Ponzivibius. Popphyrius. Prochus.
Propertius. Psellus. Ptolomeus. Pythagoras. Quintilianus. Rabbi Abraham. Rabbi
Ben Ezra. Rabbi David Kimhi. Rabbi Josuah Ben Levi. Rabbi Isaac Natar. Rabbi
Levi. Rabbi Moses, Rabbi Sedajas Hajas. Robertus Carocullus. Rupertus. Sabinus.
Sadoletus. Savanorola. Scotus. Seneca. Septuaginta interpretes. Serapio.
Socrates. Solinus. Speculum exemplorum. Strabo. Sulpitius Severus. Synesius.
Tatianus. Tertullianus. Thomas Aquinas. Themistius. Theodoretus. Theodorus
Bizantius. Theophrastus. Thucydides. Tibullus. Tremelius. Valerius Maximus.
Varro. Vegetius. Vincentius. Virgillius. Vitellius. Wierus. Xantus
Historiographus.
English Authors.
BArnaby Googe. Beehive of the Romish Church. Edward Deering. Geoffrey Chaucer.
Giles Alley. Gnimelf Maharba. Henry Haward. John Bale. John Fox. John Malborn.
John Record. Primer after York. use. Richard Gallis. Roger Bacon. Testament
Printed at Rhemes. T. E. a nameless Author, 467. Thomas Hills. Thomas Lupton.
Thomas Moore Knight. Thomas Phaer. T. R. a nameless Author, 393. William
Lambard. W. W. a nameless Author, 542.
THE DISCOVERY OF Witchcraft. BOOK I.
CHHP. I.
An impeachment of Witches power in Meteors and Elementary Bodies, tending to
the rebuke of such an attribute too much unto them.

THe Fables of Witchcraft have taken so fast hold and deep root in the heart of
man, that few or none can (now adays) with patience endure the hand and
correction of God. For if any adversity, grief, sickness, loss of children,
corn, cattle, or liberty, happen unto them; by and by they exclaim upon
Witches: Job 5.
As though there were no God in Israel that orders all things according to
his will, punishing both just and unjust with griefs, plagues, and afflictions
in manner and form as he thinks good: but that certain old women here on
earth, called Witches, must needs be the contrivers of all men's calamities; and
as though they themselves were innocents, and had deserved no such punishments.
Insomuch as they stick not to ride and go to such, as either are injuriously
termed Witches, or else are willing so to be accounted, seeking at their hands
comfort and remedy in time of their tribulation, contrary to Gods Will and
Commandment in that behalf, Mat. 12.
who bids us resort to him in all our necessities.

Such faithless people (I say) are also persuaded, that neither hail nor snow,
thunder nor lightning, rain nor tempestuous winds, come from the Heavens at the
commandment of God; but are raised by the cunning and power of Witches and
Conjurers; insomuch as a clap of thunder, or a gale of wind is no sooner heard,
but either they run to ring bells, or cry out to burn Witches; or else burn
consecrated things, hoping by the smoke thereof, to drive the Devil out of the
air, as though spirits could be fraid away with such external toies: howbeit,
these are right enchantments, as Brentius affirms. In concione.


Psalm. 25. Psalm. 83. Eccles. 43. Luke 8. Matthew. 8. Mark 4.41. Luke 8.14. Psalm.
107. Job 38.22. Eccles. 43.
But certainly, it is neither a Witch, nor Devil, but a glorious God that makes
the thunder. I have read in the Scriptures, that God makes the blustering
tempests and whirl-winds: and I find that it is the Lord that altogether
deals with them, and that they blow according to his will. But let me see any
of them all rebuke and still the sea in time of tempest, as Christ did; or
raise the stormy wind, as God did with his word; and I will believe in them.
Has any Witch or Conjurer, or any creature entered into the treasures of the
snow; or seen the secret places of the hail, which God has prepared against
the day of trouble, battle, and war? I for my part also think with Jesus
Sirach, that at Gods only commandment the snow falls; and that the wind
blows according to his will, Levit. 26.3, 4.
who only makeh all storms to cease; and who (if we keep his ordinances) will
send us rain in due season, and make the land to bring forth her increase, and
the trees of the field to give their fruit.

Psalm. 78.23.
But little think our Witch-mongers, that the Lord commands the clouds above,
or opens the doors of heaven, as David affirms; or that the Lord goes
forth in the tempests and storms, Nahum. 1.
as the Prophet Nahum reports: but rather that Witches and Conjurers are then
about their business.

The Marcionists acknowledged one God the Author of good things, and another
the ordainer of evil: but these make the Devil a whole God, to create things of
nothing, to know men's cogitations, and to do that which God never did; as to
transubstantiate men into beasts, etc. Which thing, if Devils could do, yet
follows it not, that Witches have such power. But if all the Devils in Hell
were dead, and all the Witches in England were burned or hanged; I warrant you
we should not fail to have rain, hail, and tempests, as now we have: according
to the appointment and will of God, and according to the constitution of the
Elements, and the course of the Planets, wherein God has set a perfect and
perpetual order.

I am also well assured, that if all the old women in the world were Witches;
and all the Priests Conjurers; we should not have a drop of rain, nor a blast
of wind the more or the less for them: Job 26.8. Job 37. Psalm. 135. Jer. 10.
and 15. Ose. 13.
For the Lord has bound the waters in the clouds, and has set bounds about
the waters, until the day and night come to an end: yea, it is God that raises
the winds and stilleth them: and he says to the rain and snow, Be upon the
earth, and it falls. The wind of the Lord, and not the wind of Witches, shall
destroy the treasures of their pleasant vessels, and dry up the fountains;
says Oseas. Let us also learn and confess with the Prophet David, Psalm. 39.
etc.
that we our selves are the causes of our afflictions; and not exclaim upon
Witches, when we should call upon God for mercy.

In epist. ad Io. Wierum.
The Imperial law (says Brentius) condemns them to death that trouble and
infect the air: but I affirm (says he) that it is neither in the power of
Witch nor Devil so to do, but in God only. Though (besides Bodin, and all the
Popish Writers in general) it please Danaeus, Hyperius, Hemingius, Erastus,
etc. to conclude otherwise. The clouds are called the pillars of Gods tents,
Gods chariots, Exodus 13. Isai. 66. Ps. 18.11, 19. August. 3. de sancta Trinit.
Mar. 4.41.
and his pavillions: And if it be so, what Witch or Devil can make masteries
thereof? S. Augustine says, Non est putandum istis transgressoribus angelis
servire hanc rerum visibilium materiem, sed soli Deo; We must not think that
these visible things are at the commandment of the Angels that fell, but are
obedient to the only God.

Finally, If Witches could accomplish these things; what needed it seem so
strange to the people, when Christ by miracle commanded both seas and winds,
etc. For it is written; Who is this? for both wind and sea obey him.

CHAP. II.
The inconvenience growing by men's Credulity herein, with a reproof of some
Churchmen, which are inclined to the common conceived opinion of Witches
Omnipotency, and familiar example thereof.

BUt the world is now so bewitched and overrun with this fond error, that even
where a man should seek comfort and counsel, there shall he be sent (in case of
necessity) from God to the Devil; and from the Physician to the cosening Witch,
who will not stick to take upon her by words to heal the lame (which was proper
only to Christ; and to them whom he assisted with his divine power) yea, with
her familiar and charms she will take upon her to cure the blind: Joh. 10.21.
though in the tenth of S. John's Gospel it be written, that the Devil cannot
open the eyes of the blind. And they attain such credit, as I have heard (to my
grief) some of the ministry affirm, that they have had in their Parish at one
instant, 17 or 18 Witches, meaning such as could work Miracles supernaturally.
Whereby they manifested as well their infidelity and ignorance, in conceiving
Gods Word; as their negligence and error in instructing their flocks: For they
themselves might understand, and also teach their parishioners, that Psalm. 72.
and 136. Jer. 5.
God only works great wonders; and that it is he which sends such
punishments to the wicked, and such trials to the Elect: according to the
saying of the Prophet Haggai, Hag. 2.28.
I smote you with blasting and mildew, and with hail, in all the labors of
your hands; and yet you turned not unto me, says the Lord. And therefore says
the same Prophet in another place; Idem. cap. 1.
You have sown much, and bring in little. And both in Joel. 1.
Joel and Levit. 26.
Leviticus, the like phrases and proofs are used and made. But more shall be
said of this hereafter.

S. Paul foresaw the blindness and obstinancy, both of these blind shepherds,
2 Timothy 4.3.4.
and also of their scabbed sheep, when he said, They will not suffer wholesome
doctrine, but having their ears itching, shall get them a heap of Teachers
after their own lusts; and shall turn their ears from the Truth, and shall be
given to fables. And in the latter time some shall depart from the Faith, 1 Timothy 4.1.
and shall give heed to Spirits of Errors, and Doctrins of Devils, which speak
lies, (as Witches and Conjurers do) but cast thou away such profane and old
wives fables. In which sense Basil says; Who so gives heed to Inchanters,
harkeneth to a fabulous and frivilous thing. But I will rehearse an example,
whereof I my self am not only Oculatus testis, but have examined the cause, and
am to justify the truth of my report: not because I would disgrace the
Ministers that are godly, but to confirm my former assertion, that this absurd
error is grown into the place, which should be able to expel all such
ridiculous folly and impiety.

At the Assizes holden at Rochester, Anno 1581. one Margaret Simons, A story of
Margaret Simons, a supposed Witch.
the wife of John Simons, of Brenchly in Kent, was arraigned for witchcraft, at
the instigation and complaint of diverse fond and malicious persons; and
specially by the means of one John Ferral Vicar of that Parish: with whom I
talked about that matter and found him both fondly assorted in the cause, and
enviously bent toward her: and (which is worse) as unable to make a good
account of his faith, as she whom he accused. That which he, for his part, laid
to the poor woman's charge, was this.

His son (being an ungracious boy, and prentise to one Robert Scotchford
clothier, dwelling in that Parish of Brenchly) passed on a day by her house; at
whom by chance her little Dog barked. Which thing the boy taking in evil part,
drew his knife, and pursued him therewith even to her door: whom she rebuked
with some such words as the boy disdained, and yet nevertheless would not be
persuaded to depart in a long time. At the last he returned to his Masters
house, and within five or six days fell sick. Then was called to mind the fray
betwixt the Dog and the Boy: insomuch as the Vicar (who thought himself so
privileged, as he little mistrusted that God would visit his children with
sickness) did so calculate; as he found, partly through his own judgment, and
partly) as he himself told me) by the relation of other Witches, that his said
son was by her bewitched. Yea, he also told me, that this his son (being, as it
were, past all cure) received perfect health at the hands of another Witch.

He proceeded yet further against her, affirming, that always in his
Parish Church, when he desired to read most plainly, his voice so failed him,
as he could scant be heard at all; Which he could impute, he said, to nothing
else, but to her enchantment. When I advertised the poor woman hereof, as being
desirous to hear what she could say for her self; she told me, that in very
deed, his voice did much fail him, specially when he trained himself to speak
lowdest. Howbeit, she said that at all times his voice was hoarse and low,
which thing I perceived to be true. But Sir; said she, you shall understand,
that this our Vicar is diseased with such a kind of hoarseness, as diverse of
our neighbors in this Parish not long since, doubted that he had the
French Pox; and in that respect utterly refused to communicate with him: until
such time as (being thereunto enjoined by M.D. Lewen the ordinary) he had
brought from London a certificate, under the hands of two Physicians, that his
hoarseness proceeded from a disease in the lungs. Which certificate he
published in the Church, in the presence of the whole Congregation: and by this
means he was cured, or rather excused of the shame of his disease; And this I
know to be true by the relation of diverse honest men of that Parish: And truly,
if one of the Jury had not been wiser than the other, she had been condemned
thereupon, and upon other as ridiculous matters as this. For the name of a
Witch is so odious, and her power so feared among the common people, that if
the honestest body living chance to be arraigned thereupon. she shall hardly
escape condemnation.

CHAP. III.
Who they be that are called Witches, with a manifest Declaration of the cause
that moves men so commonly to think, and Witches themselves to believe that
they can hurt Children, Cattle, etc. with words and imaginations; and of
cosening Witches.

ONe sort of such as are said to be Witches, are women which be commonly old,
lame, blear-eyed, pale, fowl, and full of wrinckles; poor, sullen,
superstitious, and Papists; or such as know no Religion: in whose drousie minds
the Devil has gotten a fine seat; so as, what mischief, mischance, calamity,
or slaughter is brought to pass, they are easily persuaded the same is done by
themselves; imprinting in their minds an earnest and constant imagination
thereof. Cardan de var. rerum.
They are lean and deformed, showing melancholy in their faces, to the horror
of all that see them. They are doting, scolds, mad, devilish, and not much
differing from them that are thought to be possessed with spirits, so firm and
steadfast in their opinions, as whosoever shall only have respect to the
constancy of their words uttered, would easily believe they were true indeed.

These miserable wretches are so odious unto all their neighbors; and so
feared, as few dare offend them, or deny them any thing they ask: whereby they
take upon them; yea, and sometimes think, that they can do such things as are
beyond the ability of humane nature. These go from house to house, and from
door to door for a pot full of milk, yest, drink, pottage, or some such relief;
without the which they could hardly live: neither obtaining for their service
and pains, nor yet by their art, nor yet at the Devils hands (with whom they
are said to make a perfect and visible bargain) either beauty, money,
promotion, wealth, worship, pleasure, honor, knowledge, learning, or any other
benefit whatsoever.

It falls out many times, that neither their necessities, nor their
expectation is answered or served, in those places where they beg or borrow;
but rather their lewdness is by their neighbors reproved. And further, in tract
of time the Witch waxes odious and tedious to her neighbors; and they again
are despised and despited of her: so as sometimes she curses one, and
sometimes another; and that from the Master of the house, his wife, children,
cattle, etc. to the little Pig that lies in the stie. Thus in process of time
they have all displeased her, and she has wished evil luck unto them all;
perhaps with curses and imprecations made in form. Doubtless (at length) some
of her neighbors die, or fall sick; or some of their children are visited with
diseases that vex them strangely: as Apoplexies, Epilepsie, Convulsions, hot
Fevers, Worms, etc. Which by ignorant Parents are supposed to be the vengeance
of Witches. Yea and their opinions and conceits are confirmed and maintained by
unskilful Physicians, according to the common saying: Inscitiae pallium
malleficium and incantatio, Witchcraft and Enchantment is the cloak of
Ignorance: whereas indeed evil humors, and not strange words, Witches, or
Spirits, are the causes of such diseases: Also some of their Cattle perish,
either by disease or mischance: Then they upon whom such adversities fall,
weighing the fame that goes upon this woman, her words, displeasure, and
curses, meeting so justly with their misfortune, do not only conceive, but also
are resolved that all their mishaps are brought to pass by her only means.

The Witch on the other side expecting her neighbors mischances, and seeing
things sometimes come to pass according to her wishes, curses, and
incantations, (for Bodin himself confesses, J. Bodin. lib. 2. de damon. cap. 8.
that not above two in a hundred of their witchings or wishings take effect)
being called before a Justice, by due examination of the circumstances is
driven to see her imprecations and desires, and her neighbors harms and losses
to concur, and as it were to take effect: and so confesses that she (as a
goddess) has brought such things to pass. Wherein, not only she, but the
accuser and also the Justice are foully deceived and abused; as being through
her confession, and other circumstances persuaded (to the injury of Gods glory)
that she has done, or can do that which is proper only to God himself.

Another sort of Witches there are, which be absolutely coseners. These take
upon them either for glory, fame, or gain, to do any thing which God or the
Devil can do: either for foretelling of things to come, bewraying of secrets,
curing of maladies, or working of miracles. But of these I will talk more at
large hereafter.

CHAP. IV.
What miraculous actions are imputed to Witches by Witchmongers, Papists, and
Poets.

ALthough it be quite against the hair, and contrary to the Devils will, to the
Witches oath, promise, and homage, and contrary to all reason, that Witches
should help any thing that is bewitched; but rather set forward their Masters
business: yet we read in Malleo Maleficarum, Mal. Malef. part. 2. quaest. 1.
cap. 2.
of three sorts of Witches; and the same is affirmed by all the Writers
hereupon, new and old. One sort (they say) can hurt and not help, the second
can help and not hurt, the third can both help and hurt. And among the hurtful
Witches he says there is one sort more beastly than any kind of Beasts, saving
Wolves; for these usually devour and eat young Children and Infants of their
own kind. These be they (says he) that raise hail, tempests, and hurtful
weather; as Lightning, Thunder, etc. These be they that procure barrenness in
Man, Woman, and Beast. These can throw Children into waters, as they walk with
their Mothers, and not be seen. These can make Horses kick, till they cast
their Riders. These can pass from place to place in the air invisible. These
can so alter the mind of Judges, they can have no power to hurt them. These can
procure to themselves and to others, taciturnity and insensibility in their
torments. These can bring trembling to the hands, and strike terror into the
minds of them that apprehend them. These can manifest unto others, things
hidden and lost, and foreshew things to come, and see them as though they were
present. These can alter men's minds to inordinate love or hate. These can kill
whom they list with lightning and thunder. Ovid lib. metamorph. 7. Danaeus in
dialog.

Psellus in Operatione daem. Virg. in Damon. Horat. epod. 5. Tibul. de
fascinat. lib. 1. eleg. 2. Ovid. Epist. 4. Lex. 12. Tabul. Mal. Malef. Lucan de
bello civili. lib. 6. Virg. eclog. 8. Ovid de remedio amoris lib. 1. Hyperius,
Erastus.

Rich. Gal. in his horrible Treatise. Hemingius. Bryan Darcy Confessio Windesor.

Virg. Aeneid. 4. C. Manlius astrol. lib. 1. Mal. Malef. part. 2. quaest. 1.
cap. 14.


These can take man's courage, and the power of generation. These can make a
woman miscarry in childbirth, and destroy the child in the Mothers womb,
without any sensible means either inwardly or outwardly applied. These can with
their looks kill either man or beast.

All these things are avowed by James Sprenger and Henry Institor, In Malleo
Maleficarum, to be true and confirmed by Nider, and the inquisitor Cumanus; and
also by Danaeus, Hyperius, Hemingius, and multiplied by Bodin, and Friar
Bartholomaus Spineus. But because I will in no wise abridge the authority of
their power, you shall have also the testimonies of many other grave Authors in
this behalf; as follows.

And first Ovid affirms, that they can raise and suppress Lightning and
Thunder, Rain and Hail, Clouds and Winds, Tempests and Earthquakes. Others do
write, that they can pull down the Moon and Stars. Some write, that with
wishing they can send Needles into the Livers of their Enemies. Some that they
can transfer Corn in the blade from one place to another. Some, that they can
cure Diseases supernaturally, fly in the Air, and dance with Devils. Some
write, that they can play the part of Succubus, and contract themselves to
Incubus; and so young Prophets are upon them begotten, etc. Some say, they can
transubstantiate themselves and others, and take the forms and shapes of Asses,
Wolves, Ferrets, Cows, Apes, Horses, Dogs, etc. Some say they can keep Devils
and Spirits in the likeness of Todes and Cats.

They can raise spirits (as others affirm) dry up Springs, turn the course of
running waters, inhibit the Sun, and stay both day and night, changing the one
into the other. They can go in and out at awger-holes, and sail in an
Egge-shel, a Cockle or Muscel-shel, through and under the tempestuous Seas.
They can go invisible, and deprive men of their Privities, and otherwise of the
act and use of Venery. They can bring souls out of graves. They can tear Snakes
in pieces with words, and with looks kill Lambs. But in this case a man may
say, that Miranda canunt, sed non credenda Poetae. They can also bring to pass,
that Chern as long as you list, your Butter will not come; especially if either
the Maids have eaten up the Cream; or the good-wife have sold the Butter before
in the market. Whereof I have had some trial, although there may be true and
natural causes to hinder the common course thereof: as for example; Put a
little Soap or Sugar into your Chern of Cream, and there will never come any
Butter, chern as long as you list. But M. Mal. says that there is not so
little a Village, where many women are not that bewitch, infect, and kill kine,
and dry up the Mik: alleging for the strengthening of that assertion, the
saying of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.9.
Nunquid Deo cura est de Bobus? does God take any care of Oxen?

CHAP. V.
A Confutation of the common conceived Opinion of Witches and Witchcraft, and
how detestable a sin it is to repair to them for counsel, or other help, in
time of affliction.

BUt whatsoever is reported or conceived of such manner of Witchcrafts, I dare
avow to be false and fabulous (cosenage, dotage, and poisoning excepted:)
neither is there any mention made of these kind of Witches in the Bible. If
Christ had known them, he would not have pretermitted to inveigh against their
presumption, in taking upon them his Office: as, to heal and cure diseases; and
to work such miraculous and supernatural things, as whereby he himself was
specially known, believed and published to be God; his actions and cures
consisting (in order and effect) according to the power by our Witchmongers
imputed to Witches. Howbeit, if there be any in these days afflicted in such
strange sort, as Christ's cures and patients are described in the New Testament
to have been: we fly from trusting in God to trusting in Witches, who do not
only in their cosening art take on them the office of Christ in this behalf;
but use his very phrase of speech to such Idolaters, as come to seek divine
assistance at their hands, saying; Go thy ways, thy son or thy daughter, John
5, 6. Mark 5.34.
etc. shall do well, and be whole.

It will not suffice to dissuade a Witchmonger from his credulity, that he
sees the sequel and event to fall out many times contrary to their assertion;
but in such case (to his greater condemnation) he seeks further to Witches of
greater fame. If all fail, he will rather think he came in an hour too late,
than that he went a mile too far. To go to Witches, etc. is Idolatry.
Truly I for my part cannot perceive what it is to go a whoring after strange
gods, if this be not. He that looks upon his neighbors wife, and lusts
after her, has committed adultery. And truly, he that in heart and by argument
maintained the sacrifice of the Mass to be propitiatory for the quick and the
dead, is an Idolater; as also he that allows and commends creeping to the
cross, and such like Idolatrous actions, although he bend not his corporal
knees.

In like manner I say, he that attributes to a witch, such divine power, as
duly and only appertains unto GOD (which all Witchmongers do) is in heart a
blasphemer, an Idolater, and full of gross impiety, although he neither go nor
send to her for assistance.

CHAP. VI.
A further confutation of Witches miraculous and omnipotent power, by
invincible reasons and authorities, with disswasions from such fond credulity.

IF Witches could do any such miraculous things, as these and other which are
imputed to them, they might do them again and again, at any time or place, or
at any man's desire: for the devil is as strong at one time as at another, as
busy by day as by night, and ready enough to do all mischief, and cares not
whom he abuses: And insomuch as it is confessed, by the most part of
Witchmongers themselves, that he knows not the cogitation of man's heart, he
should (me thinks) sometimes appear, unto honest and credible persons, in such
gross and corporal form, as it is said he does unto Witches: which you shall
never hear to be justified by one sufficient witness. For the devil indeed
enters into the mind, and that way seeks man's confusion.

The art always presupposes the power; so as, if they say they can do this or
that, they must show, how and by what means they do it; as neither the Witches
nor the Witchmongers are able to do: For, to every action is required the
faculty and ability of the agent or doer; the aptness of the patient or
subject; and a convenient and possible application. Now the Witches are mortal,
and their power depends upon the analogy and consonancy of their minds and
bodies; but with their minds they can but will and understand; and with their
bodies they can do no more, but as the bounds and ends of terrene sense will
suffer: and therefore their power extended not to do such miracles, as
surmounteth their own sense, and the understanding of others which are wiser
than they; so as here wants the virtue and power of the efficient. And in
reason, there can be no more virtue in the thing caused, than in the cause, or
that which proceeds of or from the benefit of the cause. And we see, that
ignorant and impotent women, or Witches, are the causes of incantations and
charms; Aristot. de anima lib. 2. Acts 8.
wherein we shall perceive there is none effect, if we will credit our own
experience and sense unabused, the rules of Philosophy, or the Word of God. For
alas! What an unapt instrument is a toothless, old, impotent, and unwieldy
woman to fly in the air; Truly, the Devil little needs such instruments to
bring his purposes to pass.

Why should not the devil be as ready to help a thief really as a witch? L.
multum. l. si quis alteri, vel sibi.
It is strange, that we should suppose, that such persons can work such feats:
and it is more strange, that we will imagine that to be possible to be done by
a witch; which to nature and sense is impossible; specially when our neighbors
life depends upon our credulity therein; and when we may see the defect of
ability, which always is an impediment both to the act, and also to the
presumption thereof. And because there is nothing possible in law, that in
nature is impossible; therefore the judge does not attend or regard what the
accused man says; or yet would do: but what is proved to have been committed,
and naturally falls in man's power and will to do. For the law says, that to
will a thing impossible, is a sign of a madman, or of a fool, upon whom no
sentence or judgment takes hold. Furthermore, what Jury will condemn, or what
Judge will give sentence or judgment against one for killing a man at Berwick,
when they themselves, and many other saw that man at London, that very day,
wherein the murder was committed; yea though the party confess himself guilty
therein, and twenty witnesses depose the same: But in this case also I say the
Judge is not to weigh their testimony, which is weakened by Law; and the Judges
authority is to supply the imperfection of the case, and to maintain the right
and equity of the same.

Seeing therefore that some other things might naturally be the occasion and
cause of such calamities as witches are supposed to bring; let not us that
profess the Gospel and knowledge of Christ, be bewitched to believe that they
do such things, An objection answered.
as are in nature impossible, and in sense and reason incredible; If they say
it is done through the Devils help, who can work miracles; why do not thieves
bring their business to pass miraculously, with whom the Devil is as conversant
as with the other: Such mischiefs as are imputed to witches, happen where no
witches are, yea and continue when witches are hanged and burnt: why then
should we attribute such effect to that cause, which being taken away,
happens nevertheless?

CHAP. VII.
By what means the name of Witches becomes so famous, and how diversely people
be opinioned concerning them and their actions.

SUrely the natural power of man or woman cannot be so enlarged, as to do any
thing beyond the power and virtue given and ingraffed by God. But it is the
will and mind of man, which is vitiated and depraved by the devil: neither does
God permit any more, than that which the natural order appointed by him does
require. Which natural order is nothing else, but the ordinary power of God,
Miracles are ceased.
powered into every creature, according to his state and condition. But hereof
more shall be said in the title of witches confessions. Howbeit you shall
understand, The opinions of people concerning Withcraft are diverse and
inconstant.
that few or none are thoroughly persuaded, resolved, or satisfied, that witches
can indeed accomplish all these impossibilities: but some one is bewitched in
one point, and some are cosened in another, until in fine, all these
impossibilities, and many more, are by several persons affirmed to be true.

And this I have also noted, that when any one is cosened with a cosening toye
of witchcraft, and makes report thereof accordingly, verifying a matter most
impossible and false as it were upon his own knowledge, as being overtaken with
some kind of illusion or other (which illusions are right enchantments) even
the self-same man will deride the like proceeding out of another man's mouth, as
a fabulous matter unworthy of credit. It is also to be wondered, how men (that
have seen some part of witches cosenages detected, and see also therein the
impossibility of their own presumptions, and the folly and falsehood of the
witches confessions) will not suspect, but remain unsatisfied, or rather
obstinately defend the residue of witches supernatural actions: like as when a
jugler has discovered the slight and illusion of his principal feats, one
would fondly continue to think, that his other petty juggling knacks of
legierdemain are done by the help of a familiar: and according to the folly of
some Papists, who seeing and confessing the Popes absurd Religion, in the
erection and maintenance of Idolatry and Superstition, specially in Images,
Pardons, and Relics of Saints, will yet persevere to think, that the rest of
his doctrine and trumpery is holy and good. Finally, many maintain and cry out
for the execution of witches, that particularly believe never a whit of that
which is imputed unto them; if they be therein privately dealt withal, and
substantially opposed and tried in argument.

CHAP. VIII.
Causes that move as well Witches themselves as others to think that they can
work impossibilities, with answers to certain objections: where also their
punishment by Law is touched.

CArdanus writes, Car. de var. rerum lib. 15. cap. 80.
that the cause of such credulity consists in three points; to wit, in the
imagination of the melancholic, in the constancy of them that are corrupt
therewith, and in the deceit of the Judges; who being inquisitors themselves
against heretics and witches, did both accuse and condemn them, having for
their labor the spoil of their goods: So as these inquisitors added many
fables hereunto, lest they should seem to have done injury to the poor
wretches, in condemning and executing them for none offense. But sithence
(says he) the springing up of Luthers sect, these Priests have tended more
diligently upon the execution of them; because more wealth is to be caught from
them: insomuch as now they deal so loosly with witches (through distrust of
gains) that all is seen to be malice, folly or avarice that has been practiced
against them: And whosoever shall search into this cause, or read the chief
writers hereupon, shall find his words true.

It will be objected, An Objection answered.
that we here in England are not now directed by the Popes Laws; and so by
consequence our witches not troubled or convented by the Inquisitors Haereticae
pravitatis. I answer, that in times past here in England, as in other nations,
this order of discipline has been in force and use; although now some part of
the old rigor be qualified by two several Statutes made in the first of
Elizabeth, and 33 of Henry the eight. Nevertheless the estimation of the
omnipotency of their words or charms seems in those statutes to be somewhat
maintained, as a matter hitherto generally received; and not yet so looked
into, as that it is refuted and decided. But how wisely soever the
Parliament House has dealt therein, or how mercifully soever the Prince
beholds the cause: if a poor old woman, supposed to be a Witch, be by the
Civil or Canon Law convented; I doubt, some Canon will be found in force, not
only to give scope to the tormentor, but also to the hangman, to exercise their
offices upon her. And most certain it is, that in what point soever any of
these extremities, which I shall rehearse unto you, be mitigated, it is through
the goodness of the Queens Majesty, and her excellent Magistrates placed
amongst us: For as touching the opinion of our Writers therein in our age; yea
in our Country, you shall see it does not only agree with foreign cruelty, but
surmounteth it far. If you read a foolish Pamphlet dedicated to the Lord Darcy
by W.W. 1582. you shall see that he affirms, that all those tortures are far
too light, W. W. his Book printed in Anno Dom. 1582.
and their rigor too mild; and that in that respect he impudently exclameth
against our Magistrates, who suffer them to be but hanged, when murderers, and
such malefactors be so used, which deserve not the hundredth part of their
punishments. But if you will see more folly and lewdness comprised in one lewd
book, I commend you to Ri. Ga. a Windsor-man; who being a madman, has written
according to his frantic humor, the reading whereof may satisfy a wise man,
how mad all these Witch-mongers dealings be in this behalf.

CHAP. IX.
A conclusion of the first Book, wherein is fore-shewed the tyrannical cruelty
of Witchmongers and Inquisitors; with a request to the reader to peruse the
same.

ANd because it may appear unto the world what treacherous and faithless
dealing, what extreme and intolerable tyranny, what gross and fond absurdities,
what unnatural and uncivil discourtesie, what cankered and spiteful malice,
what outrageous and barbarous cruelty, what lewd and false packing, what
cunning and crafty intercepting, what bald and peevish interpretations, what
abominable and devilish inventions; and what flat and plain knavery is
practiced against these old women; I will set down the whole order of the
inquisition, to the everlasting, inexcusable, and apparent shame of all
Witch-mongers. Neither will I insert any private or doubtful dealings of
theirs; or such as they can either deny to be usual, or justly cavil at; but
such as are published and renewed in all ages, since the commencement of
Popery, established by Laws, practiced by Inquisitors, privileged by Princes,
commended by Doctors, confirmed by Popes, Councels, Decrees, and Canons; and
finally be left of all Witch-mongers; to wit, by such as do attribute to old
women, and such like creatures, the power of the Creator. I pray you therefore,
though it be tedious and intolerable (as you would be heard in your miserable
calamities) so hear with compassion their accusations, examinations, matters
given in evidence, confessions, presumptions, interrogatories, conjurations,
cautions, crimes, tortures, and condemnations, devised and practiced usually
against them.

BOOK II.
CHAP. I.
What testimonies and witnesses are allowed to give evidence against reputed
Witches, by the report and allowance of the Inquisitors themselves, and such as
are special writers herein.

EXcommunicate persons, partakers of the fault, infants, Mal. Malef. quaest. 5.
p. 3. I. Bod. lib. 4. cap. 2. de demon.

Arch. in C. all. accusatus. in Selz. super. verba.

I. Bod. lib. 4. cap. 1. de demon.

Mal. Malef. quaest. 56. pa. 3. and quae. 5. part. 3. Ibidem.


wicked servants, and run-awaies are to be admitted to bear witness against
their dames in this matter of Witchcraft, because (says Bodin the champion of
Witch-mongers) none that be honest are able to detect them. Heretics also and
Witches shall be received to accuse, but not to excuse a Witch. And finally,
the testimony of all infamous persons in this case is good and allowed. Yea,
one lewd person (says Bodin) may be received to accuse and condemn a thousand
suspected Witches. And although by law, a capital enemy may be challenged; yet
James Sprenger, and Henry Institor, (from whom Bodin, and all the writers that
ever I have read, do receive their light, authorities and arguments) say (upon
this point of Law) that the poor friendless old woman must prove that her
capital enemy would have killed her, and that he has both assaulted and
wounded her; otherwise she pleads all in vain. If the judge ask her, whether
she have any capital enemies; and she rehearse other, and forget her accuser:
or else answer, that he was her capital enemy, but now she hops he is not so;
such a one is nevertheless admitted for a witness. And though by law, Quae. 7.
act. 2.
single witnesses are not admittable; yet if one depose she has bewitched her
Cow; another, her Sow; and the third, her Butter: these (says M. Mal. and
Bodin) are not single witnesses; because they agree that she is a Witch.

CHAP. II
The order of examination of Witches by the Inquisitors.

WOmen suspected to be Witches, The Scottish custom of accusing a witch.
after their apprehension may not be suffered to go home, or to other places,
to seek sureties: for then (says Bodin) the people would be worse willing to
accuse them; for fear lest at their return home, they work revenge upon them:
In which respect Bodin commends much the Scottish custom and order in this
behalf: where (he says) a hollow piece of wood or a chest is placed in the
Church, into the which any body may freely cast a little scroll of paper,
wherein may be contained the name of the Witch, the time, place, and fact, etc.
And the same chest being locked with three several locks, are opened every
fifteenth day by three Inquisitors or officers appointed for that purpose:
which keep three several keys. And thus the accuser need not be known, nor
shamed with the reproach of slander or malice to his poor neighbor.

Item, There must be great persuasions used to all men, women, and children, to
accuse old women of witchcraft.

Item, There may always be promised impunity and favor to Witches, that
confess and detect others; and on the contrary, there may be threatenings and
violence practiced and used.

Item, The little children of Witches, which will not confess, must be
attached, who (if they be craftily handled, says Bodin) will confess against
their own mothers.

Item, Witches must be examined as suddenly, and as unawares as is possible:
the which will so amaze them, that they will confess any thing, supposing the
devil has forsaken them; whereas, if they should first be committed to prison,
the devil would tamper with them, and inform them what to do.

Item, The Inquisitor, judge, or examiner, must begin with small matters first.

I. Bod. lib. de demon. 4. cap. 4. L. parents de testibus.
Item, They must be examined, whether their parents were Witches or no: for
Witches (as these Doctors suppose) come by propagation. And Bodin sets down
this principle in Witchcraft, to wit, Si saga sit matter, sic etiam est filia:
howbeit the law forbids it, Ob sanguinis reverentiam.

Item, The examiner must look steadfastly upon their eyes: for they cannot look
directly upon a man's face (as Bodin affirms in one place, although in another
he says, that they kill and destroy both men and beasts with their looks.)

Item, She must be examined of all accusations, presumptions, and faults, at
one instant; left Satan should afterward dissuade her from confession.

Item, A Witch may not be put in prison alone, lest the Devil dissuade her from
confession, through promises of her indemnity. For (says Bodin) some that have
been in the goal have proved to fly away, as they were wont to do when they met
with Diana and Minerva, etc. and so brake their own necks against the
stone-walls.

Item, If any deny her own confession made without torture, she is nevertheless
by that confession to be condemned, as in any other crime.

Item, The Judges must seem to be in a pitiful countenance, and to bemoan them;
saying, that, It was not they, but the Devil that committed the murder, and
that he compelled them to do it; and must make them believe that they think
them to be innocents.

Item, If they will confess nothing but upon the rack or torture; their apparel
must be changed; and every hair in their body must be shaven off with a sharp
razor.

K. Childeberts cruel devise.
Item, If they have charms for taciturnity, so as they feel not the common
tortures, and therefore confess nothing: then some sharp instrument must be
thrust betwixt every nail of their fingers and toes; which (as Bodin says) was
King Childeberts devise, and is to this day of all others the most effectual:
For by means of that extreme pain, they will (says he) confess any thing.

P. Grillandus.
Item, Paulus Grillandus, being an old doer in these matters: wishes that when
Witches sleep, and feel no pain upon the torture, Domine labia mea aperies
should be said; and so (says he) both the torments will be felt, and the truth
will be uttered: Et sic ars deluditur art.

A subtle and devilish devise.
Item, Bodin says, that at the time of examination, there should be a
semblance of great ado, to the terrifying of the Witch; and that a number of
instruments, ginns, manacles, ropes, halters, fetters, etc. be prepared,
brought forth, and laid before the examinate: and also that some be procured to
make a most horrible and lamentable cry, in the place of torture, as though he
or she were upon the rack, or in the tormentors hands: so as the examinate may
hear it whiles she is examined, before she her self be brought into the prison;
and perhaps (says he) she will by this means confess the matter.

Item, There must be subborned some crafty spy, that may seem to be a prisoner
with her in the like case; who perhaps may in conference undermine her, and so
bewray and discover her.

Item, If she will not yet confess, she must be told that she is detected, and
accused by other of her companions; and although in truth there be no such
matter: and so perhaps she will confess, the rather to be revenged upon her
adversaries and accusers.

CHAP. III.
Matters of Evidence against Witches.

IF an old woman threaten or touch one being in health, who dies shortly
after; or else is infected with the Leprosy, Apoplexy, or any other strange
disease: it is (says Bodin) a permanent fact, and such an evidence, as
condemnation, or death must ensue, without further proof: if any body have
mistrusted her, or said before that she was a Witch.

Item, If any come in, or depart out of the chamber or house, the doors being
shut; it is an apparent and sufficient evidence to a witches condemnation,
without further trial: which thing Bodin never saw: If he can show me that
feat; I will subscribe to his folly. For Christ after his resurrection used the
same: not as a ridiculous toy, that every Witch might accomplish; but as a
special miracle, to strengthen the faith of the Elect.

Item, If a woman bewitch any bodies eyes, she is to be executed without
further proof.

Item, If any inchant or bewitch men's Beasts, or Corn, or fly in the air, or
make a Dog speak, or cut off any man's members, and unite them again to men or
childrens bodies; it is sufficient proof to condemnation.

Item, Presumptions and conjectures are sufficient proofs against Witches.

Item, If three witnesses do but say, Such a woman is a Witch; Bar. Spineus and
I. Bod. de demon. lib. 2. cap. 2. Alexander. L. ubi numeris de testibus. J.
Bod. de demon. lib. 2. cap. 2.
then it is a clear case that she is to be executed with death. Which matter
Bodin says is not only certain by the Canon and Civil Laws, but by the opinion
of Pope Innocent, the wisest Pope (as he says) that ever was.

Item, The complaint of any one man of credit is sufficient to bring a poor
woman to the rack or pully.

Item, A condemned or infamous persons testimony is good and allowable in
matters of Witchcraft.

Item, A Witch is not to be delivered, though she endure all the tortures, and
confess nothing; as all other are in any criminal cases.

Item, Though in other cases the depositions of many women at one instant are
disabled, as sufficient in law; because of the imbecility and frailty of their
nature or sex, yet in this matter one woman, though she be a party, either
accuser or accused, and be also infamous and impudent (for such are Bodins
words) yea and already condemned: she may nevertheless serve to accuse and
condemn a Witch.

Item, A witness uncited, and offering himself in this case is to be heard, and
in none other.

Item, A captial Enemy (if the enmity be pretended to grow by means of
Witchcraft) may object against a Witch; and none exception is to be had or made
against him.

Item, Although the proof of perjury may put back a witness in all other
causes; Parin. L. post lenotum 9 his, de iis quibus ut indig.

Alex. cap. 72. L. 2. etc. In his foolish Pamphlet of the execution of Windsor
Witches. J. Bod. l. 4 c. 3.


yet in this a perjured person is a good and lawful witness,

Item, The Proctors and Advocates in this case are compelled to be witnesses
against their Clients, and in none other case they are to be constrained
thereunto.

Item, None can give evidence against Witches, touching their assemblies, but
Witches only: (as Bodin says) none other can do it. Howbeit, Ri. Ga. writes,
that he came to the God-speed, and with his sword and Buckler killed the Devil;
or at the last he wounded him so sore, that he made him stink of Brimstone.

Item, Bodin says that because this is an extraordinary matter; there must
herein be extraordinary dealing: and all manner of ways are to be used, direct
and indirect.

CHAP. IV.
Confessions of Witches, whereby the are condemned.

Is there any probability that such would continue Witches? Idem. ibid. Joan.
An. ad speculat. tit. de litis contest. part. 2. non alienem eodem.
SOme Witches confess (says Bodin) that are desirous to dye; not for glory, but
for despair: because they are tormented in their life time: But these may not
be spared (says he) although the law does excuse them.

The best and surest confession is at strife, to her ghostly father.

Item, If she confess many things that are false, and one thing that may be
true; she is to be taken and executed upon that confession.

Item, She is not so guilty that confesses a falsehood or a lie, and denies a
truth; as she that answers by circumstance.

Item, An equivocal or doubtful answer is taken for a confession against a
Witch.

L. de aetat. 5. nihil eodem, etc.

J. Bod. de demon. lib. 4. c. 3.


Item, Bodin reports, that one confessed that he went out, or rather up in
the air, and was transported many miles to the Fairies dance, only because he
would spy unto what place his wife went to hagging, and how she behaved her
self: Whereupon was much ado among the Inquisitors and Lawyers, to discuss
whether he should be executed with his wife or no: But it was concluded that he
must die, because he bewrayed not his wife: the which he forbear to do, Propter
reverentiam honoris and familiae.

Item, If a woman confess freely herein, before question be made; and yet
afterward deny it: she is nevertheless to be burned.

Item, They affirm that this extremity is herein used, because not one among a
thousand Witches is detected. And yet it is affirmed by Sprenger in M. Mal.
that there is not so little a Parish, but there are many Witches known to be
there.

CHAP. V.
Presumptions, whereby Witches are condemned.

J. Bod. de demon. lib. 4. c. 4.
IF any woman's Child chance to dye at her hand, so as no body knows how; it
may not be thought or presumed that the Mother killed it, except she be
supposed a Witch, and in that case it is otherwise; for she must upon that
presumption be executed; except she can prove the negative or contrary.

Item, If the child of a woman that is suspected to be a Witch, be lacking or
gone from her; it is to be presumed, that she has sacrificed it to the Devil:
except she can prove the negative or contrary.

Item, Though in other persons, certain points of their Confessions may be
thought erroneous, and imputed to error: yet in Witches causes) all oversights,
imperfections, and escapes must be adjudged impious and malicious; and tend to
her confusion and condemnation.

J. Bod. de demon. lib. 4. c. 4. L. decurionem de panis.

Panorm. and Felin in C. veniens. 1. de testibus parsi causa 15.4. Lib. 4.
numero 12. usque 18.


Item, Though a Theif be not said in law to be infamous in any other matter
than in theft; yet a Witch defamed of witchcraft is said to be defiled with all
manner of faults and infamies universally, though she were not condemned; but
(as I said) defamed with the name of Witch: For rumors and reaports are
sufficient (says Bodin) to condemn a Witch.

Item, If any man, woman, or child do say, that such a one is a Witch; it is a
most vehement suspicion (says Bodin) and sufficient to bring her to rack;
though in all other cases it be directly against law.

Item, In presumptions and suspicions against a Witch, the common brute or
voice of the people cannot err.

Item, If a woman, when she is apprehended, cry out, or say; I am undone; Save
my life; I will tell you how the matter stands, etc. she is thereupon most
vehemently to be suspected and condemned to die.

Item, Though a Conjurer be not to be condemned for curing the diseased by
virtue of his Art; yet must a Witch die for the like case.

Item, The behavior, looks, becks, and countenance of a woman, are sufficient
signs, whereby to presume she is a Witch: for always they look down to the
ground, and dare not look a man full in the face.

Item, If their Parents were thought to be Witches, then it is certainly to be
presumed that they are so: but it is not so to be thought of Whores.

Item, It is a vehement presumption if she cannot weep, at the time of her
examination: and yet Bodin says, that a Witch may shed three drops out of her
right eye.

Item, It is not only a vehement suspicion, and presumption, but an evident
proof of a Witch; if any man or beast dye suddenly where she has been seen
lately; although her witching-stuffe be not found or espied.

Item, If any, body use familiarity or company with a Witch convicted, it is a
sufficient presumption against that person to be adjudged a Witch.

Item, L. 5. de adult. S. gl. and Bart. c. venerabilis de electio, etc. I. Bod.
de demon. lib. 4. cap. 4.
That evidence that may serve to bring in any other person to examination, may
serve to bring a Witch to her condemnation.

Item, Herein judgment must be pronounced and executed (as Bodin says, without
order, and not like to the orderly proceeding and form of judgment in other
crimes.

Item, A Witch may not be brought to the torture suddenly; or before long
examination, least she go away scot-free: for they feel no torments, and
therefore care not for the same, as Bodin affirms.

Item, Little children may be had to the torture at the first dash; Idem. ibid.
but so may it not be done with old women; as is aforesaid.

Item, If she have any privy mark under her armpits, under her hair, under her
lip, or in her buttock, or in her privities: it is a presumption sufficient for
the Judge to proceed and give sentence of death upon her.

The only pity they show to a poor woman in this case, is: that though she be
accused to have slain any body with her Enchantments; yet if she can bring
forth the party alive, she shall not be put to death: Whereat I marvel, in as
much as they can bring the Devil in any bodies likeness and representation.

Item, Their Law says, that an uncertain presumption is sufficient, Cap.
preterea cum glos. extra. de test. Panormit. in C. vener. col. 2. eodem, etc.
when a certain presumption fails.

CHAP. VI.
Particular Interrogatories used by the Inquisitors against Witches.

I Need not stay to confute such partial and horrible dealings, being so
apparently impious, and full of tyranny, which except I should have so
manifestly detected, even with their own writings and assertions, few or none
would have believed: But for brevities sake I will pass over the same;
supposing that the citing of such absurdities may stand for a sufficient
confutation thereof. Now therefore I will proceed to a more particular order
and manner of examinations, etc. used by the Inquisitors, and allowed for the
most part throughout all Nations.

First, the Witch must be demanded, why she touched such a child, Mal. Malef.
super. interrog.
or such a cow, etc. and afterward the same child or cow fell sick or lame, etc.

Item, Why her two Kine give more milk than her neighbors. And the note before
mentioned is here again set down, to be specially observed of all men: to wit,
that though a Witch cannot weep, yet she may speak with a crying voice. Which
assertion of weeping is false, and contrary to the saying of Seneca, Seneca in
tragoed.
Cato, and many others; which affirm, that a woman weepeth when she means
most deceit; and therefore says M. Mal. she must be well looked unto, Mal.
Malef. part. 3. quest.
otherwise she will put spittle privily upon her cheeks, and seem to weep,
which rule also Bodin says is infallible. But alas that tears should be
thought sufficient to excuse or condemn in so great a cause, Act. 15.10. Numb.
11.4. 1 Samuel 11.4. 2 Samuel 15.23. Mat. 8. and 13. and 22. and 24. and 25. Luke
3. etc.
and so weighty a trial! I am sure that the worst sort of the children of
Israel wept bitterly: yea, if there were any Witches at all in Israel, they
wept: For it is written, That all the children of Israel wept. Finally, if
there be any Witches in Hell, I am sure they weep; for there is weeping,
wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

But, God knows, many an honest Matron cannot sometimes in the heaviness of
her heart, shed tears; the which oftentimes are more ready and common with
crafty queans and strumpets, than with sober women: For we read of two kinds of
tears in a woman's eye, the one of true grief, the other of deceit: And it is
written, Seneca in tragoed.
that Dediscere flere foeminium est mendacium: which argues, that they lie,
which say, that wicked women cannot weep. But let these Tormentors take heed,
that the tears in this case which run down the widows cheeks, with their cry
spoken by Jesus Syrach, be not heard above. But lo what learned, godly, Eccl.
35.15.
and lawful means these Popish Inquisitors have invented for the trial of true
or false tears.

CHAP. VII.
The Inquisitors trial of Weeping by Conjuration.

Trial of tears.
I Conjure thee by the amorous tears, which Jesus Christ our Savior shed upon
the Cross for the salvation of the world; and by the most earnest and burning
tears of his Mother the most glorious Virgin Mary, sprinkled upon his wounds
late in the evening; and by all the tears, which every Saint and elect Vessel
of God has poured out here in the world, and from those eyes he has wiped
away all tears; that if thou be without fault, thou may pour down tears
abundantly; and if thou be guilty, that thou weep in no wise: In the name of
the Father, Mal. Malef. quaest. 15. pae. 3.
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; Amen. And note, says he, that the more you
conjure, the less she weepeth.

CHAP. VIII.
Certain Cautions against Witches, and of their Tortures to procure Confession.

BUt to manifest their further follies, I will recite some of their cautions,
which are published by the ancient Inquisitors, for perpetual lessons of their
successors: as follows.

The first caution is that, which was last rehearsed concerning weeping; the
which (say they) is an infallible note.

Ja. Sprenger. H. Institor.
Secondly, the Judge must beware she touch no part of him, specially of his bare
skin: and that he always wear about his neck conjured Salt, Palm, Herbs, and
Wax hallowed; which (say they) are not only approved to be good by the Witches
confessions; but also by the use of the Romish Church, which halloweth them
only for that purpose.

Mal. Malef. pa. 3. quaest. 15.
Item, she must come to her arreignment backward, to wit, with her tail to the
Judges face, who must make many crosses, at the time of her approaching to the
Bar. And least we should condemn that for superstition, they prevent us with a
figure, and tell us, that the same superstition may not seem superstitious unto
us. Prolepsis, or Preocupation.
But this resembles the persuasion of a theif, that disswadeth his son from
stealing; and nevertheless tells him that he may pick or cut a purse, and rob
by the high way.

One other caution is, that she must be shaven, so as there remain not one hair
about her: for sometimes they keep secrets for taciturnity, and for other
purposes also in their hair, in their privities, and between their skin and
their flesh: For which cause I marvel they flea them not: for one of their
Witches would not burn, being in the midst of the flame, Mal. Malef.
as M. Mal. reports; until a charm written in a little scroll was espied to
be hidden between her skin and flesh, and taken away. And this so gravely and
faithfully set down by the Inquisitors themselves, that one may believe it if
he list, though indeed it be a very lie. The like cites Bodin, John Bod. Anno
1485. a Knave Inquisitor.
of a Witch that could not be strangled by the Executioner, do what he could.
But it is most true, that the Inquisitor Cumanus in one year did shave one and
forty poor women; and burnt them all when he had done.

Another caution is, that at the time and place of torture, Q. 16. de tempore
and modo terror.

Blasphemous Pope July, of that name the third.


the hallowed things aforesaid, with the seven words spoken on the Cross, be
hanged about the Witches neck; and the length of Christ in wax be knit about
her bare naked body, with Relics of Saints, etc. All which stuff (say they)
will so work within and on them, as when they are racked and tortured, they can
hardly stay or hold themselves from confession. In which case, I doubt not but
that Pope, which blasphemed Christ, and cursed his Mother for a Peacock, and
cursed God with great despights for a piece of Pork, with less compulsion would
have renounced the Trinity, and have worshipped the Devil upon his knees.

Another caution is, that after she has been racked, and passed over all
tortures devised for that purpose; and after that she has been compelled to
drink holy water, she be conveyed again to the place of torture: and that in
the midst of her torments, her accusations be read unto her; and that the
witnesses (if they will) be brought face to face unto her: and finally, that
she be asked, whether for trial of her innocence she will have judgment,
Candentis ferri, Mal. Malef par, 3. quae. 16.
which is, To carry a certain weight of burning Iron in her bare hand. But that
may not (say they) in any wise be granted: For both M. Mal. and Bodin also
affirm, that many things may be promised, but nothing need be performed: for
why, they have authority to promise, but no Commission to perform the same.

Another caution is, that the Judge take heed, that when she once begins to
confess, he cut not off her examination, but continue it night and day. For
many times, whiles they go to dinner, she returns to her vomit.

Another caution is, that after the Witch has confessed the annoying of men
and beasts, she be asked how long she has had Incubus, when she renounced, the
faith, and made the real league, and what that league is, etc. And this is
indeed the chief cause of all their incredible and impossible confessions: for
upon the rack, when they have once begun to lie, they will say what the
Tormentor list.

The last caution is, that if she will not confess, she be had to some strong
Castle or Goal. And after certain days, the Jayler must make her believe he
goes into some far Country: and then some of her friends must come in to her,
and promise her, that if she will confess to them, they will suffer her to
escape out of Prison: which they may well do, the Keeper being from home. And
this way (says M. Mal.) has served, when all other means have failed. Mal.
Malef. par. 3. quae. 16. act. 11.


And in this place it may not be omitted, that above all other times, they
confess upon frydayes. Now says James Sprenger, and Henry Institor, we must
say all, to wit: If she confess nothing, she should be dismissed by law; and
yet by order she may in no wise be bailed, but must be put into close Prison,
and there be talked withal by some crafty person; those are the words, and in
the mean while there must be some eves-droppers with pen and ink behind the
wall, to hearken and note what she confesses: or else some of her old
companions and acquaintance may come in and talk with her of old matters, and
so by eves-droppers be also bewrayed; so as there shall be no end of torture
before she have confessed what they will.

CHAP. IX.
The fifteen crimes laid to the charge of Witches by Witchmongers; specially by
Bodin in Daemonomania.



Answ. Then let them dye therefore, or at the least be used like Infidels, or
Apostates.



Answ. Then let them have the Law expressed in Levit. 24. and Deuteronomy. 13. and 17.

They give their faith to the Devil, and they worship and offer sacrifice unto
him.

Answ. Let such also be judged by the same law.

They do solemnly vow and promise all their progeny unto the Devil.

Answ. This promise proceeds from an unsound mind, and is not to be regarded;
because they cannot perform it, neither will it be proved true: Howbeit, if it
be done by any that is sound of mind, let the curse of Jeremy, 32.36. light
upon them, to wit, the Sword, Famine, and Pestilence.

They sacrifice their own children to the Devil before baptism, holding them up
in the air unto him, and then thrust a needle into their brains.

Answ. If this be true, I maintain them not herein: but there is a law to judge
them by. Howbeit, it is so contrary to sense and nature, that it were folly to
believe it; either upon Bodins bare word, or else upon his presumptions;
especially when so small commodity, and so great danger and inconvenience
insueth to the Witches thereby.

They burn their Children when they have sacrificed them.

Answ. Then let them have such punishment, as they that offered their children
unto Moloch, Lev. 20. But these be mere devises of Witchmongers and
Inquisitors, that with extreme tortures have wrung such Confessions from them;
or else with false reports have believed them; or by flattery and fair words
and promises have won it at their hands, at the length.

They swear to the Devil to bring as many into that society as they can.

Answ. This is false, and so proved elsewhere.

They swear by the name of the Devil.

Answ. I never heard any such Oath, neither have we warrant to kill them that
so do swear; though indeed it be very lewd and impious.

They use incestuous adultery with spirits.

Answ. This is a stale ridiculously, as is proved apparently hereafter.

They boil Infants, after they have murdered them unbaptized, until their
flesh be made potable.

Answ. This is untrue, incredible, and impossible.

They eat the flesh and drink the blood of men and children openly.

Answ. Then are they akin to the Anthropophagi and Canibals: But, I believe
never an honest man in England nor in France, will affirm that he has seen any
of these persons, that are said to be Witches, do so; if they should, I believe
it would poison them.

They kill men with poison.

Answ. Let them be hanged for their labor.

They kill men's Cattle.

Answ. Then let an action of trespass be brought against them for so doing.

They bewitch men's corn, and bring hunger and barrenness into the country; they
ride and fly in the air, bring storms, make tempests, etc.

Answ. Then will I worship them as Gods; for those be not the works of man, nor
yet of a Witch: as I have elsewhere proved at large.

They use venery with a Devil called Incubus, even when they lie in bed with
their husbands, and have children by them, which become the best Witches.

Answ. This is the last lie, very ridiculous, and confuted by me elsewhere.

CHAP. X.
A refutation of the former surmised Crimes patched together by Bodin, and the
only way to escape the Inquisitors.

IF more ridiculous or abominable crimes could have beeen invented, these poor
women (whose chief fault is that they are scolds) should have been charged with
them.

In this libel you do see, is contained all that Witches are charged with; and
all that also, which any Witchmonger surmiseth, or in malice imputes unto
Witches power and practice.

Some of these crimes may not only be in the power and will of a Witch, but may
be accomplished by natural means: and therefore by them the matter in question
is not decided, to wit; The question or matter in controversy: that is to say,
the proposition or theme.
whether a Witch can work wonders supernaturally; For many a knave and whore
does more commonly put in execution those lewd actions, than such as are called
Witches, and are hanged for their labor.

Some of these crimes also laid unto Witches charge, are by me denied, and by
them cannot be proved to be true, or committed by any one Witch. Othersome of
these crimes likewise are so absurd, supernatural, and impossible, that they
are derided almost of all men, and as false, fond, and fabulous reports
condemned: insomuch as the very Witchmongers themselves are ashamed to hear of
them.

If part be untrue, why may not the residue be thought false: For all these
things are laid to their charge at one instant, even by the greatest Doctors
and Patrons of the Sect of Witchmongers, producing as many proofs for Witches
supernatural and impossible actions, as for the other: So as, if one part of
their accusation be false, the other part deserves no credit. If all be true
that is alleged of their doings, why should we believe in Christ, because of
his miracles, when a Witch does as great wonders as ever he did?

But it will be said by some; As for those absurd and Popish writers, they are
not in all their allegations, touching these matters, to be credited. A general
error.
But I assure you, that even all sorts of writers herein (for the most part)
the very Doctors of the Church to the Schoolmen, Protestants, and Papists,
learned and unlearned, Poets and Historiographers, Jews, Christians, or
Gentiles agree in these impossible and ridiculous matters. Yea and these
writers, out of whom I gather most absurdities, are of the best credit and
authority of all writers in this matter. The reason is, because it was never
thoroughly looked into; but every fable credited; and the word (Witch) named so
often in Scripture.

They that have seen further of the Inquisitors orders and customs, say also;
The only way for Witches to avoid the Inquisitors hands.
that there is no way in the world for these poor women to escape the
Inquisitors hands, and so consequently burning: but to gild their hands with
money, whereby oftentimes they take pity upon them, and deliver them, as
sufficiently purged: For they have authority to exchange the punishment of the
body with the punishment of the purse, applying the same to the office of their
Inquisition: whereby they reap such profit, as a number of these silly women
pay them yearly pensions, to the end they may not be punished again.

CHAP. XI.
The opinion of Cornelius Agrippa concerning Witches, of his pleading for a
poor woman accused of witchcraft, and how he convinced the Inquisitors.

Cornelius Agrippa says, that while he was in Italy, many Inquisitors in the
Duchy of Millen troubled diverse most honest and noble Matrons, privily
wringing much money from them, until their knavery was detected: Further he
says, that being an Advocate or Counselor in the Commonwealth of Maestright
in Brabant, he had sore contention with an Inquisitor, who through unjust
accusations drew a poor woman of the Country into his butchery, and to an unfit
place; not so much to examine her, as to torment her, whom when C. Agrippa had
undertaken to defend, declaring that in the things done, there was no proof, no
sign or token that could cause her to be tormented; the Inquisitor stoutly
denying it, said; One thing there is, which is proof and matter sufficient: for
her mother was in times past burned for a Witch. Now when Agrippa replied,
affirming that this Article was impertinent, and ought to be refused by the
Judge, as being the deed of another; alleging to the Inquisitor reasons and law
for the same: he replied again, that this was true, because they used to
sacrifice their children to the Devil, as soon as they were born; and also
because they usually conceived by spirits transformed into man's shape, and that
thereby witchcraft was naturally ingraffed into this child, as a disease that
comes by inheritance.

A bitter invective against a cruel Inquisitor.
C. Agrippa replying against the Inquisitors folly and superstitious blindness,
said; O thou wicked Priest! Is this thy Divinity? Do thou use to draw poor
guiltless women to the rack by these forged devises? Do thou with such
sentences judge others to be Heretics, thou being more a Heretic than either
Faustus, or Donatus? Be it as thou say, Do thou not frustrate the grace of
Gods Ordinance; namely Baptism? Are the words in Baptism spoken in vain? Or
shall the Devil remain in the child, or it in the power of the Devil, being
there and then consecrated to Christ Jesus, in the Name of the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost? And if thou defend their false opinions, which affirm, that
Spirits accompanying with women, can engender; yet dotest thou more than any of
them, which never believed that any of those Devils, together with their stolen
seed, do put part of that their seed or nature into the creature. But though
indeed we be born the children of the Devil and damnation, yet in baptism,
through grace in Christ, Satan is cast out, and we are made new creatures in
the Lord, from whom none can be separated by another man's deed. The Inquisitor
being hereat offended, threatened the Advocate to proceed against him, as a
supporter of Heretics or Witches; yet nevertheless, he ceased not to defend
the silly woman, and through the power of the Law he delivered her from tho
claws of the bloody Monk, who with her accusers, were condemned in a great sum
of money to the Charter of the Church of Mentz, and remained infamous after
that time almost to all men.

But by the way, you must understand, that this was but a pety Inquisitor, and
had not so large a Commission as Cumanus, Sprenger, and such other had; nor yet
as the Spanish Inquisitors at this day have; For these will admit no Advocates
now unto the poor souls, except the Tormentor or Hangman may be called an
Advocate. You may read the sum of this Inquisition in few words set out by M.
John Fox in the Acts and Monuments: John Fox in the Acts and Monuments.
For Witches and Heretics are among the Inquisitors of like reputation; saving
that the extremity is greater against Witches, because through their
simplicity, they may the more boldly tyrannize upon them, and triumph over them.

CHAP. XII.
What the fear of death and feeling of torments may force one to do, and that
it is no marvel though Witches condemn themselves by their own confessions so
tyrannically extorted.

HE that reads the Ecclesiastical histories, or remembers the persecutions
in Queen Mary's time, shall find, that many good men have fallen for fear of
persecution, and returned unto the Lord again: What marvel then, though a poor
woman, such a one as is described elsewhere, and tormented as is declared in
these latter leaves, be made to confess such absurd and false impossibilities;
when flesh and blood is unable to endure such trial? Or how can she in the
midst of such horrible tortures and torments, promise unto her self constancy;
or forbear to confess any thing? Or what avails it her, to persevere in the
denial of such matters as are laid to her charge unjustly; when on the one side
there is never any end of her torments; on the other side, if she continue in
her assertion, they say she has charms for taciturnity or silence?

Peter the Apostle renounced, cursed, Peter's apostasy and renouncing of
Christ.
and forsware his master and our Savior Jesus Christ, for fear of a wenches
menaces; or rather at a question demanded by her, wherein he was not so
circumvented, as these poor Witches are, which be not examined by girls, but
by cunning Inquisitors; who having the spoil of their goods, and bringing with
them into the place of judgment, minds to maintain their bloody purpose, spare
no manner of allurements, threatenings, nor torments, until they have wrung out
of them all that, which either makes to their own desire, or serves to the
others destruction.

Peter (I say) in the presence of his Lord and Master Christ, who had
instructed him in true knowledge many years, being forewarned, not passing four
or five hours before, and having made a real league, and a faithful promise to
the contrary, without any other compulsion than (as has been said) by a
question proposed by a girl; against his conscience, forsook, thrice denied,
and abandoned his said Master; and yet he was a man illuminated, and placed in
dignity aloft, and nearer to Christ by many degrees, than the Witch, whose fall
could not be so great as Peter's; because she never ascended half so many steps.
A Pastors declination is much more abominable than the going astray of any of
his sheep: as an Ambassadors conspiracy is more odious, than the falsehood of a
common person; or as a Captains treason is more mischievous, than a private
soldiers mutiny. If you say, Peter repented; I answer, that the Witch does so
likewise sometimes; and I see not in that case, but mercy may be employed upon
her. It were a mighty temptation to a silly old woman, that a visible Devil
(being in shape so ugly, Danaeus in Dialog.

1 Cor. 10.


as Danaeus and others say he is) should assault her in manner and form as is
supposed, or rather avowed; specially when there is promise made that none
shall be tempted above their strength. The poor old Witch is commonly
unlearned, unwarned, and unprovided of counsel and friendship, void of
judgment and discretion to moderate her life and communication, her kind and
gender more weak and frail than the masculine, and much more subject to
melancholy; her bringing up and company is so base, that nothing is to be
looked for in her, specially of these extraordinary qualities; her age also is
commonly such, as makes her decrepite, which is a disease that moves them to
these follies.

Finally, Christ did clearly remit Peter, though his offense was committed both
against his divine and humane nature; yea afterward he did put him in trust to
feed his sheep, and showed great countenance, friendship, and love unto him:
And therefore I see not, but we may show compassion upon these poor souls, if
they show themselves sorrowful for their misconceipts and wicked imaginations.

BOOK III.
CHAP. I.
The Witches bargain with the Devil, according to M. Mal. Bodin, Nider,
Danaeus, Psellus, Erastus, Hemingius, Cumanus, Aquinas, Bartholomaeus, Spineus,
etc.

THat which in this matter of Witchcraft has abused so many, and seems both
so horrible and intolerable, is a plain bargain, that (they say) is made
betwixt the devil and the Witch. And many of great learning conceive it to be a
matter of truth, and in their writings publish it accordingly; the which (by
Gods grace) shall be proved as vain and false as the rest.

The double bargain of Witches with the Devil.
The order of their bargain or profession is double; the one solemn and pulick,
the other secret and private. That which is called solemn or public, is where
Witches come together at certain assemblies, at the times prefixed, and do not
only see the Devil in visible form; but confer and talk familiarly with him. In
which conference the Devil exhorts them to observe their fidelity unto him,
promising them long life and prosperity. Then the Witches assembled, commend a
new disciple (whom they call a novice) unto him: and if the Devil find that
young Witch apt and forward in renunciation of Christian Faith, in despising
any of the seven Sacraments, in treading upon Crosses, it spitting at the time
of the elevation, in breaking their fast on fasting-daies, and fasting on
Sundaies; the Devil gives forth his hand, and the novice joining hand in hand
with him, promises to observe and keep all the Devils commandments.

This done, the Devil begins to be more bold with her, telling her plainly,
that all this will not serve his turn; and therefore requires homage at her
hands: yea he also tells her, that she must grant him both her body and soul
to be tormented in everlasting fire; Mal. Malef. de modo professionis.
which she yields unto: Then he charge her, to procure as many men, women,
and children also, as she can, to enter into this society. Then he teaches
them to make ointments of the bowels and members of children, whereby they ride
in the air, and accomplish all their desires: So as, if there be any children
unbaptized, or not guarded with the sign of the cross, or orizons; then the
Witches may and do catch them from their mothers sides in the night, or out of
their cradles, or otherwise kill them with their ceremonies; and after burial
steal them out of their graves, and sees them in a chaldron, until their flesh
be made potable. Of the thickest whereof they make ointments, whereby they ride
in the air, but the thinner potion they put into flaggons, whereof whosoever
drinks, observing certain ceremonies, immediately becomes a master, or
rather a mistress in that practice and faculty.

CHAP. II.
The order of the Witches homage done (as it is written hy lewd Inquisitors and
peevish Witch-mongers) to the devil in person; of their songs and dances, and
namely of Lavolta, and of other ceremonies, also of their excourses.

SOmetimes their homage with their oath and bargain is received for a certain
term of years; sometimes for ever: Homage of Witches to the Devil.
Sometimes it consists in the denial of the whole faith, sometimes in part.
The first is, when the soul is absolutely yielded to the Devil and hell fire:
the other is, when they have but bargained to observe certain ceremonies and
statutes of the Church; as to conceal faults at Shrift, to fast on Sundaies,
etc. And this is done either by oath, protestation of words, or by obligation
in writing, sometimes sealed with wax, sometimes signed with blood, sometimes
by kissing the Devils bare buttocks; as did a Doctor called Edlin, who (as
Bodin says) was burned for Witchcraft.

You must also understand, Bar. Spineus, cap. 1. inanuo Mal. Malef.
that after they have delicately banqueted with the Devil and the lady of the
Fayries; and have eaten up a fat Ox, and emptied a Butt of Malmsie, and a Binn
of Bread at some Noble man's house, in the dead of the night, nothing is missed
of all this in the morning: For the Lady Sibylla, Minerva; or Diana with a
golden rod strikes the vessel and the binn, and they are fully replenished
again: Yea, she causes the Bullocks bones to be brought and laid together upon
the hide, and lappeth the four ends thereof together, laying her golden rod
thereon, and then rises up the Bullock again in his former estate and
condition: and yet at their return home, they are like to starve for hunger; as
Spineus says. And this must be an infallible rule, Idem Ibid.
that every fortnight, or at the least every month, each Witch must kill one
child at the least for her part.

And here some of Monsier Bodin's lies may be inserted, who says, I. Bod. de
demon. lib. 2. cap. 4,
that at these Magical assemblies, the Witches never fail to dance; and in
their dance they sing these words; Har har, Devil devil, dance here, dance
here, play here, play here, Sabbath, sabbath: And whiles they sing and dance,
every one has a broom in her hand, and holds it up aloft. Item, he says,
that these night-walkings, or rather night-dancings, brought out of Italy into
France, that dance which is called La volta. Mal. Malef.


A part of their league is, to scrape off the oil, which is received in extreme
folly (unction I should have said): But if that be so dangerous, they which
sock the corpse had need to take great care, that they rub not off the oil,
which diverse other ways may also be thrust out of the forehead; and then I
perceive all the virtue thereof is gone, and farewell it. But I marvel how they
take upon them to preserve the water powered on them in Baptism, which I take to
be largely of as great force as the other; and yet I think is commonly wiped
and washed off, within four and twenty hours after baptism: but this agrees
with the residue of their folly.

And this is to be noted, that the Inquisitors affirm, that during the whole
time of the Witches excourse, the Devil occupies the room and place of the
Witch, in so perfect a similitude, as her husband in his bed, neither by
feeling, speech, nor countenance, can discern her from his wife. Yea the wife
departs out of her husbands arms insensibly, and leaves the Devil in her
room visibly. Wherein their credulity is incredible, Grillandus de sort. 10.
vol. tract.
who will have a very body in the fained play, and a fantastical body in the
true bed: and yet (forsooth) at the Name of Jesus, or at the sign of the Cross,
all these bodily Witches they say) vanish away.

CHAP. III.
How Witches are summoned to appear before the Devil, of their riding in the
air, of their accounts, of their conference with the Devil, of his supplies,
and their conference; of their farewell and sacrifices, according to Danaeus,
Psellas, etc.

HItherto for the most part, are the very words contained in M. Mal. or Bodin,
or rather in both; or else in the new M. Mal. or at the leastwise of some
writer or other, that maintains the almighty power of Witches. Danaeus in
Dialog. cap. 4.
But Danaeus says, the Devil oftentimes in the likeness of a summoner, meets
them at Markets and Fairs, and warns them to appear in their assemblies, at a
certain hour in the night, that he may understand whom they have slain, and how
they have profited. If they be lame, he says the Devil delivers them a
staff, to convey them thither invisibly through the air; and that then they
fall a dancing and singing of bawdy-songs, wherein he leads the dance
himself: Which dance, and other conferences being ended, he supplieth their
wants of powders and roots to intoxicate withal; and gives to every novice a
mark, either with his teeth, or with his claws, and so they kiss the Devils
bare buttocks, and depart: not forgetting every day afterward to offer to him,
Dogs, Cats, Hens, or blood of their own. And all this does Danaeus report as a
truth, Idem Ibidem. Idem in Dialog. cap. 3.
and as it were upon his own knowledge. And yet elsewhere he says, In these
matters they do but dream, and do not those things indeed, which they confess
through their distemperature, growing of their melancholic humor: and
therefore (says he) these things, which they report of themselves, are but
mere illusions.

Psellus adds hereunto, that certain magical heretics, to wit; the
Eutychyans, assemble themselves every Good Friday at night; and putting out the
candles, do commit incestuous adultery, the father with the daughter, the
sister with the brother, and the son with the mother; and the ninth month they
return and are delivered; and cutting their children in pieces, fill their pots
with their blood; then burn they the carcasses, and mingle the ashes therewith,
and so preserve the same for Magical purposes. Cardanus writes (though in mine
opinion not very probably) that these excourses, Card. lib. de var. rerum 15.
cap. 80.
dancings, etc. had their beginning from certain Heretics called Dulcini, who
devised those feasts of Bacchus which are named Orgia, whereunto these kind of
people openly assembled; and beginning with riot, ended with this folly: Which
feasts being prohibited, they nevertheless haunted them secretly; and when they
could not do so, then did they it in cogitation only; and even to this day
(says he) there remains a certain image or resemblance thereof among our
melancholic women.

CHAP. IV.
That there can no real league be made with the devil the first author of the
league, and the weak proofs of the adversaries for the same.

IF the league be untrue, as are the residue of their confessions, the
Witchmongers arguments fall to the ground: for all the writers herein hold this
bargain for certain, good, and granted, and as their only maxim. But surely the
indentures, containing those covenants, are sealed with butter; and the labels
are but bables. What firm bargain can be made betwixt a carnal body and a
spiritual? Let any wise or honest man tell me, that either has been a party,
or a witness; and I will believe him. But by what authority, proof, or
testimony; and upon what ground all this geer stands, if you read M. Mal. you
shall find to the shame of the reporters (who do so vary in their tales, and
are at such contrariety: Mal. Malef. part. 2. quae. 7. cap. 2.
) and to the reproach of the believers of such absurd lies.

For the beginning of the credit hereof, rests upon the confession of a
baggage young fellow, condemned to be burnt for Witchcraft; Upon what ground
this real league began to grow in credit.
who said to the Inquisitors (of likelihood to prolong his life, if at
leastwise the story be true, which is taken out of Nider;) If I wist (quoth he)
that I might obtain pardon: I would discover all that I know of Witchcraft: The
which condition being accepted, and pardon promised (partly in hope thereof,
and partly to be rid of his wife) he said as follows.

The novice or young disciple goes to some Church, together with the mistress
of that profession; upon a Sunday morning, before the conjuration of holy
water, and there the said novice renounceth the faith, promises obedience in
observing, or rather omitting of ceremonies in meetings, and such other
follies; and finally, that they do homage to their young master the Devil, as
they covenanted.

But this is notable in that story; that this young Witch, doubting that his
wives examination would bewray his knavery, told the Inquisitor: that in truth
his wife was guilty as well as he, but she will never, I am sure (quoth he)
though she should be burned a thousand times, confess any of these
circumstances.

And this is in no wise to be forgotten, that notwithstanding his contrition,
his confession, and his accusation of his own wife (contrary to the inquisitors
promise and oath) he and his wife were both burned at a stake, being the first
discoverers of this notable league, whereupon the fable of Witchcraft is
maintained; and whereby such other confessions have been from the like persons,
since that time, extorted and augmented.

CHAP. V.
Of the private league, a notable tale of Bodins concerning a French Lady, with
a confutation.

THe manner of their private league is said to be, The manner of Witches
private league with the Devil.
when the Devil invisible, and sometimes visile, in the midst of the people
talks with them privately; promising, that if they will follow his counsel,
he will supply all their necessities, and make all their endeavors prosperous;
and so begins with small matters: whereunto they consent privily, and come
not into the fayries assembly.

And in this case (me thinks) the Devil sometimes, in such external or corporal
shape, should meet with some that would not consent to his motions, (except you
will say he knows their cogitations) and so should be bewrayed. They also
(except they were idiots) would spy him; and forsake him for breach of
covenants. But these bargains, and these assemblies do all the writers hereupon
maintain; and Bodin confirms them with a hundred and odd lies; among the
number whereof I will (for diverse causes) recite one.

There was (says he) a noble Gentlewoman at Lions, J. Bodin lib. 2. de
daemonomania. cap. 4.
that being in bed with a lover of hers, suddenly in the night arose up, and
lighted a candle; and when she had done, she took a box of ointment, wherewith
she anointed her body; and after a few words spoken, she was carried away.
This agrees not with their interpretation, that say, this is only done by
virtue of the league; nor yet to them that refer it unto words; quoth not^.
Her bedfellow seeing the order hereof, leapt out of his bed, took the candle
in his hand, and sought for the Lady round about the chamber, and in every
corner thereof; But though he could not find her, yet did he find her box of
ointment; and being desirous to know the virtue thereof, besmeered himself
therewith, even as he perceived her to have done before: And although he was
not so superstitious, as to use any words to help him forward in his business,
yet by the virtue of that ointment (says Bodin) he was immediately conveyed to
Lorrein, into the assembly of Witches. Which when he saw, he was abashed, and
said; In the name of God, what make I here? And upon those words the whole
assembly vanished away, and left him there alone stark naked; and so was he
fain to return to Lions: But he had so good a conscience, for you may perceive
by the first part of the history, he was a very honest man, that he accused his
true lover for a Witch, and caused her to be burned: And as for his adultery,
neither, M. Mal. nor Bodin do once so much as speak in the dispraise thereof.

It appears throughout all Bodins book, that he is sore offended with
Cornelius Agrippa, and the rather, as I suppose, because the said C. Agrippa
recanted that which Bodin maintains, who thinks he could work wonders by
Magic, and specially by his black Dog. It should seem he had pretty skill in
the Art of Divination: For though he wrote before Bodin many a year, yet
utters he these words in his book De vanitate scientiarum: C. Agrippa. cap.
51.
A certain French protonotary (says he) a lewd fellow and a cosener, has
written a certain fable of miracle done at Lions, etc. What Bodin is, I know
not, otherwise than by report; but I am certain this his tale is a fond fable:
and Bodin says it was performed at Lions; and this man (as I understand) by
profession, is a civil Lawyer.

CHAP. VI.
A disproof of their Assemblies, and of their Bargain.

THat the joining of hands, with the Devil, the kissing of his bare buttocks,
and his scratching and biting of them, are absurd lies; every one having the
gift of reason may plainly perceive; insomuch as it is manifest unto us by the
word of God, that a spirit has no flesh, bones, nor sinews, Tatianus contra
Gracos.
whereof hands, buttocks, claws, teeth, and lips do consist. For admit that the
constitution of a Devils body (as Tatian and other affirm) consists in
spiritual congelations, as of fire and air; yet it cannot be perceived of
mortal creatures. What credible witness is there brought at any time, of this
their corporal, visible, and incredible bargain; saving the confession of some
person diseased both in body and mind, wilfully made, or injuriously
constrained? It is marvel that no penitent Witch that forsakes her trade,
confesses not these things without compulsion. Me thinks their covenant made
at Baptism with God before good witnesses, sanctified with the Word, confirmed
with his Promises, and established with his Sacraments, should be of more force
then that which they make with the Devil, which no body sees or knows: For
God deceives none, with whom he bargaineth: neither does he mock or disappoint
them, although he dance not among them.

The oath, to procure into their league and fellowship as many as they can
(whereby every one Witch, as Bodin affirms, augmenteth the number of fifty)
bewrays greatly their indirect dealing. The author speaks upon due proof
and trial.
Hereof I have made trial; as also of the residue of their cousening devises,
and have been with the best, or rather the worst of them, to see what might be
gathered out of their counsels; and have cunningly treated with them
thereabouts: and further, have sent certain old persons to indent with them, to
be admited into their society: But as well by their excuses and delays, as by
other circumstances, I have tried and found all their trade to be mere cosening.

I pray you what bargain have they made with the Devil, that with their angry
looks bewitch lambs, children, etc. Is it not confessed, that it is natural,
though it be a lie? What bargain makes the Sooth-sayer, which has his several
kinds of Witchcraft and Divination expressed in the Scripture? Or is it not
granted that they make none? How chances it that we hear not of this bargain
in the Scriptures?

CHAP. VII.
A Confutation of the Objection concerning Witches Confessions.

IT is confessed (say some by the way of objection) even of these women
themselves, that they do these and such other horrible things, as deserves
death, with all extremity, etc. Whereunto I answer, that whosoever
considerately beholds their confessions, shall perceive all to be vain, idle,
false, inconstant, and of no weight: except their contempt and ignorance in
religion; which is rather the fault of the negligent Pastor, than of the simple
woman.

First, if their confession be made by compulsion, of force or authority,
Confession compulsory; as by Hispanical inquisition: Look Mal. Malef. and J.
Bodin Confession perswasory; as by flattery: Look Bry. Darcy against Usu.
Kempe. John Bod. Mal. Malef. L. absent. de panis.

L. 2. cum glos. de iu; qui ante senient. mortui sunt, sibi necem consciente.


or by peswasion, and under color of friendship, it is not to be regarded;
because the extremity of threats and tortures provokes it; or the quality of
fair words, and allurements constrains it: If it be voluntary, many
circumstances must be considered, to wit, whether she appeach not her self to
overthrow her neighbor, which many times happens through their cankered and
malicious melancholic humor: then, whether in that same melancholic mood and
frantic humor, she desire not the abridgement of her own days: Which thing
Aristotle says, does oftentimes happen unto persons subject to melancholic
passions: and (as Bodin and Sprenger say) to these old women called Witches,
which many times (as they affirm) refuse to live; threatening the Judges, that
if they may not be burned, they will lay hands upon themselves, and so make
them guilty of their damnation.

I my self have known, that where such a one could not prevail, to be accepted
as a sufficient witness against himself, he presently went and threw himself
into a pond of water, where he was drowned. But the law says; Volenti mori non
est habenda fides, that is, His word is not to be credited that is desirous to
dye. Also sometimes (as elsewhere I have proved) they confess that, whereof they
were never guilty; supposing that they did that which they did nor, by means of
certain circumstances. And as they sometimes confess impossibilities, as that
they fly in the air, transubstantiate themselves, raise tempests, transferr or
remove corn, etc. so do they also (I say) confess voluntarily, that which no
man could prove, and that which no man would guess, nor yet believe, except he
were as mad as they; so as they bring death wilfully upon themselves: which
argues an unsound mind.

If they confess that, which has been indeed committed by them, as poisoning,
or any other kind of murder, which falls into the power of such persons to
accomplish; I stand not to defend their cause. Howbeit, Absurdities in Witches
Confessions.
I would wish that even in that case there be not too rash credit given, nor
too hasty proceedings used against them: but that the causes, properties and
circumstances of every thing be duly considered, and diligently examined: For
you shall understand, that as sometimes they confess they have murdered their
neighbors with a wish, sometimes with a word, sometimes with a look, etc. so
they confess, that with the delivering of an apple, or some such thing, to a
woman with child, they have killed the child in the mothers womb, when nothing
was added thereunto, which naturally could be noisome or hurtful.

In like manner they confess, that with a touch of their bare hand, they
sometimes kill a man being in perfect health and strength of body; when all his
garments are betwixt their hand and his flesh.

But if this their confession be examined by Divinity, Philosophy, Physic,
Law, or Conscience, it will be found false and insufficient. First, for that
the working of miracles is ceased: Secondly, no reason can be yielded for a
thing so far beyond all reason: Thirdly, no receipt can be of such efficacy, as
when the same is touched with a bare hand, from whence the veins have passage
through the body unto the heart, it should not annoy the person; and yet retain
virtue and force enough, to pierce through so many garments and the very flesh
incurable, I. Bod. de demon. lib. 2. cap. 8.
to the place of death in another person. Cui argumento (says Bodin) nescio
quid responderi possit. Fourthly, no law will admit such a confession; as
yields unto impossibities, against the which there is never any law provided;
otherwise it would not serve a man's turn, to plead and prove that he was at
Berwick that day, that he is accused to have done a murder in Canterbury: for
it might be said he was conveyed to Berwick, and back again by enchantment.
Fifthly, he is not by conscience to be executed, which has no sound mind nor
perfect judgment. In a little pamphlet of the acts and hanging of four
Witches, in anno 1579.
And yet forsooth we read, that one mother Style did kill one Saddocke with a
touch on the shoulder, for not keeping promise witn her for an old cloak, to
make her a safeguard; and that she was hanged for her labor.

CHAP. VIII.
What folly it were for Witches to enter into such deseprate peril, and to
endure such intolerable tortures for no gain or commodity, and how it comes to
pass that Witches are overthrown by their confessions.

A Las! if they were so subtle, as Witchmongers make them to be, they would
epsy that it were mere folly for them, not only to make a bargain with the
Devil to throw their souls into hell fire, but their bodies to the tortures of
temporal fire and death, for the accomplishment of nothing that might benefit
themselves at all: but they would at the leastwise indent with the Devil, both
to enrich them, and also to enable them; and finally to endue them with all
worldly felicity and pleasure; which is furthest from them of all other. Yea,
if they were sensible, they would say to the Devil, Why should I hearken to
you, when you will deceive me? Did you not promise my neighbor mother Dutton
to save and rescue her; and yet lo she is hanged? surely this would oppose the
Devil very sore. And it is a wonder, that none, from the beginning of the
world, till this day, has made this and such like objections, whereto the
Devil could never make answer. But were it not more madness for them, to serve
the Devil, under these conditions; and yet to endure whippings with iron rods
at the Devils hands: which (as the Witch-mongers write) are so set on, that the
print of the lashes remain on the Witches body ever after, even so long as she
has a day to live?

But these old women being daunted with authority, circumvented with guile,
constrained by force, compelled by fear, induced by error, and deceived by
ignorance, do fall into such rash credulity, and so are brought unto these
absurd confessions. Whose error of mind, and blindness of will depends upon
the disease and infirmity of nature: and therefore their actions in that case
are the more to be born withal: because they being destitute of reason, can
have no consent. John Bod. L. si per errorem jurisd. omni cum inde. C. sed hoc
de publ. etc. Bal. in leg. etc.
For, Delictum sine consensu non potest committi, neque injuria sine animo
injuriandi; that is, There can be no sin without consent, nor injury committed
without a mind to do wrong. Yet the law says further, that a purpose retained
in mind, does nothing to the private or public hurt of any man; and much more
that an impossible purpose is unpunishable. Sanae mentis voluntas, voluntas rei
possibilis est; A sound mind wills nothing, but that which is possible.

CHAP. IX.
How melancholy abuses old women, and of the effects thereof by sundry
examples.

IF any man advisedly mark their words, actions, cogitations, and gestures, he
shall perceive that melancholy abounding in their head, and occupying their
brain, has deprived, or rather depraved their judgments and all their senses:
I mean not of cousening Witches, but of poor melancholic women; which are
themselves deceived. For you shall understand, that the force which melancholy
has; and the effects that it works in the body of a man, or rather of a
woman, are almost incredible. For as some of these melancholic persons
imagine, they are Witches, and by Witchcraft can work wonders, and do what they
list: so do others troubled with this disease, imagine many strange,
incredible, and impossible things: Some, that they are Monarchs and Princes,
and that all other men are their subject: some, that they are brute beasts:
some, that they be urinals or earthen pots, greatly fearing to be broken: some,
that very one that meets them, will convey them to the gallows; and yet in
the end hang themselves. One thought that Atlas whom the Poets feign to hold up
heaven with his shoulders, would be weary, and let the sky fall upon him:
another would spend a whole day upon a stage, imagining that he both heard and
saw interludes, and therewith made himself great sport. One Theophilus a
Physician, otherwise sound enough of mind (as it is said) imagined that he
heard and saw musicians continually playing on instruments, in a certain place
of his house. One Bessus, that had killed his father, was notably detected, by
imagining that a Swallow upbraided him therewith: so as he himself thereby
revealed the murder.

But the notablest example hereof is, of one that was in great perplexity; Of
one that through melancholy was induced to think that he had a nose as big as a
house, etc.
imagining that his nose was as big as a house; insomuch as no friend nor
Physician could deliver him from this conceit, nor yet either ease his grief,
or satisfy his fancy in that behalf: till at the last, a Physician more expert
in this humor than the rest, used this devise following. First, when he was to
come in at the chamber door being wide open, he suddenly stayed and withdrew
himself; so as he would not in any wise approach nearer then the door. The
melancholic person musing her eat, asked him the cause why he so demeaned
himself? Who answered him in this manner: Sir, your nose is so great, that I
can hardly enter into your chamber but I shall touch it, and consequently hurt
it. Lo (quoth he) this is the man that must do me good; the residue of my
friends flatter me, and would hide my infirmity from me. Well (said the
Physician) I will cure you, but you must be content to endure a little pain in
the dressing: which he promised patiently to sustain, and conceived certain
hope of recovery. Then entered the Physician into the chamber, creeping close by
the walls, seeming to fear the touching and hurting of his nose. Then did he
blindfold him, which being done, he caught him by the nose with a pair of
pincers, and threw down into a tub, which he had placed before his patient, a
great quantity of blood, with many pieces of bullocks livers, which he had
conveyed into the chamber, whilst the others eyes were bound up, and then gave
him liberty to see and behold the same. He having done thus again two or three
times, the melancholic humor was so qualified, that the man's mind being
satisfied, his grief was eased, and his disease cured.

Thrasibulus, otherwise called Thrasillus, being sore oppressed with this
melancholic humor, imagined, that all the ships which arrived at port
Pyraeus, were his: insomuch as he would number them, and command the mariners
to lanch, etc. triumphing at their safe returns, and mourning for their
misfortunes. The Italian whom we called here in England, the Monarch, Danaeus
in Dialog. cap. 3.
was possessed with the like spirit or conceit. Danaeus himself reports, that
he saw one that affirms constantly that he was a cock; and says that through
melancholy, such were alienated from themselves.

I. Baptist. P. N. cap. 2. Card. de var. rerum. I. Wie. de prestigiis daemonum,
etc. Aristotle. John Bod.
Now, if the fancy of a melancholic person may be occupied in causes which are
both false and impossible; why should an old Witch be thought free from such
fantasies, who (as the learned Philosophers and Physicians say) upon the
stopping of their monthly melancholic flux or issue of blood, in their age
must needs increase therein, as (through their weakness both of body and brain)
the aptest persons do meet with such melancholic imaginations: with whom their
imaginations remain, even when their senses are gone. Which Bodin labors to
disprove, therein showing himself as good a Physician, as elsewhere a Divine.

But if they may imagine, that they can transform their own bodies, which
nevertheless remain in the former shape: how much more credible is it, that
they may falsely suppose they can hurt and infeeble other men's bodies; or which
is less, hinder the coming of butter? etc. But what is it that they will not
imagine, and consequently confess that they can do? especially being so
earnestly persuaded thereunto, so sorely tormented, so craftily examined, with
such promises of favor, as whereby they imagine, that they shall ever after
live in great credit and wealth, etc.

If you read the executions done upon Witches, either in times past in other
countries, or lately in this land; you shall see such impossibilities
confessed, as none, having his right wits, will believe. Among other like false
confessions, we read that there was a Witch confessed at the time of her death
or execution, that she had raised all the tempests, and procured all the frosts
and hard weather that happened in the Winter 1565. and that many grave and wise
men believed her.

CHAP. X.
That voluntary confessions may be untruly made, to the undoing of the
confessors, and of the strange operation of melancholy, proved by a familiar
and late example.

BUt that it may appear, that even voluntary confession (in this case may be
untruly made, though it tend to the destruction of the confessor; and that
melancholy may move imaginations to that effect: I will cite a notable instance
concerning this matter, the parties themselves being yet alive, and dwelling in
the parish or Sellenge in Kent, and the matter not long sithence in this sort
performed.

A Kentish story of a late Accident.
One Ade Davie, the wife of Simon Davie husbandman; being reputed a right
honest body, and being of good parentage, grew suddenly (as her husband
informed me, and as it is well known in these parts) to be somewhat pensive and
more sad than in times past. Which thing though it grieved him; yet he was loath
to make it so appear, as either his wife might be troubled or discontented
therewith, or his neighbors informed thereof; lest ill husbandry should be
laid to his charge (which in these quarters is much abhorred. But when she grew
from pensiveness, to some perturbation of mind; so as her accustomed rest began
in the night season to be withdrawn from her, through sighing and secret
lamentation; and that, not without tears, he could not but demand the cause of
her conceit and extraordinary mourning; But although at that time she covered
the same, acknowledging nothing to be amiss with her: soon after
notwithstanding she fell down before him on her knees, desiring him to forgive
her, for she had grievously offended (as she said) both God and him. Her poor
husband being abashed at this her behavior, comforted her, as he could; asking
her the cause of her trouble and grief: who told him, that she had, contrary to
Gods Law, and to the offense of all good Christians, to the injury of him, and
specially to the loss of her own soul, bargained and given her soul to the
Devil, to be delivered unto him within short space. Whereunto her husband
answered, Note the Christian comfort of the husband to his wife.
saying Wife, be of good cheer, this thy bargain is void and of none effect:
for thou have sold that which is none of thine to sell; since it belongs to
Christ, who has bought it, and deerly paid for it, even with his blood which
he shed upon the Cross; so as the Devil has no interest in thee. After this,
with like submission, tears, and penitence, she said unto him; Oh husband, I
have yet committed another fault, and done you more injury: for I have
bewitched you and your children. Be content (quoth he) by the grace of God,
Jesus Christ shall unwitch us: for none evil can happen to them that fear God.

And (as truly as the Lord lives) this was the tenor of his words unto me,
which I know is true, as proceeding from unfeigned lips, and from one that
fears God. Now when the time approached that the Devil should come, and take
possession of the woman, according to his bargain, he watched and prayed
earnestly, and caused his wife to read Psalms and Prayers for mercy at Gods
hands: and suddenly about midnight, there was a great rumbling below under his
chamber-window, which amazed them exceedingly: For they conceived, that the
Devil was below, though he had no power to come up, because of their fervent
Prayer.

He that notes this woman's first and second confession, Confutation.
freely and voluntarily made, how every thing concurred that might serve to add
credit thereunto, and yield matter for her condemnation, would not think, but
that if Bodin were foreman of her Inquest, he would cry; Guilty: and would
hasten execution upon her, who would have said as much before any Judge in the
World, if she had been examined: and have confessed no less, if she had been
arraigned thereupon. But God knows, she was innocent of any of these crimes:
howbeit she was brought low and pressed down with the weight of this humor, so
as both her rest and sleep were taken away from her; and her fancies troubled
and disquieted with despair, and such other cogitations as grew by occasion
thereof. And yet I believe, if any mishap had insued to her husband, or his
children, few Witchmongers would have judged otherwise, but that she had
bewitched them. And she (for her part) so constantly persuaded her self to be a
Witch, that she judged her self worthy of death, insomuch as being retained in
her chamber, she saw not any one carrying a faggot to the fire, but she would
say it was to make a fire to burn her for Witchery. But God knows she had
bewitched none, neither insued there any hurt unto any by her imagination, but
unto her self.

And as for the rumbling, it was by occasion of a sheep, which was flayed, A
comical catastrophe.
and hung by the walls, so as a Dog came and devoured it; whereby grew the noise
which I before mentioned: and she being now recovered, remains a right honest
woman, far from such impiety, and ashamed of her imaginations, which she
perceives to have grown through melancholy.

CHAP. XI.
The strange and diverse effects of Melancholy, and how the same humor abounding
in Witches, or rather old women; fills them full of mavelous imaginatians,
and that their confessions are not to be credited.

BUt in truth, this Melancholic humor (as the best Physicians affirm) is the
cause of all their strange, impossible and incredible confessions: H. Card. de
var. rerum. c. ^. Jo. Wierus de deprast. l. 6.
which are so fond, that I wonder how any men can be abused thereby. Howbeit
these affections, though they appear in the mind of man, yet are they bred in
the body, and proceed from this humor, which is the very dregs of blood,
nourishing and feeding those places, from whence proceed fears, cogitations,
superons, fastings, labors, and such like:

Aristotle de sownio.

H. Card. lib. 8. de var. rer.


This makes sufferance of torments, and (as some say) fore sight of things to
come, and preserves health, as being cold and dry; it makes men subject to
leanneses, and to the Quartane Ague. They that are vexed therewith are
destroyers of themselves, stout to suffer injuries, fearful to offer violence;
except the humor be hot. They learn strange tongues with small industry (as
Aristotle, and others affirm.)

If our Witches fantasies were not corrupted, nor their wills confounded with
this humor, they would not so voluntarily and readily confess that which
calls their life in question; whereof they could never otherwise be
convicted. Jo. Bod. contra. Jo. Wierum.
J. Bodin with his Lawyers Physic reasons contrarily; as though melancholy
were furthest of all from those old women, whom we call Witches; deriding the
most famous and noble Physician John Wier for his opinion in that behalf. But
because I am no Physician, I will set a Physician to him; namely, Erastus, who
has these words, that these Witches, through their corrupt fantasy abounding
with melancholic humors, by reason of their old age, do dream and imagine they
hurt those things which they neither could nor do hurt; and so think they know
an Art, which they neither have learned nor yet understand.

But why should there be more credit given to Witches, when they say they have
made a real bargain with the Devil, killed a Cow, bewitched Butter, infeebled a
Child, fore-spoken her neighbor, etc. than when she confesses that she
transubstantiateth her self, makes it rain or hail, flies in the air, goes
invisible, transferreth Corn in the Grass from one field to another? etc. If
you think that in the one their confessions be sound, why should you say that
they are corrupt in the other; the confession of all these things being made at
one instant, and affirmed with like constancy, or rather audacity? But you see
the one to be impossible, and therefore you think thereby, that their
confessions are vain and false: The other you think may be done, and see them
confess it, August. lib. de. Trinit. 3. Idem. de civit. Dei.
and therefore you conclude, Aposse ad esse; as being persuaded it is so,
because you think it may be so. But I say, both with the Divines, and
Philosophers, that that which is imagined of Witchcraft, has no truth of
action, or being, besides their imagination; the Witch (for the most part) is
occupied in false causes: Clem. recog. 3. Jamblichus. Jo. Wierus. Cardanus.
Pampia, etc.
For whosoever desires to bring to pass an impossible thing, has a vain, and
idle, and childish persuasion, bred by an unsound mind; for Sanae mentis
voluntas, voluntas rei possibilis est; The will of a sound mind, is the desire
of a possible thing.

CHAP. XII.
A Confutation of Witches Confessions, especially concerning their League.

An objection.
BUt it is objected, that Witches confess they renounce the faith, and as their
confession must be true, or else they would not make it, so must their fault be
worthy of death, or else they should not be executed. Whereunto I answer as
before; that their confessions are extorted, or else proceed from an unsound
mind. The resolution.
Yea, I say further, that we our selves, which are sound of mind, and yet seek
any other way of salvation than Christ Jesus, or break his Commandments, or
walk not in his steps with a lively faith, etc. do not only renounce the faith,
but God himself: and therefore they, in confessing that they forsake God, and
embrace Satan, do that which we all should do. As touching that horrible part
of their confession, in the league which tends to the killing of their own
and others children, the seething of them, and the making of their potion or
pottage, and the effects thereof; their good fridayes meeting, being the day of
their deliverance, their incests, their return at the end of nine months, when
commonly women be neither able to go that journey, nor to return, etc. it is so
horrible, unnatural, unlikely, and unpossible; that if I should behold such
things with mine eyes, I should rather think my self dreaming, drunken, or some
way deprived of my senses; than give credit to so horrible and filthy matters.

How has the Oil or Pottage of a sodden child such virtue, A forged miracle.
as that a staff anointed therewith, can carry folk in the air? Their potable
liquor, which, they say, makes Masters of that faculty, Is it not ridiculous?
And is it not, by the opinion of all Philosophers, Physicians, and Divines,
void of such virtue, as is imputed thereunto?

Their not fasting on fridayes, and their fasting on sundays, their spitting at
the time of elevation, their refusal of Holy Water, their despising of
superstitious Crosses, etc. which are all good steps to true Christianity, help
me to confute the residue of their confessions.

CHAP. XIII.
A Confutation of Witches Confessions, concerning making of Tempests and Rain:
of the natural cause of Rain, and that Witches or Devils have no power to do
such things.

ANd to speak more generally of all the impossible actions referred unto them,
as also of their false Confessions; I say, that there is none which
acknowledges God to be only Omnipotent, and the only worker of all Miracles,
nor any other endued with mean sense, but will deny that the Elements are
obedient to Witches, and at their Commandment; or that they may at their
pleasure send Rain, Hail, Tempests, Thunder, Lightning; when she being but an
old doting woman, casts a flint-stone over her left shoulder, toward the
West, or hurleth a little Sea-sand up into the Element, The ways that Witches
use to make rain, etc.

Nider. Mal. Malef. J. Bod. Friar Barth. Heming, Danaeus, etc.

Mal. Males. par. 2. quaest. 1. c. 12.


or wetteth a Broom-sprig in water, and sprinkleth the same in the air; or
diggeth a pit in the earth, and putting water therein, stirs it about with
her finger; or boileth Hogs bristles, or lays sticks across upon a bank,
where never a drop of water is; or buryeth Sage till it be rotten; all which
things are confessed by Witches, and affirmed by writers to be the means that
Witches use to move extraordinary Tempests and Rain, etc.

We read in M. Maleficarum, that a little Girl walking abroad with her Father
in his land, heard him complain of drought, wishing for rain, etc. Why Father,
quoth the child, I can make it rain or hail, when and where I list? He asked
where she learned it: She said, of her Mother, who forbad her to tell any body
thereof: He asked her how her Mother taught her? She answered, that her Mother
committed her to a Master, who would at any time do any thing for her: Why
then, said he, make it rain but only in my field: And so she went to the
stream, and threw up water in her Masters name, and made it rain presently: And
proceeding further with her father, she made it hail in another field, at her
fathers request: Hereupon he accused his wife, and caused her to be burned; and
then he new christened his child again: which circumstance is common among
Papists, and Witch-mongers: And howsoever the first part hereof was proved,
there is no doubt, but the latter part was thoroughly executed. If they could
indeed bring these things to pass at their pleasure, then might they also be
impediments unto the course of all other natural things, and Ordinances
appointed by God: as, to cause it to hold up, when it should rain; He that can
ly, can steal, as he that can work can play.
and to make midnight, of high noon; and by those means, I say, the Divine
power should become servile to the will of a Witch, so as we could neither eat
nor drink, but by their permission.

Me thinks Seneca might satisfy these credulous or rather idolatrous people,
that run a whore-hunting, either in body or fancy, after these Witches;
believing all that is attributed unto them, to the derogation of Gods glory. He
says, that the rude people, and our ignorant predecessors did believe, that
rain and showers might be procured and stayed by Witches charms and
enchantments: of which kind of things, that there can nothing be wrought, it is
so manifest, that we need not go to any Philosophers School, to learn the
confutation thereof.

Jer. 16.22. Dii gentium daemonia.
But Jeremy. by the Word of God, does utterly confound all that which may be
devised for the maintenance of that foolish opinion, saying: Are there any
among the gods of the Gentiles, that send rain, or give showers from Heaven?
Art not thou the self same our Lord God? The gods of the Gentiles are Devils.
The natural generation of hail and rain.
We will trust in thee, for thou do and makes all these things. I my
therefore with Brentius boldly say, that it is neither in the power of Witches
nor Devils, to accomplish that matter; but in God only: For when exhalations
are drawn and lifted up from out of the earth, by the power of the Sun, into
the middle region of the air, the coldness thereof constrains and thickeneth
those vapors: which being become clouds, are dissolved again by the heat of
the Sun; whereby Rain or Hail is engendered; Rain, if by the way, the drops be
not frozen and made hail. These circumstances being considered with the course
of the whole Scripture, it can neither be in the power of Witch or Devil to
procure rain or fair weather.

And whereas the story of Job in this case is alleged against me (wherein a
Witch is not once named) I have particularly answered it elsewhere: And
therefore thus much only I say here; that even there, where it pleased God (as
Calvin says) to set down circumstances for the instruction of our gross
capacities, which are not able to conceive of spiritual communication, or
heavenly affairs, the Devil desires God to stretch out his hand, and touch all
that Job has: Job 11. 1b. verse. 16.
And though he seems to grant Satan's desire, yet God himself sent fire from
heaven, etc. Whereby it is to be gathered, that although God said, He is in
thine hand: it was the Lords hand that punished Job, and not the hand of the
Devil, who said not, Give me leave to plague him; but, Lay thine hand upon him.
And when Job continued faithful, notwithstanding all his afflictions, in his
children, body and goods; the Devil is said to come again to God, Job 2.5.
and to say, as before, to wit; Now stretch out thine hand and touch his bones
and his flesh. Which argues as well that he could not do it, as that he
himself did it not before. Mal. Males. par. 1. quaest. 2.
And be it here remembered, that M. Mal. and the residue of the Witchmongers
deny, that there were any Witches in Jobs time. But see more hereof elsewhere.

CHAP. XIV.
What would ensue, if Witches confessions or Witchmongers opinions were true,
concerning the effects of Witchcraft, Enchantments, etc.

But these suppositions are false, Ergo the consequence are not true.
IF it were true that Witches confess, or that all Writers write, or that
Witchmongers report, or that fools believe, we should never have Butter in the
chearn, nor Cow in the close, nor Corn in the field, nor fair weather abroad,
nor health within doors: Or if that which is contained in M. Mal. Bodin, etc.
or in the Pamphlets late set forth in English, of Witches executions, should be
true in those things that Witches are said to confess, what creature could live
in security? Or what needed such preparation of wars, or such trouble, or
charge in that behalf? No Prince should be able to reign or live in the Land.
For (as Danaeus says) that one Martin a Witch killed the Emperor of Germany
with witchcraft: so would our Witches (if they could) destroy all our
Magistrates. One old Witch might overthrow an Army Royal: and then what needed
we any Guns, or wildfire, or any other Instruments of war? A Witch might
supply all wants, and accomplish a Princes will in this behalf, even with out
charge or bloodshed of his people.

If it be objected, that Witches work by the Devil, and Christian Princes are
not to deal that way: I answer, that Princes disposed to Battle would not make
Conscience therein, specially such as take unjust wars in hand, using other
helps, devises, and engines as lawful and devilish as that; in whose Camp
there is neither the rule of Religion, or Christian order observed; insomuch as
ravishments, murders, Mal. Malef. J. Bodin. Bar. Spinaeus.
blasphemies and thefts are there most commonly and freely committed: So that
the Devil is more feared, and better served in their Camps, than God Almighty.

But admit that soldiers would be scrupulous herein, the Pope has authority
to dispense therewith; as in like case he has done, by the testimony of his
own authors and friends. Admit also, that throughout all Christendom, was were
justly maintained, and Religion duly observe in their Camps; yet would the Turk
and other Infidels cut our throat, or at least one another throats, with the
help of their Witches; for they would make no conscience thereof.

CHAP. XV.
Examples of foreign Nations, who in their wars used the assistance of Witches
of eye-biting Witches in Ireland, of two Archers that shot with familiars.

IN the wars between the Kings of Denmark and Sueveland, Witches in wars.
1563. the Danes do write, that the King of Sueveland carried about with him in
Camp, four old Witches, who with their charms so qualified the Danes, as they
were thereby disabled to annoy their Enemies: insomuch as, if they had taken in
hand any enterprise, they were so infeebled by those Witches, as they could
perform nothing. And although this could have no credit at the first, yet in
the end, one of these Witches was taken Prisoner, and confessed the whole
matter; so as (says he) the threads, and the line, and the characters were
found in the highway and water-plashes.

The Irishmen addict themselves wonderfully to the credit and practice hereof;
insomuch as they affirm, that not only their children, but their cattle,
Eye-biting Witches.
are (as they call it) eye-bitten, when they fall suddenly sick, and term one
sort of their Witches eye-biters; only in that respect: yea and they will not
stick to affirm, that they can rhyme either man or beast to death. Also the
West-Indians and Muscovites do the like, and the Huns (as Gregory Turonensis
writes) used the help of Witches in time of war.

I find another story written in M. Mal. repeated by Bodin; that one soldier
called Pumher, daily through witchcrraft killed with his Bow and Arrows, Pumher
an Archer.
three of the Enemies, as they stood peeping over the walls of a Castle
besieged: so as in the end he killed them all quite, saving one. The trial of
the Archers sinister dealing, and a proof thereof expressed, is; for that he
never lightly failed when he shot, and for that he killed them; by three a day;
and had shot three arrows into a rod. This was he that shot at a penny on his
sons head, and made ready another Arrow, to have slain the Duke of Remgrave
that commanded it. And doubtless, because of his singular dexterity in
shooting, he was reputed a Witch, as doing that which others could not do, nor
think to be in the power of man to do: though indeed no miracle, no witchcraft,
no impossibility nor difficulty consisted therein.

But this later story I can requite with a familiar example: A skilful Archer
punished by an unskilful Justice.
For at Town Malling in Kent, one of Queen Mary's Justices, upon the complaint
of many wise men, and a few foolish boys, laid an Archer by the heels; because
he shot so near the white at Buts: For he was informed and persuaded, that the
poor man played with a Fly, otherwise called a Devil or familiar: And because
he was certified that the Archer aforesaid shot better than the common
shooting, which he before had heard of, or seen, he conceived it could not be
in Gods Name, but by Enchantment; whereby this Archer (as he supposed by
abusing the Queens liege people) gained some one day two or three shillings, to
the detriment of the Commonwealth, and to his own enriching: And therefore the
Archer was severely punished, to the great encouragement of Archers, and to the
wise example of Justices; but specially to the overthrow of witchcraft. And now
again to our matter.

CHAP. XVI.
Authorities condemning the fantastical confessions of Witches, and how a
Popish Doctor takes upon him to disprove the same.

CErtain general Councils, by their Decrees, have condemned the Confessions and
erroneous credulity of Witches, to be vain, fantastical and fabulous. And even
those, which are parcel of their league, whereupon our Witchmongers do so
build, to wit; their night-walkings and meetings with Herodias, and the Pagan
gods: at which time they should pass so far in so little aspace on cock-horse;
their transubstantiation, their eating of children, and their pulling of them
from their mothers sides; their entering into men's houses, through chinks and
little holes where a fly can scarcely wring out, and the disquieting of the
Inhabitants, Council. Acquirens. in deoret. 26. quaest. 5. Can. Episcopi.
August. de spiritu and anima cap. 8. Fran. Ponzivib. tract. de lam. numero 49.
Grillandus de ac sort. numero. 6.

In histor. vel vita. sancti. Germani.


etc. all which are not only said by a General Council, to be mere
fantastical, and imaginations in dreams; but so affirmed by the ancient
writers. The words of the Council are these; It may not be omitted, that
certain wicked women following Satan's provocations, being seduced by the
illusion of Devils, believe and profess, that in the night times they ride
abroad with Diana, the goddess of the Pagans, or else with Herodiac, with an
innumerable multitude, upon certain Beasts, and pass over many Countries, and
Nations, in the silence of the night, and do whatsoever those fairies or Ladies
command, etc. And it follows even there; Let all Ministers therefore in their
several Cures, preach to Gods people, so as they may know all these things to
be false, etc. It follows in the same Council; Therefore, whosoever believes
that any creature may be either created by them, or else changed into better or
worse, or be any way transformed into any other kind or likeness of any, but of
the Creator himself, is assuredly an Infidel, and worse than a Pagan.

And if this be credible; then all these their bargains and assemblies, etc.
are incredible, which are only ratified by the certain foolish and extorted
confessions; and by a fable of S. Germane, who watched the Faries or Witches,
being at a rear banquet, and through his holiness stayed them, till he sent to
the houses of those neighbors, which seemed to be there, and found them all in
bed; and so cried, that these were Devils in the likeness of those women: Which
if it were as true, as it is false, it might serve well to confute this their
meeting and night-walkings: For if the Devils be only present in the likeness
of Witches, then is that false, which is attributed to Witches in this behalf.

Nonus Mal. in quast. de strigib. cap. 21, 22, 23, etc.
But because the old hammer of Sprenger and Institor, in their old Malleo
maleficarum, was insufficient to knock down this Council; a young Beetle-head
called Friar Bartholomaeus Spinaeus has made a new leaden beetle, to beat down
the counsel, and kill these old women: Wherein he counterfeiting Aesops Ass,
claweth the Pope with his heels, affirming upon his credit, that the Council is
false and erroneus; because the doctrine swerveth from the Popish Church, and is
not Authentical but Apocryphal: saying (though untruly) that that Council was
not called by the commandment and pleasure of the Pope, nor ratified by his
authority, which (says he) is sufficient to disanul all Councils: For surely
(says this Friar which at this instant is a chief Inquisitor) if the words of
this Council were to be admitted, both I, and all my predecessors have
published notorious lies, and committed many injurious executions: whereby the
Popes themselves also might justly be detected of error, Bar. Spinaeus Mal.
Malef. cap. 23. in quae. destrigib.
contrary to the Catholic belief in that behalf. Marry, he says, that
although the words and direct sense of this counsel be quite contrary to truth
and his opinion; yet he will make an exposition thereof, that shall somewhat
mittigate the lewdness of the same; and this, he says, is not only allowable
to do, but also meritorious. Mark the man's words, and judge his meaning.

CHAP. XVII.
Witch-mongers Reasons, to prove that Witches can work wonders. Bodins tale of
a Friseland, Priest transported, that imaginations proceeding of Melancholy do
cause illusions.

OLd M. Malificarum also says, Mal. Malef. Pa. 1. cap. 3. Guli. Pharist.
that the Counsels and Doctors were all deceived herein, and alleging
authority therefore, confuteth that opinion by a notable reason, called Petitio
principii, or rather, Ignotum per ignotius, in this manner: They can put
changlings in the place of other children: Ergo, they can transfer and
transform themselves and others, etc. according to their confession in that
behalf. Item, he says, and Bodin justifies it, that a Priest in Frieseland,
was corporally transferred into a far Country, as witnessed another Priest of
Oberdorf his companion, who saw him aloft in the air: Ergo, says, M. Mal. they
have all been deceived hitherto, to the great impunity of horrible Witches.
Wherein he opposes his folly against God and his Church, against the truth,
and against all possibility. But surely it is almost incredible, how
imagination shall abuse such as are subject unto Melancholy; so as they shall
believe they see, hear, and do that, which never was nor shall be; as is partly
declared, if you read Galen de locis affectis, and may more plainly appear also
if you read Aristotle de Somnio.

And thereof S. Augustine says well, August. de spiritu and anima. Lib. 1.
cap. 7. de Eucharist.
that he is too much a fool and a blockhead, that supposes those things to be
done indeed, and corporally, which are by such persons phantastically imagined:
which fantastical illusions, do as well agree and accord (as Algerus says)
with Magical deceipts, as the verity accompanies divine holiness.

CHAP. XVIII.
That the confession of Witches is sufficient in civil and common law to take
away life. What the sounder divines, and decrees of council determine in this
case.

ALas! what creature being found in state of mind, It is not likely they would
so do; ergo, a lie.
would (without compulsion, make such manner of confessions as they do, or
would for a trifle, or nothing, make a perfect bargain with the Devil, for her
soul to be yielded up unto his tortures and everlasting flames, and that within
a very short time; specially being through age most commonly unlike to live one
whole year? The terror of hellfire must needs be to them diversely manifested,
and much more terrible, because of their weakness, nature, and kind, than to
any other: as it would appear, if a Witch were but asked, Whether she would be
contented to be hanged one year hence, upon condition her displeasure might be
wreaked upon her enemy presently? As for thieves, and such other, they think
not to go to hellfire; but are either persuaded there is no hell, or that
their crime deserves it not, or else that they have time enough to repent: so
as, no doubt, if they were perfectly resolved hereof, they would never make
such adventures. Neither do I think, that for any sum of money, they would make
so direct a bargain to go to hellfire. Now then I conclude, That confession in
this behalf is insufficient to take away the life of any body; or to attain
such credit, as to be believed without further proof: Aug. de. Civit. Dei.

Isidor. lib. 8. c. 9. Etymol. 26. qua. 5. ca. non mirum. Ponzivibus de lamiis,
vol. 10. L. error and L. cum post c. de juris and facti ignor. ac in L. de
etat. S. item de interrog. action. Per. glos. Bal. and alios in L. 1. c. de
confess. glos. nec si de confess. in. 6. S. ad leg. Aquil. L Neracius. S. fin. Ut
per Bald. and Aug. in L. 1. c. de con. etc.

Extra. de praesum. literas. Per Bald. in deleg. etc. Extra detest. cum
literis. Mal. Malef. pa. 3. qu. 5. c. 11.


For, as Augustine and Isidore, with the rest of the sounder divines, say, that
these perstigious things, which are wrought by Witches, are fantastical: so do
the sounder decrees of Councels and Canons agree, that in that case, there is
no place for criminal action. And the law says, That the confession of such
persons as are illuded, must needs be erroneous, and therefore is not to be
admitted; for, Confessio debet tenere verum and possibile. But these things are
opposite both to law and nature, and therefore it follows not, Because these
Witches confess so, Ergo, it is so: for the confession differs from the act,
or from the possibility of the act. And whatsoever is contrary to nature
fails in his principles, and therefore is naturally impossible.

The Law also says, In criminalibus regulariter non statur soli confessioni
rei: In criminal cases, or touching life, we must not absolutely stand to the
confession of the accused party: but in these matters proofs must be brought
more clear than the light it self: And in this crime no body must be condemned
upon presumptions. And where it is objected and urged, that since God only
knows the thoughts, there is none other way of proof but by confession: It is
answered thus in the law, to wit: Their confession in this case contains an
outward act, and the same impossible both in the law and nature, and also
unlikely to be true; and therefore Quod verisimile non est, attendi non debet.
So as, though their confessions may be worthy of punishment, as whereby they
show a will to commit such mischief, yet not worthy of credit, as that they
have such power. For, Si factum absit, solaque opinione laborent, e stultorum
genere sunt; If they confess a fact performed but in opinion, they are to be
reputed among the number of fools. Neither may any man by law be condemned for
criminal causes, upon presumptions, nor yet by single witnesses: neither at the
accusation of a capital enemy; who indeed is not to be admitted to give
evidence in this case; though it please M. Mal. and Bodin to affirm the
contrary. But beyond all equity, these Inquisitors have shifts and devises
enough, to plague and kill these poor souls; for (they say) their fault is
greatest of all others, because of their carnal copulation with the Devil, and
therefore they are to be punished as Heretics, four manner of ways; to wit,
with Excommunication, deprivation, loss of goods, and also with death.

And indeed they find law, and provide means thereby to maintain this their
bloody humor. For it is written in their Popish Canons, That as for these kind
of Heretics, how much soever they repent and return to the faith, they may not
be retained alive, or kept in perpetual prison, but be put to extreme death.
Yea, Mal Malef. qu. 14. pa. 1. C. de Malef. L. nullus L. nemo. and L. culpa.
and affirmed by Mal. Malef. quaest 17.
M. Mal. writes, that a Witches sin, is the sin against the holy Ghost; to
wit, irremissible; yea further, that it is greater than the sin of the Angels
that fell. In which respect I wonder, that Moses delivered not three tables to
the children of Israel; or, at the leastwise, that he exhibited not
commandments for it. It is not credible, that the greatest should be included
in the less, etc.

But when these Witchmongers are convinced in the objection concerning their
confessions; so as thereby their tyrannical arguments cannot prevail, to imbrue
the Magistrates hands in so much blood as their appetite requires; they fall
to accusing them of other crimes, that the world might think they had some
color to maintain their malicious fury against them.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Four capital Crimes objected against Witches, all fully answered and
confuted us frivolous.

FIrst therefore, they lay to their charge Idolatry; but alas, without all
reason; for, such are properly known to us to be Idolaters, as do external
worship to Idols or strange gods: The furthest point that Idolatry can be
stretched unto, is, that they which are culpable therein, are such as hope for,
and seek salvation at the hands of Idols, or of any other than God: or fix
their whole mind and love upon any creature, so as the power of God is
neglected and contemned thereby. But Witches neither seek nor believe to have
salvation at the hands of Devils, but by them they are only deceived, the
instruments of their fantasy being corrupted, and so infatuated, that they
suppose, confess, and say, they can do that, which is as far beyond their power
and nature to do, as to kill a man at York before noon, when they have been
seen at London in that morning, etc. But if these latter Idolaters, whose
Idolatry is spiritual and committed only in mind, should be punished by death;
then should every covetous man or other, that sets his affection any way too
much upon an earthly creature be executed, and yet perchance the Witch might
escape scot-free.

Secondly, Apostasy is laid to their charge, whereby it is inferred, 2.
Apostasy confuted.
that they are worthy to die. But Apostasy is, where any of sound judgment
forsake the Gospel, learned and well known unto them, and do not only embrace
impiety and infidelity, but oppugn and resist the truth erst-while by them
professed. But alas, these poor women go not about to defend any impiety, but
after good admonition repent.

Thirdly, They would have them executed for seducing the people. 3. Seducing of
the people, confuted.
But God knows, they have small store of Rhetoric or art to seduce; except,
to tell a tale of Robin Good Fellow, to be deceived and seduced: Neither may
their age or sex admit that oppinion or accusation to be just; for they
themselves are poor seduced souls. I for my part (as elsewhere I have said)
have proved this point to be false in most apparent sort.

Fourthly, as touching the accusation, 4. Carnal copulation with Incubus,
confuted.
which all the Writers use herein against them for their carnal copulation with
Incubus: the folly of men's credulity is as much to be wondered at and derided,
as the others vain and impossible confessions. For the Devil is a Spirit, and
has neither flesh nor bones, which are to be used in the performance of this
action. And since he also lacks all instruments, substance and seed engendered
of blood, it were folly to stay overlong in the confutation of that, which is
not in the nature of things: And yet must I say somewhat herein, because the
opinion hereof is so strongly and universally received, and the fables hereof
so innumerable, whereby M. Mal. Bodin, Hemingius, Hyperius, Danaeus, Erastus,
and others that take upon them to write herein, are so abused, or rather seek
to abuse others, as I wonder at their fond credulity in this behalf: For, they
affirm undoubtedly, How the Devil plays Succubus and Incubus.
that the Devil plays Succubus to the man, and carries from him the seed of
Generation, which he delivers as Incubus to the Woman, who many times that
way is gotten with child; which child will very naturally (they say) become a
Witch, and such a one, they affirm, Merlin was.

CHAP. XX.
A request to such readers as are loath to hear or read fithy and bawdy
matters, which of necessity are here to be inserted, to pass over eight
Chapters.

A preoration to that readers.
BUt insomuch as I am driven (for the more manifest bewraying and displaying of
this most filthy and horrible error) to stain my paper with writing thereon
certain of their beastly and baudy assertions and examples, whereby they
confirm this their doctrine (being my self both ashamed, and loath once to
think upon such filthiness, although it be to the condemnation thereof) I must
entreat, you that are the readers hereof, whose chaste ears cannot well endure
to hear of such abominable Lecheries, as are gathered out of the books of those
Witch-mongers, (although Doctors of Divinity, and otherwise of great authority
and estimation) to turn over a few leaves, wherein (I say) I have, like a
Groom, thrust their bawdy stuff (even that which I my self loath) as into a
stinking corner: howbeit, none otherwise, I hope, but that the other parts of
my writing shall remain sweet, and this also covered as close as may be.

BOOK IV.
CHAP. I.
Of Witchmongers opinions concerning evil Spirits, how they framethemselves in
more excellent sort than God made us.

JAmes Sprenger and Henry Institor, Mal. Malef. part. 2. cap. 4. quest. 1.
in M. Mal. agreeing with Bodin, Barth, Spineus, Danaeus, Erastus, Hemingius,
and the rest, do make a bawdy Discourse; laboring to prove by a foolish kind
of Philosophy; that evil Spirits cannot only take earthly forms and shapes of
men; but also counterfeit hearing, seeing, etc. and likewise, that they can eat
and devour meats, and also retain, digest, and avoid the same; and finally, use
diverse kinds of activities, but specially excel in the use and art of Venery:
For M. Mal. says, If his bodily eyes were out he would see but ilfavoredly.
that the eyes and ears of the mind are far more subtle then bodily eyes or
carnal ears. Yea, it is there affirmed, that as they take bodies, and the
likeness of members; so they take minds and similitudes of their operations.
But, by the way, I would have them answer this question. Our minds and souls
are spiritual things. If our corporal ears be stopped, what can they hear or
conceive of any external wisdom? And truly, a man of such a constitution of
body, as they imagine of these Spirits, which make themselves, etc. were of far
more excellent substance, etc. than the bodies of them that God made in
paradise; and so the devils workman-ship should exceed the handiwork of God
the Father and Creator of all things.

CHAP. II.
Of bawdy Incubus and Succubus, and whether the action of Venery may be
performed between Witches and Devils, and when Witches first yielded to Incubus.

HEretofore (they say) Incubus was fain to ravish Women against their wills,
Nider in for^icaro. T. Brabant. in lib. de apib. in sen did. 4. art. 4. Genesis
6.4.
until Anno 1400. but now since that time, Witches consent willingly to their
desires: insomuch as some one Witch exercised that trade of Lechery with
Incubus twenty or thirty days together, as was confessed by forty and eight
Witches burned at Ravenspurge. But what goodly fellows Incubus begeteth upon
these Witches, is proved by Thomas of Aquine, Bodin, M. Mal. Hyperuis, etc.

This is proved, first, by the Devils cunning, in discerning the difference of
the seed which falls from men. Secondly, by his understanding of the aptness
of the women for the receipt of such seed. Thirdly, by his knowledge of the
constellations, which are friendly to such corporal effects. And lastly, by the
excellent complexion of such as the Devil makes choice of, to beget such
notable personages upon, as are the causes of the greatness and excellency of
the child thus begotten.

And to prove that such bawdy doings, betwixt the Devil and Witches, Mal.
malef. par. 7. quae. 1. A^g^de doctrina, Christ.
is not fained, S. Augustine is alleged, who says, That all superstitious
arts had their beginning of the pestiferous society betwixt the Devil and Man.
Wherein he says truly; for that in paradise, betwixt the Devil and Man, all
wickedness was so contrived, that man ever since has studied wicked arts; yea,
and the Devil will be sure to be at the middle, and at both ends of every
mischief. But that the Devil ingendreth with a Woman, in manner and form as is
supposed, and naturally begets the wicked, neither is it true, nor
Augustines meaning in this place.

Howbeit M. Mal. proceeds, affirming, That all Witches take their beginning
from such filthy actions, wherein the Devil, in likeness of a pretty Wench,
lies prostitute as Succubus to the man, and retaining his nature and seed,
conveyeth it unto the Witch, to whom he delivers it as Incubus. Wherein also
is refuted the opinion of them that hold a Spirit to be unpalpable, Mal. malef.
quae. 1. part. 1.
M. Mal. says, There can be rendered no infallible rule, though a probable
distinction may be set down, whether Incubus, in the act of Venery, do always
power seed out of his assumed body: And this is the distinction, Either she is
old and barren, or young and pregnant. If she be barren, then does Incubus use
her without decision of seed; because such seed should serve for no purpose.
And the Devil avoideth superfluity as much as he may; and yet for her pleasure
and condemnation together, he goes to work with her. But by the way, if the
Devil were so compendious, what should he need to use such circumstances, even
in these very actions, as to make these assemblies, conventicles, ceremonies,
etc. when he has already bought their bodies, and bargained for their souls?
Or what reason had he, to make them kill so many Infants, by whom he rather
loses than gains any thing; because they are, so far as either he or we
know, in better case than we of riper years, by reason of their innocence?
Well, if she be not past children, then steals he seed away (as has been
said) from some wicked man being about that lecherous business, and therewith
gets young Witches upon the old.

And note, that they affirm, That this business is better accomplished with
seed thus gathered, than that which is shed in Dreams, through superfluity of
humors: because that is gathered from the virtue of the seed generative. And if
it be said, That the seed will wax cold by the way, and so lose his natural
heat, and consequently the virtue: M. Mal. Danaeus, and the rest do answer,
That the Devil can so carry it, as no heat shall go from it, etc.

Danaens in dialog. de sortiariis. Ja. Sprenger in Mal. malef.
Furthermore, old Witches are sworn to procure as many young Virgins for Incubus
as they can, whereby in time they grow to be excellent bawds: but in this case
the Priest plays Incubus. For you should find, that confession to a Priest,
and namely this word Benedicit, drives Incubus away, when Ave Mary's, crosses,
and all other Charms fail.

CHAP. III.
Of the Devils visible and invisible dealing with Witches in the way of Lechery.

BUt as touching the Devils visible or invisible execution of Lechery, it is
written, that to such Witches, as before have made a visible league with the
Priest, (the Devil I should say) there is no necessity that Incubus should
appear invisible: This was done at Ravenspurge.
marry to the standers-by he is for the most part invisible. For proof hereof,
James Sprenger and Institor affirm, That many times Witches are seen in the
fields and woods prostituting themselves uncovered and naked up to the navil,
wagging and moving their members in every part, according to the disposition of
one being about that act of concupiscence, and yet nothing seen of the
beholders upon her; saving, that after such a convenient time as is required
about such a piece of work, a black vapor, of the length and bigness of a man,
has been seen, as it were, to depart from her, and to ascend from that place.
Nevertheless, Mal. malef.
many times the husband sees Incubus making him cuckhold, in the likeness of a
man, and sometimes strikes off his head with his sword: but because the body
is nothing but air: it closes together again: so as, although the good-wife be
sometimes hurt thereby; yet she makes him believe he is mad or possessed, and
that he does he knows not what. For she has more pleasure and delight (they
say) with Incubus that way, than with any mortal man; whereby you may perceive
that Spirits are palpable.

CHAP. IV.
That the power of Generation is both outwardly and inwardly impeached by
Witches, and of diverse that had their genitals taken from them by Witches, and
by the same means again restored.

THey also affirm, That the virtue of Generation is impeached by Witches, both
inwardly, and outwardly: for, intrinsecally they repress the courage, and they
stop the passage of the man's seed, so as it may not descend to the vessels of
generation: also they hurt extrinsecally, with images, herbs, etc. And to
prove this true, you shall hear certain stories out of M. Mal. worthy to be
noted.

A young Priest at Mespurge, in the Diocese of Constance, was Bewitched, Mal.
malef. cap. 6. quae. par. 2.
so as he had no power to occupy any other or mo women than one: and to be
delivered out or that thraldom, sought to fly into another Country, where he
might use that Priestly occupation more freely; but all in vain; for evermore
he was brought as far backward by night, as he went forward in the day before;
sometimes by land, sometimes in the air, as though he flew. And if this be not
true, I am sure that James Sprenger does lie.

For the further confirmation of our belief in Incubus, M. Mal. cites a story
of a notable matter executed at Ravenspurge, as true and as cleanly as the
rest. A young man lying with a wench in that Town (says he) was fain to leave
his instruments of Venery behind him, by means of that prestigious art of
Witchcraft, so as in that place nothing could be seen or felt but his plain
body. This young man was willed by another Witch, to go to her whom he
suspected, and by fair or foul means to require her help: who soon after
meeting with her, entreated her fair, but that was in vain; and therefore he
caught her by the throat, and with a towel strangled her, saying, Restore me my
tool, or thou shall die for it: so as she being swollen and black in the face,
and through his boisterous handling ready to die, said, Let me go, and I will
help thee: and whilst he was losing the towel, she put her hand into his
Cod-piece, and touched the place, saying, Now have thou they desire: and even
at that instant he felt himself restored.

Item, A reverend Father, for his life, holiness, and knowledge notorious, Ja.
Sprenger in Mal. malef. par. 2. quae. 1.
being a friar of the order and company of Spire, reported, that a young man at
strift made lamentable moan unto him for the like loss; but his gravity
suffered him not to believe lightly any such reports, and therefore made the
young man untruss his cod-piece-point, and saw the complaint to be true and
just. Whereupon he advised, or rather enjoined the youth to go to the Witch
whom he suspected, and with flattering words to entreat her, to be so good unto
him, as to restore him his instrument: which by that means he obtained, and
soon after returned to show himself thankful, and told the holy father of his
good success in that behalf: but he so believed him, as he would needs be
Oculatus testis, and made him pull down his Breeches, and so was satisfied of
the truth and certainty thereof.

Another young man being in that very taking, Mal. malef. cap. 7. par. 2. quae.
1.
went to a Witch for the restitution thereof, who brought him to a tree, where
she showed him a nest, and bad him climb up and take it. And being in the top
of the tree, he took out a mighty great one, and showed the same to her, asking
her if he might not have the same. Nay (quoth she) that is our Parish Priests
tool, but take any other which thou will. And it is there affirmed, That some
have found 20 and some 30 of them in one nest, being there preserved with
provender, as it were at the rack and manger, with this note, wherein there is
no contradiction (for all must be true that is written against Witches) that if
a Witch deprive one of his Privities, it is done only by prestigious means,
Note.
so as the senses are but illuded. Marry, by the Devil it is really taken away,
and in like sort restored. These are no jests, for they be written by them that
were and are judges upon the lives and deaths of those persons.

CHAP. V.
Of Bishop Sylvanus his Lechery opened and covered again. How Maids having
yellow hair are most combered with Incubus. How married men are bewitched to
use other men's wives, and to refuse their own.

In vita Hieronym.
YOu shall read in the Legend, how in the nightime Incubus came to a Ladies
bedside, and made hot love unto her: whereat she being offended, cried out so
loud, that company came and found him under her bed in the likeness of the holy
Bishop Sylvanus, which holy man was much defamed thereby, until at the length
this infamy was purged by the confession of a Devil made at S. Jeroms tomb.
Saints as holy and chaste as horses and mares.
O excellent piece of Witchcraft wrought by Sylvanus! Item, S. Christine would
needs take unto her another maids Incubus, and lie in her room: and the story
says, that she was shrewdly accloyed. But she was a shrew indeed, that would
needs change beds with her fellow, that was troubled every night with Incubus,
Maids having yellow hair. Mal. malef. par. 2. qu. 2. cap. 2.
and deal with him her self. But here the Inquisitors note may not be
forgotten, to wit, that Maids having yellow hair, are most molested with this
Spirit. Also, it is written in the Legend, of S. Bernard, that a pretty Wench
that had had the use of Incubus his body by the space of six or seven years in
Aquitania (being belike weary of him, for that he waxed old) would needs go to
S. Bernard another while: But Incubus told her, that if she would so forsake
him, being so long her true lover, he would be revenged upon her, etc. But,
befall what would, she went to S. Bernard, who took her his staff, and bad her
lay it in the bed beside her. And indeed the Devil fearing the bed-staffe, or
that S. Bernard lay there himself, durst not approach into her chamber that
night: what he did afterward, I am uncertain. Marry you may find other
circumstances hereof, and many other like bawdy lies in the golden Legend. But
here again, we may not forget the Inquisitors note, to wit; that many are so
Bewitched, that they cannot use their own wives, but any other bodies they may
well enough away withal. Which Witchcraft is practiced among many bad husbands,
for whom it were a good excuse to say they were Bewitched.

CHAP. VI.
How to procure the dissolving of Bewitched love, also to enforce a man (how
proper soever he be) to love an old hag: and of a bawdy trick of a Priest in
Gelderland.

THe Priests say, That the best cure for a woman thus molested, next to
confession, is excommunication. But to procure the dissolving of Bewitched and
Constrained love, the party bewitched must make a jakes of the lovers shoe. And
to enforce a man, how proper soever he be, to love an old hag, she gives unto
him to eat (among other meats) her own dung: and this way an old Witch made
three Abbats of one house successively to die for her love, as she her self
confessed, Of a bawdy Priest in Gelderland.
by the report of M. Mal. In Gelderland a Priest persuaded a sick Woman that
she was Bewitched, and except he might sing a mass upon her belly, she could
not be helped: whereupon she consented, and lay naked on the Alter whilst he
sung Mass, to the satisfying of his lust; but not to the release of her grief.
Other cures I will speak of in other places more civil: Howbeit, certain
miraculous cures, both full of bawdery and lies, must either have place here,
or none at all.

CHAP. VII.
Of diverse Saints and holy persons, which were exceeding Bawdy, and Lecherous,
and by certain miraculous means became chaste.

CAssianus writes, That S. Siren being of body very Lecherous, In col. patrum.
and of mind wonderful religious, fasted and prayed, to the end in holy might
be reduced miraculously to chastity. Gregor. lib. 1. dial. 2.
At length came an Angel unto him by night, and cut out of his flesh certain
kernels, which were the sparks of concupiscence; so as afterward he never had
any more motions of the flesh. It is also reported, that the Abbot Equiciu,
being naturally as unchaste as the other, fell to his beads so devoutly, for
recovery of honesty, that there came an Angel unto him in an Apparation that
seemed to geld him; and after that (forsooth) he was as chaste as though he had
never a stone in his breech; and before that time being a Ruler over Monks, he
became afterward a Governor over Nuns. In vitis patrum. Heraclides in
paradise.
Even as it is said Helias the holy Monk gathered thirty Virgins into a
Monastery, over whom he ruled and reigned by the space of two years, and grew
so proud and hot in the cod-piece, that he was fain to forsake his holy house,
and fly to a desert, where he fasted and prayed two days, saying, Lord quench
my hot Lecherous humors, or kill me: Whereupon in the night following, there
came unto him three Angels, and demanded of him why he forsook his charge: but
the holy man was ashamed to tell them. Howbeit, they asked him further, saying,
Will thou return to these damsels, if we free thee from all concupiscence? Yea
(quoth he) with all my heart. And when they had sworn him solemnly so to do,
they took him up, and gelded him; and one of them holding his hands, and
another his feet, the third cut out his stones: But the story says, it was not
so ended, but in a Vision; Which I believe, because within five days he
returned to his Minions, who pitteously mourned for him all this while, and
joyfully embraced his sweet company at his return. The like story does Nider
write of Thomas, Nider in fornicarii.
whom two angels cured of that lecherous disease; by putting about him a
girdle, which they brought down with them from heaven.

CHAP. VIII.
Certain Popish and Magical cures, for them that are bewitched in their
Privities.

FOr direct cure to such as are Bewitched in the Privy members, the first and
special, is Confession; then follow in a row, holy water, and those ceremonial
trumperies, Ave Mary's, and all manner of crossings; which are all said to be
wholesome, except the Witchcraft be perpetual, and in that case the wife may
have a divorse of course.

Item, Aliter.
The eating of a Haggister or pie helps one Bewitched in that member.

Item, The smoke of a tooth of a dead man. Aliter.


Item, To anoint a man's body over with the gall of a Crow. Aliter.


Item, To fill a quill with Quicksilver, and lay the same under the cushion,
Aliter.
where such a one sits, or else to put it under the threshold of the door of
the house or chamber where he dwells.

Aliter.
Item, To spit into your own bosom, if you be so Bewitched, is very good.

Aliter.
Item, To piss through a Wedding-ring. If you would, know who is hurt in his
privities by Witchraft, and who otherwise is therein diseased: Hostiensis
answers, but so as I am ashamed to English it, and therefore have here set
down his experiment in Latin, Quando virgo nullatenus movetur, and nunquam
potuit cognoscere; hoc est signum frigiditatis: sed quando movetur and
erigitur, perficere autem non potest, est signum maleficii.

Sir Thomas Moor'e medicinable receipt, etc.
But Sir Tho. Moore has such a cure in this matter, as I am ashamed to write,
either in Latin or English; for, in filthy Bawdery, it passes all the tales
that ever I heard: But that is rather a medicine to procure Generation, then
the cure of Witchcraft, though it serve both turns.

Aliter.
Item, When ones instrument of Venery is Bewitched, certain characters must be
written in Virgin-parchment, celebrated and holyed by a Popish Priest; and
thereon also must the 141 Psalm be written, and bound Ad viri fascinati coxam.

Aliter.
Item, One Katharine Lo (having a husband not so readily disposed that way as
she wished him to be) made a waxen image of the likeness of her husbands
Bewitched member, and offered it up at St. Anthonies altar; so as, through the
holiness of the Mass, it might be sanctified, to be more courageous; and of
better disposition and ability, etc.

CHAP. IX.
A strange cure done to one that was molested with Incubus.

NOw being wearied with the rehearsal of so many Lecheries, most horrible, and
very filthy and fabulous actions and passions of Witches, together with the
spirit Incubus: I will end with a true story taken out of Jason Pratensis,
Jason Pratensis de cerebri morbo, cap. 16.
which, though it be rude, yet it is not altogether so unclean as the rest.

There came (says he) of late a Mass-Priest unto me, making pitteous moan, and
saying, that if I help him not, he should be undone, and utterly overthrown;
so great was his infirmity; for (says he) I was wont to be fair and fat, and
of an excellent complexion; and lo how I look, being now a very ghost
consisting of skin and bone, etc. What is the matter (quoth Jason?) I will show
you Sir, said the Priest: There comes unto me, almost every night, a certain
woman, unknown unto me, and lies so heavy upon my breast, that I cannot fetch
my breath, neither have any power to cry, neither do my hands serve me to shove
her away, nor my feet to go from her. I smild (quoth Jason) and told him that
he was vexed with a disease called Incubus, or the mare, and the residue was
fantasy and vain imagination. The Priest is opinionative in the error of his
fantasy.
Nay (said the Priest) it cannot be so; for by our blessed Lady, I tell you
nothing but that which waking I saw with mine eyes, and felt with mine hands; I
see her when she comes upon me, and strive to repel her; but I am so infeebled
that I cannot; and for remedy I have run about from place to place, but no help
I could get: At length I went to an old Friar that was counted an odd fellow,
and thought to have had help at his hands; but the Devil a whit had I of him,
saving, that for remedy, he willed me to pray to God; whom, I am sure, I
wearied with my tedious prayers long before. Then went I unto an old woman,
quoth the Priest, who was said to be a cunning Witch; and she willed me, that
the next morning, about the dawning of the day, I should piss, and immediately
should cover the piss-pot, or stop it with my right nether-stock, and before
night the Witch should come to visit me. And although, quoth he, the respect of
mine orders somewhat terrified me from the execution of her advise; yet my
necessities diverse ways, and specially my pains, moved me to make trial of her
words: and, by the mass, quoth the Priest, her words fell out as sure as a
club; For a Witch came to my house, and complained of a grief in her bladder,
and that she could not piss. The Priest recovered.
But I could neither by fair nor foul means obtain at her hands, that she would
leave molesting me by night; but she keeps her old custom, determining by
these filthy means to dispatch me. I could hardly, said Jason, reclaim him from
this mad humor; but by that time he had been with me three or four times, he
began to comfort himself, and at last perceiving it, he acknowledged his
disease, and recovered the same.

CHAP. X.
A confutation of all the former follies touching Incubus, which by examples
and proofs of like stuff is showed to be flat knavery, wherein the carnal
copulation with Spirits is overthrown.

THus are Lecheries covered with the cloak of Incubus and Witchcraft, contrary
to nature and verity: and with these fables is maintained an opinion, that men
have been begotten without carnal copulation, as Hyperius, and others write
that Merlin was, An. 440. specially to excuse and maintain the knaveries and
lecheries of idle Priests, and bawdy Monks, Merlin begotten of Incubus.
and to cover the shame of their lovers and concubines.

And alas! when great learned men have been so abused, with the imagination of
Incubus his carnal society with Women, misconstruing the Scriptures, to wit,
the place in Genesis 6. to the seducing of many others; it is the less wonder,
that this error has passed so generally among the common people.

But to use few words herein, I hope you understand that they affirm and say,
that Incubus is a Spirit, and I trust you know that a Spirit has no flesh nor
bones, etc. and that he neither does eat nor drink. Indeed your gran-dames
maids were wont to set a bowl of milk before him and his cousin Robin
Goodfellow, for grinding of Malt or Mustard, and sweeping the house at
midnight: and you have also heard, that he would chafe exceedingly, if the maid
or good-wife of the house, having compassion of his nakedness, laid any clothes
for him, besides his mess of white bread and milk, which was his standing fee.
For in that case he says, What have we here? Hemton hamten, here will I never
more tread nor stampen.

But to proceed in this confutation. Where there is no meat eaten, Quia humor
spermaticus ex succo alimentari provenit.
there can be no seed which thereof is gendred; although it be granted, that
Rohin could both eat aed drink, as being a cousening idle Friar, or some such
Rogue, that wanted nothing either belonging to Lechery or Knavery, etc. Item,
Where the Genital members want, there can be no lust of the flesh: neither does
nature give any desire of Generation, where there is no propagation or
succession required. And as Spirits cannot be grieved with hunger, so can they
not be inflamed with lusts. And if men should live ever, what needed succession
or heirs? For that is but an ordinance of God, to supply the place, the number,
the world, the time, and specially to accomplish his will. Ad facultatem
generandi tam internae quam externa organa requiruntur.
But the power of generation consists not only in members, but chiefly of
vital spirits, and of the heat; which spirits are never in such a body as
Incubus has, being but a body assumed, as they themselves say. And yet the
most part of writers herein affirm, That it is a palpable and visible body,
though all be phansies and fables that are written hereupon.

CHHP. XI.
That Incubus is a natural disease: with remedies for the same: besides Magical
cures herewithal expressed.

What Incubus is, and who be most troubled therewith.
BUt in truth, this Incubus is a bodily disease (as has been said) although it
extend unto the trouble of the mind, which of some is called the Mare,
oppressing many in their sleep so sore, as they are not able to call for help,
or stir themselves under the burden of that heavy humor; which is engendered of
a thick vapor proceeding from the crudity and rawness in the stomach: which
ascending up into the head, oppresses the brain, insomuch as many are
infeebled thereby, as being nightly haunted therewith. They are most troubled
with this disease, that being thereunto subject, lie right upward; so as, to
turn and lie on the one side, is present remedy. Likewise, if any hear the
groaning of the party, speak unto him, so as he wake him, he is presently
relieved. Howbeit, there are Magical cures for it; as for example: S. George,
S. George, our ladies knight,
He walked by day, so did he by night:
Until such time as he her found,
He her beat, and he her bound,
Until her troth she to him plight,
He would not come to her that night.


Whereas S. George our Ladies knight, was named three times S. George.

Item, Hang a stone over the afflicted persons bed, which stone has naturally
such a hole in it, as wherein a string may be put through it, and so be hanged
over the diseased or bewitched party; be it Man, Woman, or Horse.

M. Malefic. par. 2. q. 2. c. 1. col. 2. Leon. Fuchsius de curandi ratione.
Item, You shall read in M. Malefic. that Excommunication is very notable, and
better than any charm for this purpose. There are also other verses and charms
for this disease devised, which is the common cloak for the ignorance of bad
Physicians. But Leonard Fuchsius in his first book and 13 chapter, does not
only describe this disease, and the causes of it; but also sets down very
learnedly the cure thereof, to the utter confusion of the Witchmongers folly in
this behalf. Hyperius being much bewitched and blinded in this matter of
Witchcraft, hovering about the interpretation of Genesis 6. from whence the
opinion of Incubus and Succubus is extorted, Viderunt filii Dei filias hominum,
quod elegantes essent, acceperunt sibi in uxores ex omnibus, quas elegerant,
etc. seems to maintain upon hearsay, that absurd opinion; and yet in the end
is driven to conclude thus, to wit, Of the evil Spirits Incubus and Succubus
there can no firm reason or proof be brought out of Scripture, using these very
words, Hae ut probabilia dicta sunto, quandoquidem Scripturarum praesidio hac
in causa destituimur. As if he should say, Take this as spoken probably; to
wit, by humane reason, because we are destitute of Scriptures to maintain the
goodness of the cause.

Turtul. in libro de habitu muliebri.

Sulp. Sever. in epitome hist. sac.


Tertullian and Sulpitius Severus do interpret Filios Dei in that plate to be
Angels, or evil Spirits, and to have been enamored with the beauty of those
Wenches,; and finally, begat Giants by them. Which is thoroughly confuted by
Chrysostom, Hom. 22, in Genesis but specially by the circumstance of the text.

CHAP. XII.
The censure of G. Chaucer upon the knavery of Incubus.

NOw will I (after all this long discourse of abominable cloked knaveries) here
conclude with certain of G. Chaucers verses, who as he smelt out the
absurdities of Popery, so found he the Priests knavery in this matter of
Incubus, and (as the time would suffer him) he derided their folly and falsehood
in this wise: For now the great Charity and Prayers
Of Limitors and other holy Friars, Geoff. Chau. in the beginning of the wife of
Baths tale.

That searchen every land and every stream,
As thick as motes in the sunbeam,
Blissing halls, Kitchens, Chambers and Bowers,
Cities, Borroughs, Castles and High-towers,
Thropes, Barnes, Sheep-pens, and Daries,
This makes that there been now no Fairies;
For there as wont to walken was an elfe,
There walks now the Limitor himself,
In under meals, and in mornings,
And says his mattens and his holy things
As he goes in his limitation;
Women may go safely up and down,
In every bush, and under every tree,
There is none other Incubus but he, etc.


BOOK V.
CHAP. I.
Of Transformations, ridiculous examples brought by the adversaries for the
confirmation of their foolish doctrine.

NOw, that I may with the very absurdities, contained in their own Authors, and
even in their principal Doctors, and last writers, confound them that maintain
the Transubstantiations of Witches: I will show you certain proper stuff, J.
Bod. lib. 2. de damon. cap. 6.
which Bodin (their chief champion of this age) has gathered out of M. Mal.
and others, whereby he labors to establish this impossible, incredible, and
supernatural, or rather unnatural Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

J. Bod. abuses Scripture to prove a lie. Pudendis tunc primum erumpentibus.
First, As touching the Devil ( Bodin says) that he does most properly and
commonly transform himself into a Goat, confirming that opinion by the 33 and
34 of Esaias; where there is no one tittle sounding to any such purpose. Howbeit,
he sometimes allows the Devil the shape of a Blackmoor, and, as he says, he
used to appear to Mawd Cruse, Kate Darey, and Jone Harviller. But I marvel,
whether the Devil creates himself, when he appears in the likeness of a Man;
or whether God creates him, when the Devil wishes it. As for Witches, he
says, they specially Transsubstantiate themselves into Wolves, and them whom
they bewitch into Asses; though elsewhere he differ somewhat herein from
himself. But though he affirm, that it may be naturally brought to pass, that a
Girl shall become a Boy; and that any female may be turned into a male; yet, he
says, the same has no affinity with Lycanthropia; wherein, he says also,
that men are wholly transformed, and cites infinite examples hereof. First,
that one Garner, in the shape of a Wolf, killed a Girl of the age of twelve
years, and did eat up her arms and legs, and carried the rest home to his wife.
Item, that Peter Burget, and Michael Worden, having turned themselves with
ointment into Wolves, killed, and finally did eat up an infinite number of
people. Which lie Wievers does sufficiently confute. J. Wier. lib. 6. de mag.
cap. 12.
But until you see and read that, consider whether Peter could eat raw flesh
without surfeiting, specially flesh of his own kind. Item, that there was an
arrow shot into a Wolves thigh, who afterward being turned into his former
shape of a man, was found in his bed, with the arrow in his thigh, which the
Archer that shot it knew very well. Item, that another being Lycanthropus in
the form of a Wolf, had his Wolves feet cut off, and in a moment he became a
man without hands or feet.

J. Bod. mendaciorum belluo.
He accuses also one of the highest Princes in Christendom, even of late days,
to be one of those kind of Witches, so as he could, when he list, turn himself
to a Wolf, affirming, that he was espied, and oftentimes seen to perform that
villainy, because he would be counted the King of all Witches. He says, that
this transubstantiation is most common in Greece, and throughout all Asia, as
Merchant strangers have reported to him. For Anno Dom. 1542. when
Sultan-Solimon reigned, there was such force and multitude of these kind of
Wolves in Constantinople, that the Emperor drove together in one flock 150 of
them, which departed out of the City in the presence of all the people.

To persuade us the more thoroughly herein, he says, That in Livonia, A warm
season to swim in.
yearly (about the end of December) a certain Knave or Devil warns all the
Witches in the Country to come to a certain place; if they fail, the Devil
comes and whippeth them with an Iron rod, so as the print of the lashes
remains upon their bodies for ever. I marvel that they forsake not the Devil,
who punishes them so sore; I wis they get not so much at his hands.
The captain Witch leads the way through a great pool of water; many millions
of Witches swim after. They are no sooner passed through that water, but they
are all transformed into Wolves, and fly upon, and devour both Men, Women,
Cattle, etc. After twelve days they return through the same water, and so
receive humane shape again.

Item, that there was one Bajanus a Jew, being the Son of Simeon, which could,
when he list, turn himself into a Wolf; and by that means could escape the
force and danger of a whole Army of men. Which thing (says Bodin) is
wonderful: but yet (says he) it is much more mavelous, that men will not
believe it. For many Poets affirm it, yea, and if you look well into the matter
(says he) you shall find it easy to do. Item, he says, that as natural
Wolves persecute beasts; so do these Magical Wolves devour men, women and
children. Levit. 6.
And yet God says to the People, I trow, and not to the Cattle of Israel, If
you observe not my commandments, I will send among you the beasts of the
field, Deuteronomy. 32.
which shall devour both you and your cattle. Item, I will send the teeth of
beasts upon you. Where is Bodins distinction now become? He never says, I will
send Witches in the likeness of Wolves, etc. to devour you or your cattle.
Nevertheless, Bodin says, it is a clear case, for the matter was disputed upon
before Pope Leo the seventh, and by him all the matters were judged possible:
and at that time, says he, were the transformations of Lucian and Apuleius
made canonical.

Furthermore, he says, Stasus a Witch could not be apprehended, and why.
that through this art they are so cunning that no man can apprehend them, but
when they are asleep. Item, he names another Witch, that, as M. Mal. says,
could not be caught, because he would transform himself into a mouse, and run
into every little hole, till at length he was killed coming out of the hole of
a jam in a window, which indeed is as possible, Mal. Malef. John Bodin. Barth.
Spin. etc. Mal. Malef. part. 3.
as a Camel to go through a needles eye. Item, he says, that diverse Witches at
Vernon, turned themselves into Cats, and both committed and received much hurt.
But at Argentine there was a wonderful matter done, by three Witches of great
wealth, who transforming themselves into three Cats, assaulted a Faggot-maker;
who having hurt them all with a faggot-stick, was like to have been put to
death. But he was miraculously delivered, and they worthily punished; as the
story says from whence Bodin had it.

After a great many other such beastly fables, An error about Lycanthopia.
he inveyeth against such Physicians as say that Lycanthropia is a disease, and
a transformation. Item, he maintains, as sacred and true, all Homers fables
of Circe and Ulysses his companions: inveying against Chrysostom, who rightly
interprets Homers meaning to be, that Ulysses his people were by the harlot
Circe made in their brutish manners to resemble Swine.

But least some Poets fables might be thought lies (whereby the Witchmongers
arguments should quail) he maintains for true the most part of Ovids
Metamorphosis, and the greatest absurdities and impossibilities in all that
book; marry he thinks some one tale therein may be fained. Finally, he
confirms all these toys by the story of Nebuchadnezzar. And because (says
he) Nebuchadnezzar continued seven years in the shape of a beast; therefore may
Witches remain so long in the form of a beast; having in all the mean time, the
shape, hair, voice, strength, agility, swiftness, food and excrements of
beasts, and yet reserve the minds and souls of Women or Men. Howbeit, St.
Augustine (whether to confute or confirm that opinion judge you) says, Non est
credendum, August. lib. 8. de Civit. Dei. c. 18. Idem, lib. de spiritu and
anma, cap. 26.
humanum corpus daemonum art vel potestate in bestialia lineamenta converti
posse: We may not believe that a man's body may be altered into the lineaments
of a beast, by the Devils art or power. Item, Bodin says, that the reason why
Witches are most commonly turned into Wolves, is, because they usually eat
children, as Wolves eat cattle. Item, that the cause why other are truly turned
into Asses, is, for that such have been desirous to understand the secrets of
Witches. Why Witches are turned into Cats, he alleges no reason, and
therefore (to help him forth with that paraphrase) I say, Ironia.
that Witches are cursed queans, and many times scratch one another, or their
neighbors by the faces, and therefore perchance are turned into Cats. But I
have put twenty of these Witchmongers to silence with this one question; to
wit, Whether a Witch that can turn a Woman into a Cat, etc. can also turn a Cat
into a Woman?

CHAP. II.
Absurd reasons brought by Bodin, and such others, for confirmation of
Transformations.

THese examples and reasons might put us in doubt, that every Ass, Wolf, or
Cat that we see, were a Man, a Woman, or a Child. I marvel that no man uses
this distinction in the definition of a man. But to what end should one dispute
against these creations and recreations; when Bodin washes away all our
arguments with one word, confessing that none can create any thing but God;
acknowledging also the force of the Canons, and embracing the opinions of such
Divines as write against him in this behalf? Yea, he does now (contrary to
himself elsewhere) affirm, that the Devil cannot alter his form. J. Bod. lib.
2. de mag. demon. cap. 6.,
And lo, this is his distinction, Non essentialis forma (id est ratio) sed
figura solum permutatur: The essential form (to wit, reason) is not changed,
but the shape or figure, And thereby he proves it easy enough to create men
or beasts with life, so as they remain without reason. Howbeit, I think it is
an easier matter, to turn Bodines reason into the reason of an Ass, than his
body into the shape of a Sheep; which be says is an easy matter; because Lots
wife was turned into a stone by the Devil. Whereby he shows his gross
ignorance. Genesis 19.24, 26, 27.
As though God that commanded Lot upon pain of death not to look back, who also
destroyed the City of Sodom at that instant, had not also turned her into a
salt stone. And as though all this while God had been the Devils drudge, to go
about this business all the night before, and when a miracle should be wrought,
the Devil must be fain to do it himself.

J. Bod. lib. de Demon. 2. c. 20. M. Mal. par. 1. quae. 9.

J. Bod. lib. de Demon. 2. c. 1.


Item, he affirms, that these kind of Tranfigurations are more common with
them in the West parts of the World, then with us here in the East. Howbeit,
this note is given withal, that that is meant of the second persons, and not of
the first; to wit, of the bewitched, and not of the Witches. For they can
transform themselves in every part of the World, whether it be East, West,
North, or South. Marry, he says, that Spirits and Devils vex men most in the
North-countries, as Norway, Finland, etc. as in the Western Islands, as in the
West- India; but among the Heathen specially, and wheresoever Christ is not
preached. And that is true, though not in so foolish, gross, and corporal a
sense as Bodin takes it. One notable instance of a Witches cunning in this
behalf touched by Bodin in the Chapter aforesaid, I thought good in this place
to repeat: M. Mal. part. 2. quae. 2. cap. 4.
he takes it out of M. Mal. which tale was deliverd to Sprenger by a Knight of
the Rhodes, being of the order of St. John's at Jerusalem, and it follows thus.

CHAP. III.
Of a Man turned into an Ass, and returned again into a man, by one of Bodin's
Witches: S. Augustines opinion thereof.

IT happened in the City of Salamin, in the Kingdom of Cyprus (wherein is a
good haven) that a ship laden with Merchandise stayed there for a short space:
In the mean time, many of the Soldiers and Mariners went to shore, to provide
fresh victuals; among which number, a certain English man, What the Devil
should the Witch mean to make choice of the English man?
being a sturdy young fellow, went to a woman's house, a little way out of the
City, and not far from the Sea side, to see whether she had any eggs to sell:
who perceiving him to be a lusty young fellow, a stranger, and far from his
Country (so as upon the loss of him there would be the less miss or inquiry)
she considered with her self how to destroy him, and willed him to stay there a
while, she went to fetch a few eggs for him: but she tarryed long, so as the
young man called unto her, desiring her to make haste, for he told her that the
tide would be spent, and by that means the ship would be gone, and leave him
behind: Howbeit, after some detracting of time, she brought him a few eggs,
willing him to return to her, if the ship were gone when he came. The young
fellow returned toward the ship: but before he went abroad, he would needs eat
an egg or twain to satisfy his hunger, and within short space he became dumb
and out of his wits, as he afterward said. When he would have entered into the
ship, the Mariners beat him back with a cudgel, saying, What a murren lacks
the Ass? Whither the Devil will this Ass? The Ass or young man, A strange
metamorphosis of body, but not of mind.
I cannot tell by which name I should term him, being many times repelled, and
under-standing their words that called him Ass, considering that he could
speak never a word, and yet could understand every body; he thought that he was
bewitched by the woman, at whose house he was. And therefore, when by no means
he could get into the boat, but was driven to tarry and see her departure;
being also beaten from place to place, as an Ass, he remembered the Witches
words, and the words of his own fellows that called him Ass, and returned to
the Wiches house, in whose service he remained by the space of three years,
doing nothing with his hands all that while, but carried such burdens as she
laid on his back; having only this comfort, that although he were reputed an
Ass among strangers and beasts, yet that both this Witch, and all other
witches knew him to be a man.

After three years were passed over, in a morning betimes he went to Town
before his Dame; who upon some occasion, of like to make water, stayed a little
behind: in the mean time, being near to a Church, Note the devotion of the Ass.
he heard a little Saccaring bell ring, to the elevation to a morrow Mass, and
not daring to go into the Church, least he should have been beaten and driven
out with cudgels, in great devotion he fell down in the Churchyard, upon the
knees of his hinder legs, and did lift his forefeet over his head, as the
Priest does hold the Sacrament at the elevation. Which prodigious sight, when
certain Merchants of Genua espied, and with wonder beheld; anon comes the
Witch with a cudgel in her hand, beating forth the Ass. And because, as it
has been said, such kinds of Witchcrafts are very usual in those parts, the
Merchants aforesaid made such means as both the Ass and Witch were attached by
the Judge: And she being examined and set upon the rack, confessed the whole
matter, and promised that if she might have liberty to go home, she would
restore him to his old shape; and being dismissed, she did accordingly: so as,
notwithstanding, they apprehended her again, and burned her, and the young man
returned into his Country with a joyful and merry heart.

Upon the advantage of this story M. Mal. Bodin, and the residue of the
Witchmongers triumph; Aug. lib. 18. de Civit. Dei, cap. 17. and 18.
and specially because S. Augustine subscribeth thereunto; or at the least to
the very like. Which, I must confess, I find too common in his books, insomuch
as I judge them rather to be foisted in by some fond Papist or Witchmonger,
then so learned a man's doings. The best is, that he himself is no eyewitness to
any of those his tales, but speaks only by report, wherein he utters these
words, to wit, That it were a point of great incivility, etc. to discredit so
many and so certain reports. At the Alps in Arcadia.
And in that respect he justifies the corporal transfigurations of Ulysses his
mates, through the Witchcraft of Circes: and that foolish fable of Praestantius
his father, who, he says, did eat provender and hay among other horses, being
himself turned into an horse. Yea, he verifieth the starkest lie that ever was
invented, of the two Alewives that used to transform all their guests into
horses, and to fell them away at Markets and Fairs. Card. de var. rerum. lib.
15. cap. 80.

Aug. lib. 18. de Civit Dei.


And therefore I say with Cardanus, that how much Agustine says he has seen
with his eyes, so much I am content to believe. Howbeit, S. Augustine
concludes against Bodin; for he affirms these Transubstantiations to be but
fantastical, and that they are not according to the verity, but according to
the appearance: And yet I cannot allow of such appearances made by Witches, or
yet by Devils; for I find no such power given by God to any creature. And I
would know of S. Augustine, what became of them, whom Bodin's transformed
Wolves devoured? But O quam Credula men's hominis, and crectae fabulis aures!
Englished by Abraham Fleming: Good Lord! how light of credit is
the wavering mind of man!
How unto tales and lies his ears
attentive all they can?


General councels, and the Popes Canons, which Bodin so regards, do condemn
and pronounce his opinions in this behalf to be absurd, and the residue of
Witchmongers, with himself in the number, to be worse than Infidels. And these
are the very words of the Canons, Canon 26. qu. 5. Episcopi ex con. acquir. etc.
which elsewhere I have more largely repeated; Whosoever believes, that any
creature can be made or changed into better or worse, or transformed into any
other shape, or into any other similitude, by any other than by God himself,
the Creator of all things; without all doubt is an Infidel, and worse than a
Pagan: and therewithal this reason is rendered, to wit, Because they attribute
that to a Creature, which only belongs to God the Creator of all things.

CHAP. IV.
A summary of the former fable, with a Refutation thereof, after due
examination of the same.

COncerning the verity or probability of this interlude, betwixt Bodin, M. Mal.
the Witch, the Ass, the Mass, the Merchants, the Inquisitors, the Tormentors,
etc. First, I wonder at the miracle of Transubstantiation: Secondly, At the
impudency of Bodin, and James Sprenger, for affirming so gross a lie, devised
belike by the Knight of the Rhodes, to make a fool of Sprenger, and an ass of
Bodin: Thirdly, That the Ass had no more wit than to kneel down and hold up
his forefeet to a piece of starch or flower, which neither would, nor could,
nor did help him: Fourthly, That the Mass could not reform that which the Witch
transformed: Fifthly, that the Merchants, the Inquisitors, and the Tormentors,
could not either severally or jointly do it, but refer the matter to the
Witches courtesy and good pleasure.

But where was the young man's own shape all these three years, His shape was in
the woods: where else should it be? Mal. Malef. par. 1. quae. 2.
wherein he was made an Ass? It is a certain and general rule, that two
substantial forms cannot be in one subject simul and semel, both at once, which
is confessed by themselves. The form of the beast occupied some place in the
air, and so I think should the form of a man do also: For to bring the body of
a man, without feeling, into such a thin airy nature, as that it can neither be
seen nor felt, it may well be unlikely, but it is very impossible; for the air
is inconstant, and continues not in one place: so as this airy creature would
soon be carried into another region, as elsewhere I have largely proved, But
indeed our bodies are visible, In my discourse of Spirits and Devils, being the
17. book of this volume.
sensitive, and passive, and are endued with many other excellent properties,
which all the Devils in hell are not able to alter; neither can one hair of our
head perish, or fall away, or be transformed, without the special providence of
God Almighty.

But to proceed unto the probability of this story. What luck was it, that this
young fellow of England, landing so lately in those parts, and that old woman
of Cyprus, being both of so base a condition, should both understand one
another communication; England and Cyprus being so many hundred miles distant,
and their languages so far differing? I am sure in these days, wherein
traffic is more used, and learning in more price; few young or old Mariners in
this Realm can either speak or understand the language spoken at Salamim in
Cyprus, which is a kind of Greek; and as few old women there can speak our
language. But Bodin will say, You hear, that at the Inquisitors commandment,
and through the Tormentors correction, she promised to restore him to his own
shape: and so she did, as being thereunto compelled. I answer, that as the
whole story is an impious fable; so this assertion is false, and disagreeable
to their own doctrine, which maintains, That the Witch does nothing but by
the permission and leave of God. For if she could do or undo such a thing at
her own pleasure, or at the commandment of the Inquisitors, or for fear of the
Tormentors, or for love of the party, or for remorse of conscience: then is it
not either by the extraordinary leave, nor yet by the like direction of God;
except you will make him a confederate with old Witches. I for my part wonder
most, how they can turn and toss a man's body so, and make it smaller and
greater to wit, like a Mouse, or like an Ass, etc. and the man all this while
to feel no pain. And I am not alone in this maze: Dan. in dialog. cap 3.

Aug. lib. de Civ. Dei. cap. 17.18.


for Danaeus, a special maintainer of their follies, says, That although
Augustine and Apulcius do write very credibly of these matters; yet will he
never believe, that Witches can change men into other forms, as Asses, Apes,
Wolves, Bears, Mice, etc.

CHAP. V.
That the body of a Man cannot be turned into the body of a Beast by a Witch,
is proved by strong Reasons, Scriptures, and Authorities.

BUt was this Man an Ass all this while? or, was this Ass a Man? Bodin says
(his reason only reserved) he was truly transubstantiated into an Ass; so as
there must be no part of a man, but reason, remaining in this Ass: Hermer
Trismeg. in suo Periandro.
And yet Hermes Trismegistus thinks he has good authority and reason to say,
Aliud corpus quam humanum non capere animam humanam; nec fas esse in corpus
animae ratione carentis animam rationalem corruere; that is, An humane soul
cannot receive any other than an humane body, nor yet can light into a body
that wants reason of mind. But S. James says, Jam. 2.26.
The body without the spirit is dead. And surely, when the soul is departed
from the body, the life of man is dissolved; Phil. 1.23.
and therefore Paul wished to be dissolved, when he would have been with
Christ. The body of man is subject to diverse kinds of Agues, sicknesses, and
infirmities, whereunto an Asses body is not inclined; and man's body must be fed
with bread, etc. and not with hay. Bodins Asse-headed man must either eat hay
or nothing; as appears in the story. Man's body also is subject unto death,
and has his days numbered. If this fellow had died in the mean time, as his
hour might have been come, for any thing the Devils, the Witch, or Bodin knew;
I marvel then what would have become of this Ass, or how the Witch could have
restored him to shape, or whether he should have risen at the day of Judgment
in an Asses body and shape: For Paul says, 1 Cor. 15.44.
that that very body which is sown and buried a natural body, is raised a
spiritual body. The life of Jesus is made manifest in our mortal flesh, and not
in the flesh of an Ass.

God has endued every man and every thing with his proper nature, substance,
form, qualities, and gifts, and directs their ways. As for the ways of an
Ass, he takes no such care; howbeit, they have also their properties and
substance several to themselves. 1 Cor. 15.39.
For there is one flesh (says Paul) of men, another flesh of beasts, another
of fishes, another of birds: And therefore it is absolutely against the
ordinance of God (who has made me a man) that I should fly like a Bird, or
swim like a fish, or creep like a worm, or become an Ass in shape; insomuch,
as if God would give me leave, I cannot do it; for it were contrary to his own
order and decree, and to the constitution of any body which he has made. Psalm.
119.
Yea, the spirits themselves have their laws and limits prescribed, beyond the
which they cannot pass one hairs breadth; otherwise God should be contrary to
himself, which is far from him. Neither is Gods omnipotency hereby qualified,
but the Devils impotency manifested, who has none other power, but that which
God from the beginning has appointed unto him, consonant to his nature and
substance. He may well be restrained from his power and will, but beyond the
same he cannot pass, as being Gods minister, no further but in that which he
has from the beginning enabled him to do: which is, that he being a spirit,
may with Gods leave and ordinance viciate and corrupt the spirit and will of
man; werein he is very diligent.

What a beastly assertion is it, that a man, whom God has made according to
his own similitude and likeness, should be by a Witch, turned into a beast?
What an impiety is it to affirm, that an Asses body is the temple of the holy
Ghost? Or, an Ass to be the child of God, and God to be his Father, as it is
said of man? Which Paul to the Corinthians so divinely confuteth, who says,
That our bodies are the members of Christ: 1 Cor. 6.19. ver. 15. etc. ver. 2.
ver. 13.
in the which, we are to glorify God, for the body is for the Lord, and the
Lord is for the body. Surely he means not for an Asses body, as by this time
I hope appears; in such wife as Bodin may go hide him for shame; especially
when he shall understand, that even into these our bodies, which God has
framed after his own likeness, he has also breathed that spirit, which Bodin
says, is now remaining within an Asses body, which God has so subjected in
such servility under the foot of man; Psalm. 8.5, 7, 8.
of whom God is so mindful, that he has made him little lower then Angels, yea
than himself, and crowned him with glory and worship, and made him to have
dominion over the works of his hands, as having put all things under his feet,
all Sheep and Oxen, yea Wolves, Asses, and all other beasts of the field, the
fouls of the air, the fishes of the sea, etc. Bodins Poet, Ovid, whose
Metamorphosis makes so much for him; says, to the overthrow of this
fantastical imagination: Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque videre
Jussit, and erectos ad sydera tollere vultus.
The effect of which verses is this: The Lord did set man's fade so hie,
That he the heavens might behold,
And look up to the starry sky,
To see his wonders manifold.


Now, if a Witch or a Devil, can so alter the shape of a man, as contrarily to
make him look down to hell, like a beast; Gods works should not only be defaced
and disgraced, but his ordinance should be wonderfully altered, and thereby
confounded.

CHAP. VI.
The Witchmongers Objections, concerning Nebuchadnezzar answered, and their
error cerning Lycanthropia confuted.

MAlleus Maleficarum, Bodin, and many other of them that maintain Witchcraft,
triumph upon the story of Nebuchadnezzar as though Circes had transformed him
with her sorceties into an Ox, as she did others into Swine, etc. I answer,
Their groundwork is as sure as to hold a quick Eel by the tale. Dan. 4.
that he was neither in body nor shape transformed at all, according to their
gross imagination; as appears both by the plain words of the text, and also
by the opinions of the best Interpreters thereof; but that he was for his
beastly government and conditions, thrown out of his Kingdom and banished for a
time, and driven to hide himself in the Wilderness, there in exile to lead his
life in a beastly sort, among beasts of the field, and fowls of the air (for
by the way I tell you it appears by the text, that he was rather turned into
the shape of a fowl than of a beast) until he rejecting his beastly conditions,
was upon his repentance and amendment called home, and restored unto his
Kingdom. Howbeit, this (by their confession) was neither Devils nor Witches
doing; but a miracle wrought by God, whom alone I acknowledge to bring to pass
such works at his pleasure. Wherein I would know what our Witch-mongers have
gained.

I am not ignorant that some write, that after the death of Nebuchadnezzar,
Cor. Agrip. de vanit. scient. cap. 44.
his son Evilmerodath gave his body to the ravens to be devoured, least
afterward his father should arise from death, who of a beast became a man
again. But this tale is meeter to have place in the Cabalistical art, to wit,
among unwritten verities, than here. To concude, I say that the
transformations, which these Witch-mongers do so rave and rage upon, is (as all
the learned sort of Physicians affirm) a disease proceeding partly from
melancholy, whereby many suppose themselves to be Wolves, or such ravening
beasts. For Lycanthropia is of the ancient Physicians called Lupina
melancholia, or Lupina insania. J. Wierus declares very learnedly, the cause,
the circumstance, and the cure of this disease. Paul. Aeginet. li. 3. cap. 16.
Aetius li. 6. c. 11.

J. Wier. de Praest. doem. lib. 4. cap. 23.


I have written the more herein; because hereby great Princes and Potentates,
as well as poor Women and Innocents, have been defamed and accounted among the
number of Witches.

CHAP. VII.
A special Objection answered concerning Transportations, with the consent of
diverse Writers thereupon.

FOr the maintenance of Witches Transportations, they object the words of the
Gospel, Mat. 4.8. Luke 3.9.
where the Devil is said to take up Christ, and to set him on a pinnacle of the
Temple, and on a mountain, etc. which if he had done in manner and form as they
suppose, it follows not therefore that Witches could do the like; nor yet
that the Devil would do it for them at their pleasure; for they know not their
thoughts, neither can otherwise communicate with them. But I answer, Answered
to former objection.
that if it were so grossly to be understood, as they imagine it, yet should
it make nothing to their purpose: For, I hope, they will not say, that Christ
had made any ointments, or entered into any league with the Devil, and by virtue
thereof was transported from out of the Wilderness, unto the top of the temple
at Jerusalem; or that the Devil could have masteries over his body, whose soul
he could never lay hold upon, especially when he might (with a beck of his
finger) have called unto him, and have had the assistance of many legions of
Angels: Mat. 26.53.
Neither (as I think) will they presume to make Christ partaker of the Devils
purpose and sin in that behalf. If they say, This was an action wrought by the
special providence of God, and by his appointment, that the Scripture might be
fulfilled; then what gain our Witchmongers by this place? First, for that they
may not produce a particular example to prove so general an argument. And
again, if it were by Gods special providence and appointment, then why should
it not be done by the hand of God, Job 1.11.2.5.
as it was in the story of Job? Or, if if it were Gods special purpose and
pleasure, that there should be so extraordinary a matter brought to pass by the
hand of the Devil; could not God have given to the wicked Angel extraordinary
power, and clothed him with extraordinary shape, whereby he might be made an
instrument able to accomplish that matter, as he did to his Angel that carried
Habacuck to Daniel, and to them that he sent to destroy Sodom? But you shall
understand, that this was done in a vision, and not in verity of action. So as
they have a very cold pull of this place, which is the special piece of
Scripture alleged of them for their Transportations.

J. Calvin in Harmon. Evang. in Mat. 4. and Luke 4.
Hear therefore what Calvin says in his Commentary upon that place, in these
words, The question is, whether Christ were carried aloft indeed, or whether it
were but in a vision? Many affirm very obstinately, that his body was truly and
really as they say taken up; because they think it too great an indignity for
Christ to be made subject to Satan's illusions. But this objection is easily
washed away: For it is no absurdity to grant all this to be wrought through
Gods permission, or Christ's voluntary subjection: so long as we yield not to
think that he suffered these temptations inwardly, that is to say, in mind or
soul. And that which is afterward set down by the Evangelist, where the Devil
showed him all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of the same, and that
to be done (as it is said in Luke) in the twinkling of an eye, does more agree
with a vision, than with a real action: So far are the very words of Calvin:
Which differ not one syllable nor five words from that which I had written
therein, before I looked for his opinion in the matter. And this, I hope, will
be sufficient to overthrow the assertions of them that lay the ground of their
Transportations and flying in the air hereupon.

He that will say, that these words, to wit, that Christ was taken up, etc. can
hardly be applied to a vision, let him turn to the Prophecy of Ezekiel, and
see the self same words used in a vision, saving that where Christ is said to
be taken up by the Devil, Ezekiel 3.12, 14.
Ezekiel is taken up, and lifted up, and carried by the Spirit of God, and yet
in a vision. But they have less reason that built upon this sandy rock, the
supernatural frame of Transubstantiation; as almost all our Witching Writers
do. For Sprenger and Institor say, that the Devil in the likeness of a Falcon
caught him up; Danaeus says, it was in the similitude of a man; others say, of
an Angel painted with wings; others, invisible; Ergo, the Devil can take (say
they) what shape he list. Mal. Malef.
But though some may cavil upon the Devils transforming of himself; yet, that
either Devil or Witch can transform or transubstantiate others, there is no
title or color in the Scriptures to help them. If there were authority for it,
and that it were past all peradventure, lo, what an easy matter is it to
resubstantiate an Ass into a Man. J. Bod. lib. de doem 3. cap. 5. In Mal.
Malef.
For Bodin says, upon the word of Apuleius, that if the Ass eat new Roses,
Anise, or Bay Leaves out of spring water, it will presently return him into a
Man: Which thing Sprenger says may be done, by washing the Ass in fair water;
yea, he shows an instance, where, by drinking of water an Ass was turned
into a man.

CHAP. VIII.
The Witchmongers objection concerning the history of Job answered.

THese Witchmongers, for lack of better arguments, do many times object Job
against me; although there be never a word in that story which either makes
for them, or against me; insomuch as there is not the name of a Witch mentioned
in the whole book. But (I pray you) what Witchmonger now seeing one so
afflicted as Job, would not say he were bewitched, as Job never says? For
first, there came a messenger unto him, and said, Job 1.14.15.
Thy oxen were plowing, and thy asses were feeding in their places; and the
Sabeant came violently and took them; yea, they have slain thy servants with
the edge of the sword, but I only am escaped to tell thee. And whilst he was
yet speaking, 16.
another came and said, The fire of God is fallen from heaven, and has burnt
up thy sheep, and thy servants, and devoured them, but I only am escaped alone
to tell thee. 17.
And whilst he was yet speaking, another came, and said, The Chaldeans set out
their bands, and fell upon thy camels, and have taken them, and have slain thy
servants with the edge of the sword, but I only am escaped alone to tell thee.
And whilst he was yet speaking, 18.
came another and said, Thy sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking
wine in their elder brothers house, and behold, there came a great wind from
beyond the wilderness, 19.
and smote the four corners of the house, which fell upon thy children, and
they are dead, and I only am escaped alone to tell thee. Besides all this, Job
2.7.
He was smitten with boiles, from the sole of his foot to the crown of his
head. If any man in these days called Job, should be by the appointment or
hand of God thus handled, as this Job was, I warrant you that all the old Women
in the Country, would be called Coram nobis; Warrants would be sent out on
every side, public and private inquiry made, what old Women lately resorted to
Jobs house, or to any of those places where these misfortunes fell. If any poor
old Woman had chanced within two or three months to have borrowed a courtesy
of seasing, or to have fetched from thence a pot of milk, or had she required
some alms, and not obtained it at Jobs hand; there had been argument enough to
have brought her to confusion; and to be more certain to have the right Witch
apprehended, figures must have been cast, the sive and shears must have been
set on work; yea rather then the Witch should escape, a Conjurer must have
earned a little money, a circle must have been made, and a Devil raised to tell
the truth; Mother Bungy must have been gone unto, and after she had learned her
name whom Job most suspected, she would have confirmed the suspicion with
artificial accusations; in the end, some Woman or other must have been hanged
for it. But as Job said, Dominus dedit; so said he not, J. Calvin in Job 1.21.
Diabolus vel Lamia, sed Dominus abstulit. Which agrees with the tenor of the
text, where it is written, that the Devil at every of Jobs afflictions desired
God to lay his hand upon him. Insomuch as Job imputed no part of his calamity
unto Devils, Witches, nor yet unto Conjurers, or their Inchanments; as we have
learned now to do. Neither sinned he, or did God any wrong, when he laid it to
his charge: but we dishonor God greatly, when we attribute either the power or
propriety of God the creator unto a creature.

J. Calvin in Job 2. Sermon 8. Muscul. in loc. comm.

Idem. ibidem.


Calvin says, We derogate much from Gods glory and omnipotency, when we say,
he does but give Satan leave to do it: which is (says he) to mock Gods
justice: and so fond an assertion, that if Asses could speak, they would speak
more wisely than so: For a temporal judge says not to the hangman, I give thee
leave to hang this offender, but commands him to do it. But the maintainers
of Witches omnipotency, say, Do you not see how really and palpably the Devil
tempted and plagued Job? I answer first, that there is no corporal or visible
Devil named nor seen in any part of that circumstance; secondly, that it was
the hand of God that did it: thirdly, that as there is no community between the
person of a Witch, and the person of a devil, so was there not any conference
or practice between them in this case.

J. Calvin in his Ser. upon Job.
And as touching the communication betwixt God and the Devil, behold what Calvin
says, writing or rather preaching of purpose upon that place, whereupon they
think they have so great advantage; When Satan is said to appear before God, it
is not done in some place certain, but the Scripture speaks so to apply it
self to our rudeness. Certainly the Devil in this and such like cases is an
instrument to work Gods will, and not his own; and therefore it is an ignorant
and an ungodly saying (as Calvin judges it) to affirm, that God does but
permit and suffer the Devil: For if Satan were so at his own liberty (says he)
we should be overwhelmed at a sudden. And doubtless, if he had power to hurt
the body, there were no way to resist: for he would come invisibly upon us, and
knock us on the heads; yea he would watch the best and dispatch them, whilst
they were about some wicked act. If they say, God commands him, no body
impugneth them; but that God should give him leave, I say with Calvin, that the
Devil is not in such favor with God, as to obtain any such request at his
hands.

J. Calvin in Job 1. Sermon. 5.
And whereas by our Witchmongers opinions and arguments, the Witch procures the
Devil, and the Devil asks leave of God to plague whom the Witch is disposed:
there is not (as I have said) any such corporal communication between the Devil
and a Witch, as Witchmongers imagine. Neither is God moved at all at Satan's
suit, who has no such favor or grace with him, as to obtain any thing at his
hands.

Mal. Malef. par. 1. quaest. 1. Idem. part. 1. quaest. 4.
But M. Mal. and his friends deny, that there were any Witches in Jobs time: yea
the Witchmongers are content to say, that there were none found to exercise
this art in Christ's time, from his birth to his death, even by the space of
thirty three years. If there had been any (say they) they should have been
there spoken of. As touching the authority of the book of Job, there is no
question but that it is very canonical and authentic. Howbeit, many Writers,
both of the Jews and others, Note what is said touching the book of Job.
are of opinion, that Moses was the Author of this book; and that he did set it
as a looking-glass before the people: to the intent the children of Abraham (of
whose race he himself came) might know, that God showed favor to others that
were not of the same line, and be ashamed of their wickedness: seeing an
uncircumcised Painime had so well demeaned himself. Upon which argument Calvin
(though he had written upon the same) says, that forasmuch as it is uncertain,
whether it were Res gesta or Exempli gratia, we must leave it in suspense.
Nevertheless (says he) let us take that which is out of all doubt; namely,
that the holy Ghost has indicted the book, to the end that the Jews should know
that God has had a people always to serve him throughout the World, even of
such as were no Jews, nor segregated from other nations.

Howbeit, I for my part deny not the verity of the story; though indeed I must
confess, that I think there was no such corporal interlude between God, the
Devil, and Job, as they imagine; neither any such real presence and
communication as the Witchmongers conceive and maintain; who are so gross
herein, that they do not only believe, but publish so palpable adsurdities
concerning such real actions betwixt the Devil and man, as a wise man would be
ashamed to read, but much more to credit: In legenda aurea.
As that S. Dunstan lead the Devil about the house by the nose with a pair of
pinsors or tongs, and made him rore so loud, as the place rung thereof, etc.
with a thousand the like fables; without which neither the art of Popery nor of
Witchcraft could stand. But you may see more of this matter elsewhere, where in
few words (which I thought good here to omit, least I should seem to use too
many repetitions) I answer effectually to their cavils about this place.

CHAP. IX.
What several sorts of Witches are mentioned in the Scriptures, and how the
word Witch is there applied.

BUt what sorts of Witches soever M. Mal. or Bodin say there are; Moses spoke
only of four kinds of impious Coseners or Witches (whereof our Witchmongers,
old women, which dance with the Fairies, ande. are none.) The first were
Praestigiatores Pharaonis, which (as all Divines, 1. Praestigiatores Pharaonis.
both Hebrews and others conclude) were but Coseners and Juglers, deceiving the
Kings eyes with illusions and sleights, and making false things to appear as
true; which nevertheless our Witches cannot do. The second is Mecasapha, 2.
Mecasapha.
which is she that destroys with poison. The third are such as use sundry
kinds of Divinations, and hereunto pertain these words, Kasam, Onen, Ob, Idoni.
3. Kasam, Onen, Ob, Idoni.
The fourth is Habar, to wit, when Magicians, 4. Habar.
or rather such as would be reputed cunning therein, mumble certain secret
words, wherein is thought to be great efficacy.

These are all Coseners and Abusers of the people in their several kinds. But
because they are all termed of our translators by the name of Witches in the
Bible; therefore the lies of M. Mal. and Bodin, and all our old Wives tales are
applied unto these names, and easily believed of the common people, who have
never hitherto been instructed in the understanding of these words. In which
respect, I will (by Gods grace) show you (concerning the signification of them)
the opinion of the most learned in our age; specially of Johannes Wierus; who
though he himself were singularly learned in the tongues, yet for his
satisfaction and full resolution in the same, he sent for the judgment of
Andraeas Massius, the most famous Hebrician in the World, and had in it such
sense and order, as I mean to set down unto you. And yet I give you this note
by the way, Note.
that Witchcraft or Enchantment is diversely taken in the Scriptures; sometimes
nothing tending to such end as it is commonly thought to do: For, 1 Samuel 15.23.
2 Reg. 9.22. Gal. 3.1. Mat. 2.1.
1 Samuel 15.23. it is all one with Rebellion. Jesabel for her idolatrous life,
is called a Witch. Also in the new Testament, even S. Paul says, the
Galathians are bewitched, because they were seduced and led from the true
understanding of the Scriptures.

Item, sometimes it is taken in good part, as the Magicians that came to
worship and offer to Christ; and also where Daniel is said to be an Inchanter,
Daniel 4.
yea a principal Inchanter; which title being given him in diverse places of
that story, he never seemed to refuse or dislike; but rather entreats for the
pardon and qualification of the rigor toward other Inchanters, which were mere
coseners indeed; as appears in the second Chapter of Daniel, Dan. 2.8.
where you may see that the King espied their fetches.

Sometimes, such are called Conjurers, as being but Rogues, and lewd people,
Acts 19.
would use the name of Jesus to work miracles, whereby, though they being
faithless could work nothing; yet is their practice condemned by the name of
Conjuration. Sometimes Juglers are called Witches. Sometimes also they are
called Sorcerers, Genesis 4.18. Exo. 7.13, etc. Acts 13. Exodus 22. etc. Act. 13.
and 19. Cant. 4.9. Deuteronomy. 18.2. Jerem. 27. Acts 8.
that impugn the Gospel of Christ, and seduce others with violent persuasions.
Sometimes a Murderer with poison, is called a Witch. Sometimes they are so
termed by the very signification of their names; as Elymas, which signifies a
Sorcerer. Sometimes because they study curious and vain arts. Sometimes it is
taken for wounding or grieving of the heart. Yea the very word Magus, which is
Latin for a Magician, is translated a Witch; and yet it was heretofore always
taken in the good part. And at this day it is indifferent to say in the English
tongue; She is a Witch; or, She is a wise Woman.

Sometimes observers of Dreams, sometimes Soothsayers; sometimes the observers
of the flying of fowls, of the meeting of toads, the falling of salt, etc. are
called Witches. Sometimes he or she is called a Witch, that take upon them
either for gain or glory, to do miracles; and yet can do nothing. Sometimes
they are called Witches in common speech, that are old, lame, cursed, or
melancholic, as a nick name. But as for our old Women, that are said to hurt
children with their eyes, or Lambs with their looks, or that pull down the Moon
out of heaven, or make so foolish a bargain, or do such homage to the Devil;
you shall not read in the Bible of any such Witches, or of any such actions
imputed to them.

BOOK VI.
CHAP. I.
The exposition of this Hebrew word Chasaph; wherein is answered the Objection
contained in Exodus 22. to wit, Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live; and of
Simon Magus, Acts 8.

CHasaph, being an Hebrew word, is latined Veneficium, and is in English
Poisoning, or Witchcraft, if you will so have it. The Hebrew sentence written
in Exodus 22. is by the 70 Interpreters translated thus into Greek (...), which
in Latin is, Veneficos (sive) Veneficas non retinebitis in vita; in English,
You shall not suffer any Poysoners, or (as it is translated) Witches to live.
The which sentence, Josephus an Hebrew born, and a man of great estimation,
Joseph in Judeorum antiquitat.
learning, and fame, interprets in this wise; Let none of the children of
Israel have any poison that is deadly, or prepared to any hurtful use: If any
be apprehended with such stuff, let him be put to death, and suffer that which
he meant to do to them, for whom he prepared it. The Rabbis exposition agrees
herewithal. Lex Cornelia differs not from the sense, to wit, that he must
suffer death; which either makes, sells, or has any poison to the intent to
kill any man. This word is found in these places following: Exodus 22.18. Deuteronomy.
18.10. 2 Samuel 9.22. Dan. 2.2. 2 Chronicles. 33.6. Esaias. 47.9, 12. Malach. 3.5.
Jerem. 27.10. Mich. 5.2. Nah. 3.4. bis. Howbeit, in all our English
translations, Chasaph is translated, Witchcraft.

And because I will avoid prolixity and contention both at once, I will admit
that Veneficae were such Witches, as with their poisons did much hurt among the
children of Israel; and I will not deny that there remain such unto this day,
bewitching men, and making them believe that by virtue of words, and certain
Ceremonies, they bring to pass such mischiefs, and intoxications, as they
indeed accomplish by poisons. And this abuse in cosenage of people, together
with the taking of Gods name in vain, in many places of the Scripture is
reproved especially by the name of Witchcraft, even where no poisons are.
According to the sense which St. Paul used to the Galathians in these words,
where he shows plainly, that the true signification of Witchcraft is
cosenage, Gal. 3.1.
O ye foolish Galathians (says he) who has be witched you? to wit, cosened or
abused you, making you believe a thing which is neither so nor so! Whereby he
means not to ask of them, who has with Charms, etc. or with poisons
deprived them of their health, life, cattle, or children, etc. but whom has
abused or cosened them, to make them believe lies. This phrase is also used by
Job 15. Job 15.12.
But that we may be thoroughly resolved of the true meaning of this phrase used
by Paul, Gal. 3. let us examine the description of a notable Witch, called
Simon Magus, made by St. Luke; There was (says he) in the City of Samaria, a
certain man called Simon, Act. 8.9.
which used Witchcraft, and bewitched the people of Samaria, saying that he
himself was some great man. I demand, in what other thing here do we see any
Witchcraft, than that he abused the people, making them believe he could work
miracles, whereas in truth he could do no such thing; as manifestly may appear
in the 13 and 19 ver. of the same chap. where he wondered at the miracles
wrought by the Apostles, and would have purchased with money the power of the
holy Ghost to work wonders.

It will be said, the people had reason to believe him, because it is written,
That he of long time had bewitched them with Sorceries. Act. 8.11.
But let the bewitched Galathians be a warning both to the bewitched
Samaritans, and to all other that are cosened or bewitched through false
Doctrine, or Legierdemain; least while they attend to such fables and lies,
they be brought into ignorance, and so in time be led with them away from God.
1 Reg. 8.39. Mat. 9.4, 12, 25, 22. Act. 1.24. and 15.8. Romans 8.27. Mark 2. Luke
6.17. and 11.9. John 1. and 2. and 6.13 Apoc. 2. and 3. Luke 11.29. Eccl. 34.5.
Lev. 19.31.
And finally, let us all abandon such Witches and Coseners, as with Simon Magus
set themselves in the place of God, boasting that they can do miracles, expound
dreams, foretell things to come, raise the dead, etc. which are the works of the
holy Ghost, who only seacheth the heart and reins, and only works great
wonders, which are now stayed and accomplished in Christ, in whom who so
steadfastly believes, shall not need to be by such means resolved or confirmed
in his Doctrine and Gospel: And as for the unfaithful, they shall have none
other miracle showed unto them, but the sign of Jonas the Prophet.

And therefore I say, whatsoever they be, that with Simon Magus, take upon them
to work such Wonders, by Soothsaying, Sorcery, or Witchcraft, are but liars,
deceivers and coseners, according to Syrachs saying, Sorcery, Witchcraft,
Soothsaying, and Dreams, are but vanity, and the Law shall be fulfilled without
such lies. God commanded the people, That they should not regard them that
wrought with Spirits, nor Soothsayers: for the estimation that was attributed
to them, offended God.

CHAP. II.
The place of Deuteronomy expounded, Deuteronomy. 8.19, 11.
wherein are recited all kind of Witches; also their opinions confuted, which
hold, that they can work such Miracles as are imputed unto them.

THe greatest and most common objection is, that if there were not some, which
could work such miraculous or supernatural feats, by themselves, or by their
Devils, it should not have been said, Let none be found among you, that makes
his son or his daughter to go through the fire, or that uses Witchcraft, or is
a regarder of times, or a marker of the flying of fowls, or a Sorcerer, or a
Charmer, or that counsels with Spirits, or a Soothsayer, or that asks
counsel of the dead, or (as some translate it) that raises the dead. But as
there is no one place in the Scripture that says, they can work Miracles; so
it shall be easy to prove, that these were all Coseners, every one abusing the
people in his several kind; and are accursed of God. Not that they can do all
such things indeed, Isa. 42.8. Psalm. 24.8, 10.
as there is expressed; but for that they take upon them to be the mighty power
of God, and to do that which is the only work of him, seducing the people, and
blaspheming the Name of God, who will not give his glory to any creature, being
himself the King of Glory and Omnipotency.

First, I ask, What miracle was wrought by their passing through the fire?
Truly it cannot be proved that any effect followed; but that the people were
bewitched, to suppose their sins to be purged thereby; as the Spaniards think
of scourging and whipping themselves: so as Gods power was imputed to that
action, and so forbidden as an Idolatrous Sorcery. What wonders works the
regarder of times? What other Devil deals he withal, than with the spirit of
Superstition? Does he not deceive himself and others, and therefore is worthyly
condemned for a Witch? What spirit uses he, which marketh the flying of Fowls?
Nevertheless, he is here condemned as a practiser of Witchcraft, because he
coseneth the people, and takes upon him to be a Prophet; impiously referring
Gods certain ordinances to the flittering feathers and uncertain ways of a
bird? The like effects produces Sorcery, Charming, consultation with Spirits,
Sooth-saying, and consulting with the dead; in every of the which Gods power is
obscured, his glory defaced, and his commandment infringed.

And to prove that these Soothsayers and Witches are but lying mates and
coseners; note these words pronounced by God himself, Deuteronomy. 8.14. Luke 16.23.
Job 14.12. Psalm. 88.10. Deuteronomy. 18.11. Luke 16.29, 31. Luke 16.22. Joh. 5.21.
Hos. 6. Act. 17.25, 28. 1 Timothy 6.13
even in the self same place to the children of Israel. Although the Gentiles
suffered themselves to be abused, so as they gave ear to these Sorcerers, etc.
he would not suffer them so but would raise them a Prophet, who should speak
the truth. As if he should say* The other are but lying and cosening mates,
deceitful and undermining Merchants, whose abuses I will make known to my
people. And that every one may be resolved herein, let the last sentence of
this precept be well weighed; to wit, Let none be found among you, that asks
counsel of, or raises the dead.

First, you know the souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, and
resting with Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, do sleep in Jesus Christ. And from
that sleep, man shall not be raised, till the heavens be no more, according to
this of David, Will thou show wonders among the dead? Nay, the Lord says, the
living shall not be taught by the dead, but by the living: As for the
unrighteous, they are in hell, where is no redemption; neither is there any
passage from heaven to earth, but by God and his Angels. As touching the
resurrection and restoration of the body, read John 5. and you shall
manifestly see, that it is the only work of the Father, who has given the
power thereof to the Son, and to none other, etc. Dominus percutit, and ipse
medetur: Ego occidam, and ego vivefaciam. And in many other places it is
written, that God gives life and being to all. Although Plato, with his Master
Socrates, the chief pillars of these vanities say, That one Pamphilus was
called up out of hell, who when he came among the people, told many incredible
tales concerning infernal actions. But herein I take up the Proverb, Amicus
Plato, amicus Socrates, sed major amica veritas.

So as this last precept, or last part thereof, extending to that which neither
can be done by Witch nor Devil, may well expound the other parts and points
thereof. For it is not meant hereby, that they can do such things indeed; but
that they make men believe they do them, and thereby cosen the people, and take
upon them the office of God, and therewithal also blaspheme his holy name, and
take it in vain; as by the words of charms and conjurations does appear, which
you shall see, if you look into these words Habar and Idoni.

In like manner I say you may see, that by the prohibition of divination by
augury, and of Sooth-sayings, etc. who are Witches, and can indeed do nothing
but lie and cosen the people, the law of God condemns them not for that they
can work miracles, but because they say they can do that which pertains to
God, and for cosenage, etc. Concerning other points of Witchcraft contained
therein, and because some cannot otherwise be satisfied, 26 quae. 7. non obser.
fact. 1398. act. 17. August. de spirit. and anima. cap. 28.
I will allege under one sentence, the decretals, the mind of S. Augustine,
the Aurelian Council, and the determination of Paris, to wit: Who so observes
or gives heed unto Soothsayings, Divinations, Witchcraft, etc. or does give
credit to any such, he renounceth Christianity, and shall be counted a Pagan,
and an enemy to God; yea, and he erreth both in Faith and Philosophy. And the
Reason is therewithal expressed in the Canon, to wit, Because hereby is
attributed to a creature, that which pertains to God only and alone. So as,
under this one sentence [Thou shall not suffer a Poysoner or a Witch to live]
is forbidden both murder and Witchcraft; the murder consisting in poison; the
Witchcraft in cosenage or blasphemy.

CHAP. III.
That Women have used poisoning in all ages more than Men, and of the
inconvenience of poisoning.

AS Women in all ages have been counted most apt to conceive Witchcraft, and
the Devils special instruments therein, and the only or chief practisers
thereof: so also it appears, that they have been the first inventers, and the
greatest practisers of poisoning, and more naturally addicted and given
thereunto than men: according to the saying of Quintilian, Latrocinium facilius
in viro, Plin. lib. 25. c. 2.
veneficium in foemina credam: From whom Pliny differs nothing in opinion,
when he says, Scientiam foeminarum in veneficiis praevalere. To be short,
Augustine, Livy, Valerius, Diodorus, and many other agree, That Women were the
first inventers and practisers of the art of poisoning. As for the rest of
their cunning, in what estimation it was had, may appear by these verses of
Horace, wherein he does not only declare the vanity of Witchcraft, but also
expounds the other words, wherewithal we are now in hand.

Somnia, terrores Magicos, miracula, sagas,
Nocturnos lemures, portentaque Thessala rides.
These dreams and terrors Magical,
These Miracles and Witches,
Night-walking Sprites, or Thessal bugs,
Esteem them not two rushes.
Here Horace (you see) contemns as ridiculous, all our Witches cunning;
marry, herein he comprehends not their poisoning art, which hereby he only
seemed to think hurtful. Pythagoras and Democritus give us the names of a great
many Magical herbs and stones, whereof now, both the virtue, and the things
themselves also are unknown: as Marmaritin, whereby Spirits might be raised:
Archimedon, which would make one bewray in his sleep, all the secrets in his
heart, Adincantida, Calicia, Mevais, Chirocineta, etc. which had all their
several virtues, or rather poisons. But all these now are worn out of
knowledge; marry in their stead, we have hogs-turd and chervil, as the only
thing whereby our Witches work miracles.

Truly this poisoning art called Veneficium, of all others is most abominable;
as whereby murders may be committed, where no suspicion may be gathered, nor
any resistance can be made; the strong cannot avoid the weak, the wise cannot
prevent the foolish, the godly cannot be preserved from the hands of the
wicked; Children may hereby kill their Parents, the Servant the Master, the
Wife her Husband, so privily, so unevitably, and so incurably, that of all
other it has been thought the most odious kind of murder; according to the
saying of Ovid: Ovid Metamo. lib. 1.
-- Non hospes abhospite tutus,
Non socer a genero, fratrum quoque gratia rara est:
Imminet exitio vir conjugis, illa mariti;
Lurida terribiles miscent aconita novercae;
Filius ante diem patrios inquirit in annos.
Englished by Abraham Fleming: The traveling guest oppressed,
Does stand in danger of his host,
The host eke of his guest:
The Father of his son-in-law,
Yea rare is seen to rest
'Twixt brethren love and amity,
And kindness void of strife:
The husband seeks the goodwifes death,
And his again the wife.
Ungentle stepdames grizly poison
temper and do give:
The Son too soon does ask how long
His Father is to live.


The Monk that poisoned King John, was a right Veneficus, to wit, both a Witch
and a Murderer; for he killed the King with poison, and persuaded the people
with lies, that he had done a good and a meritorious act; and doubtless, many
were so bewitched, as they thought he did very well therein. Aenoid. 4. lib. 4.
Antonius Sabellicus writes of a horrible poisoning murder, committed by
Women at Rome, where were executed (after due conviction) 170 Women at one
time; besides 20 Women of that consort, who were poisoned with that poison
which they had prepared for others.

CHAP. IV.
Of diverse poisoning practices, otherwise called Veneficia, committed in Italy,
Genua, Millen, Wittenberge, also how they were discovered and executed.

ANother practice, not unlike to that mentioned in the former Chapter, Venefica
in Italy.
was done in Cassalis at Salassia in Italy, Anno 1536. where 40 Veneficae, or
Witches being of one confederacy, renewed a Plague which was then almost
ceased, besmeering with an ointment and a powder, the posts and doors of men's
houses; so as thereby whole families were poisoned; and of that stuff they had
prepared above 40 crocks for that purpose. Herewithal they conveyed
inheritances as it pleased them, till at length they killed the brother and
only son of one Necus (as lightly none died in the house but the Masters and
their children) which was much noted; and therewithal that one Androgina
haunted the houses, specially of them that died: and she being suspected,
apprehended, and examined, confessed the fact, conspiracy, and circumstance, as
has been showed. The like villainy was afterward pactised at Genua, Veneficae
in Genua and Millen.
and execution was done upon the offenders. At Millen there was another like
attempt that took none effect. This art consists as well in poisoning of
Cattle as Men; and that which is done by poisons unto Cattle, toward their
destruction, is as commonly attributed to Witches charms as the other. And I
doubt not, but some that would be thought cunning in Incantations, and to do
miracles, have experience in this behalf: For it is written by diverse Authors,
that if Wolves dung be hidden in the mangers, racks, or else in the hedges
about the pastures, where cattle go (through the antipathy of the nature of the
Wolf and other cattle) all the beasts that savor the same do not only forbear
to eat, but run about as though they were mad, or (as they say) bewitched.

But Wierus tells a notable story of a Veneficus, or destroyer of cattle,
which I thought meet here to repeat. Of a Butcher a right Venefical Witch.
There was (says he) in the Dukedom of Wittenberge, not far from Tubing, a
Butcher, Anno 1564. that bargained with a Town for all their hides which were
of sterven cattle, called in these parts Morts. He with poison privily killed
in great numbers, their bullocks, sheep, swine, etc. and by his bargain of the
hides and tallow he grew infinitely rich: And at last being suspected, was
examined, confessed the matter and manner thereof, and was put to death with
hot tongs, wherewith his flesh was pulled from his bones. We for our parts
would have killed five poor Women, before we would suspect one rich Butcher.

CHAP. V.
A great Objection answered, concerning this kind of Witchcraft called
Veneficium.

IT is objected, That if Veneficium were comprehended under the title of
manslaughter, it had been a vain repetition, and a disordered course undertaken
by Moses to set forth a law against Veneficas severally. But it might suffice
to answer any reasonable Christian, that such was the pleasure of the holy
Ghost, to institute a particular Article hereof, as of a thing more odious,
wicked and dangerous, then any other kind of Muther. But he that shall read the
law of Moses, or the Testament of Christ himself, shall find this kind of
repetition and reiteration of the law most common: For, as it is written, Exodus
22.21. Thou shall not grieve nor afflict a stranger, for thou was a stranger in
the land of Egypt: so are the same words found repeated in Levit. 19.33.
Polling and shaving of heads and beards is forbidden in Deuteronomy. 27. which was
before prohibited in 22. It is written in Exodus 20. Thou shall not steal: and
it is repeated in Levit. 19. and and in Deuteronomy. 5. Murder is generally forbidden
in Exodus 20. and likewise in 22. and repeated in Numb. 35. But the aptest
example is, that Magic is forbidden in three several places, to wit, once in
Levit. 19. and twice in Levit. 20. For the which a man might as well cavil with
the holy Ghost, as for the other.

CHAP. VI.
In what kind of confections that Witchcraft which is called Veneficium,
consists: of Love-cups, and the same confuted by Poets.

AS touching this kind of Witchcraft, the principal part thereof consists in
certain confections prepared by lewd people to procure love; which indeed are
mere poisons, bereaving some of the benefit of the brain, and so of the sense
and understanding of the mind. And from some it takes away life, and that is
more common then the other. These be called Philtra, or Pocula amatoria, or
Venenosa pocula, or Hippomanes, which bad and blind Physicians rather practice,
than Witches or Conjurers, etc. But of what value these bables are, toward the
end why they are provided, may appear by the opinions of Poets themselves, from
whence was derived the estimation of that stuff. And first you shall hear what
Ovid says, who wrote of the very art of love, and that so cunningly and
feelingly, that he is reputed the special doctor in that science.

Ovid lib. 2. de art amandi.
Fallitur Aemonias si quis decurrit ad arts,
Datque quod a teneri front revellet equi.
Non facient ut vivat amor Medeides herbae,
Mistaque cum Magicis mersae venena sonis.
Phasias Aesonidem, Circe tenuisset Ulyssem,
Si modo servari carmine posset amor:
Nec data profuerint pallentia philtra puellis,
Philtra nocent animis, vimque furoris habent.
Englished by Abraham Fleming: Who so does run to Hamon arts,
I dub him for a dolt,
And gives that which he does pluck
from forehead of a colt:
Medias herbs will not procure
that love shall lasting live,
Nor steeped poison mixed with Magic
charms the same can give.
The Witch Medea had full fast
held Jason for her own:
So had the grand Witch Circe too
Ulysses, if alone
With Charms maintained and kept might be
the love of twain in one.
No slibbersawces given to Maids, Philtra, slibbersawces to procure love.

to make them pale and wan,
Will help: such slibbersawces mar
the minds of maid and man,
And have in them a furious force
of Frenzy now and than.
Viderit Aemoniae si quis mala pdula terrae, Ovid. lib. de remedio amoris. 1.

Et magicas arts posse juvare putat.
English by Abraham Flemming: If any think that evil herbs
in Haeman land which be,
Or Witchcraft able is to help,
let him make proof and see.


These Verses precedent do show, that Ovid knew that those beggarly Sorceries
might rather kill one, or make him stark mad, than do him good toward the
attainment of his pleasure of love; and therefore he gives his counsel to them
that are amorous in such hot manner, that either they must enjoy their love, or
else needs dye; saying, Sit procul omne nefas, ut ameris amabilis esto.
Far off be all unlawful means,
thou amiable be,
Loving I mean, that she with love
may quit the love of thee.


CHAP. VII.
It is proved by more credible writers, that Love-cups rather engender death
through venom, than love by art: and with what toys they destroy cattle, and
procure love.

BUt because there is no hold nor trust to these Poets, who say and unsay,
dallying with these causes; so as indeed the wife may perceive they have them
in derision: let us see what other graver Authors speak hereof. Eusebius
Caesariensis writes, that the Poet Lucretius was killed with one of those
lovers poisoned cups. Hieron. in Ruff. Plin. lib. 25. c. 3. Joseph lib. 11. de
Judaeorum antiquit.

Aristot. lib. 8. de natura animal. cap. 24.

Jo. Wier. de nef. cap. 40.


Hierom reports that one Livia herewith killed her husband, whom she too much
hated; and Lucilla killed hers, whom she too much loved, Callisthenes killed
Lucius Lucullus the Emperor with a love-pot, as Plutarch and Cornelius Nepos
say. Pliny and Josephus report, that Caesonia killed her husband Caligula
amatorio poculo, with a Lovers-cup, which was indeed stark poison. Aristotle
says, That all which is believed touching the efficacy of these matters, is
lies and old wives tales. He that will read more arguments and histories
concerning these poisons, let him look in J. Wier. de Veneficiis.

Toys to mock Apes.
The toys, which are said to procure love, and are exhibited in their poison
loving cups, are these; the hair growing in the nethermost part of a Wolves
tail, a Wolves yard, a little fish called Remora, the brain of a Cat, of a
Newt, or of a Lizzard; the bone of a green Frog, the flesh thereof being
consumed with Pismires or Ants, the left bone whereof ingendreth (as they say)
love, the bone on the right side, hate. Also it is said, that a frog bones, the
flesh being eaten off round about with Ants, whereof some will swim, and some
will sink: those that sink, being hanged up with a white linen cloth, engender
love; but if a man be touched therewith, hate is bred thereby. Another
experiment is thereof, with young Swallows, whereof one brood or nest being
taken and buried in a crock under the ground, till they be starved up, they
that be sound open-mouthed, serve to engender love; they whose mouths are shut,
serve to procure hate. Besides these, many other follies there be to this
purpose proposed to the simple, as namely, the garments of the dead, candles
that burn before a dead corpse, and needles wherewith dead bodies are sown or
sockt into their sheets; and diverse other things, which for the reverence of
the Reader, and in respect of the unclean speech to be used in the description
thereof, I omit; which (if you read Dioscorides, Dioscorid. de materia medicin.

L. Vairus de fascin. lib. 2. cap. 11. propt finem.


or diverse other learned Physicians) you may see at large. In the mean while,
he that desires to see more experiments concerning this matter, let him read
Leonardus Vairus de fascin. now this present year 1583. newly published;
wherein (with an incestuous mouth) he affirms directly, that Christ and his
Apostles were Venefici; very fondly prosecuting that argument, and with as much
Popish folly as may be; laboring to prove it lawful to charm and inchant
Vermin, etc.

CHAP. VIII.
Jolin Bodin triumphing against John Wier, is overtaken with false Greek, and
false interpretation thereof.

J. Bodin.
MOnsieur Bodin triumpeth over Doctor Wier herein, pronouncing a heavy sentence
upon him, because he refers this word to Poison. But he reigns or rather
rides over him much more for speaking false Greek; affirming that he calls
Veneficos (...), which is as true as the rest of the reports and fables of
Witches miracles contained in his book of Devilish devises: For in truth he
has no such word, but says they are called (...), whereas he should have said
(...) the true accent being omitted, and (...) being enterposed, which should
have been left out; which is nothing to the substance of the matter, but must
needs be the Printers fault.

But Bodin reasons in this wife, (...) is sometimes put for Magos or
Praes^igiutores: Ergo, in the translation of the Septuagint, it is so to be
taken. Wherein he manifests his bad Logic, more then the others ill Greek:
For it is well known to the learned in this tongue, that the usual and proper
signification of this word, with all its derivations and compounds, does
signify Venificos, Poysoners by Medicine. Which when it is most usual and
proper, why should the Translators take it in a signification less usual, and
nothing proper? Thus therefore he reasons and concludes with his newfound
Logic, and old found Greek: Sometimes it signifies so, though unproperly, or
rather Metaphorically: Ergo, in that place it is so to be taken, when another
fitter word might have been used: Which argument being vain, agrees well with
his other vain actions. The Septuagint had been very destitute of words, found
for this purpose. But if no proper word could have been found where they have
occasion to speak of Witchcraft in their Translations, they use Magian,
Maggagian, etc. and therefore belike they see some difference betwixt them and
the other, and knew some cause that moved them to use the word (...),
Veneficium.

BOOK VII.
CHAP. I.
Of the Hebrew word Ob, what it signifies, where it is found: Of Pythonisses
called Ventriloquae, who they be, and what their practices are; experience and
examples thereof showed.

THis word Ob, is translated Pytho, or Pythonicus spiritus; Deuteronomy. 18. Isa. 19.
1 Samuel 28. 2 Reg. 23. etc. sometime, though unproperly, Magus, as 2 Samuel 23.
But Ob signifies most properly a Bottle, and is used in this place, because
the Pythonists spoke hollow, as in the bottom of their bellies; whereby they
are aptly in Latin called Ventriloqui; of which sort was Elizabeth Barton, The
holy maid of Kent a Ventiloqua.
the holy maid of Kent, etc. These are such as take upon them to give Oracles,
to tell where things lost are become; and finally, to appeach others of
mischiefs, which they themselves most commonly have brought to pass; whereby
many times they overthrow the good fame of honest Women, and of such others of
their neighbors, with whom they are displeased. For trial hereof, letting pass
a hundred cosenages that I could recite at this time: I will begin with a true
story of a Wench, practicing her Diabolical Witchcraft and Ventriloquie, Anno
1574. at Westwell in Kent, within six miles where I dwell, taken and noted by
two Ministers and Preachers of Gods Word, four substantial Yeomen, and three
Women of good fame and reputation, whose names are after written.

Mildred the base daughter of Alice Norrington, Anno Do 1574. October. 13. Confer
this story with the Woman of Endor, 1 Samuel 18. and see whether the same might
not be accomplished by this devise.
and now servant to William Spooner of Westwell in the County of Kent, being of
the age of seventeen years, was possessed with Satan in the night and day
aforesaid: About two of the clock in the afternoon of the same day, there came
to the same Spooners house, Roger Newman Minister of Westwell, John Brainford
Minister of Kinington, with others whose names are underwritten, who made their
Prayers unto God, to assist them in that needful case; and then commanded Satan
in the name of the Eternal God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, to speak with such
a voice as they might understand, and to declare from whence he came. But he
would not speak, but roared and cried mightily: And though we did command him
many times, in the name of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, and in his mighty
power to speak, yet he would not; until he had gone through all his delays, as
roaring, crying, striving, and gnashing of teeth, and otherwise with mowing,
and other terrible countenances, and was so strong in the maid, that four men
could scarce hold her down. And this continued by the space almost of two
hours: So sometimes we charged him earnestly to speak, and again praying unto
GOD that he would assist us: at the last, he spoke, but very strangely, and
that was thus, He comes, he comes; and that oftentimes he repeated; and, He
goes, he goes; and then we charged him to tell us who sent him? And he said, I
lay in her way like a log, and I made her run like fire, but I could not hurt
her: And why so? said we: Because God kept her, said he: When came thou to
her? said we: To night in her bed, said he: Then we charged him, as before, to
tell what he was, and who sent him, and what his name was: At first he said,
The Devil, the Devil: Then we charged him as before: Then he roared and cried
as before, and spoke terrible words; I will kill her, I will kill her, I will
tear her in pieces, I will tear her in pieces. We said, Thou shall not hurt
her: He said, I will kill you all: We said, Thou shall hurt done of us all.
Then we charged him as before: Then he said, You will give me no rest: We said,
Thou shall have none here, for thou must have no rest within the servants of
God; but tell us in the name of God what thou art, and who sent thee? Then he
said, He would tear her in pieces: We said, Thou shall not hurt her: Then he
said again, He would kill us all: We said again, Thou shall hurt none of us
all, for we are the servants of God; and we charged him as before: And he said
again, Will you give me no rest? We said, Thou shall have none here, neither
shall thou rest in her, for thou have no right in her, since Jesus Christ has
redeemed her with his blood, and she belongs to him, and therefore tell us
thy name and who sent thee? He said, his name was Satan: We said, Who sent
thee? He said, Old Alice, old Alice: Which old Alice? said we: Old Alice, said
he: Where dwells she? said we: In Westwel-street, said he: We said, How long
have thou been with her? These twenty years, said he. We asked him where she
did keep him? In two bottels, said he: Where be they? said we: In the backside
of her house, said he: In what place? said we: Under the wall, said he: Where
is the other? In Kenington: In what place? said we: In the ground, said he.
Then we asked him, What she did give him: He said, Her will, her will: What did
she bid thee do? said we: He said, Kill her maid: Wherefore did she bid thee
kill her? said we: Because she did not love her, said he: We said, How long is
it ago, since she sent thee to her? More than a year, said he: Where was that?
said we: At her Masters, said he: Which Masters? said we: At her Master
Brainfords at Kinington, said he: How often were thou there? said we: Many times,
said he: Where first? said we? In the garden, said he: Where the second time?
In the hall: Where the third time? In her bed: Where the fourth time? In the
field: Where the fifth time? In the Court: Where the sixth time? In the water,
where I cast her into the mote: Where the seventh time? In her bed. We asked
him again, Where else? He said, in Westwell: Where there? said we: In the
Vicarige, said he: Where there? In the loft: How came thou to her? said we:
In the likeness of two birds, said he: Who sent thee to that place? said we:
Old Alice, said he: What other Spirits were with thee there? said we: My
servant, said he: What is his name? said we: He said, Little Devil: What is thy
name? said we? Satan, said he: What does old Alice call thee? said we: Partner,
said he: What does she give thee? said we: Her will, said he: How many have
thou killed for her? said we: Three, said he: Who are they? said we: A man and
his child, said he: What were their names? said we: The child's name was Edward,
said he: What more then Edward? said we: Edward Ager, said he: What was the
man's name? said we: Richard, said he: What more? said we: Richard Ager, said
he: Where dwelt the man and the child? said we: At Dig, at Dig, said he: This
Richard Agar of Dig, was a Gentleman of forty pounds land by the year, a very
honest man, but would often say, he was bewitched, and languished long before
he dyed: Whom else have thou killed for her? said we: Woltons wife, said he:
Where did she dwell? In Westwell, said he: What else have thou done for her?
said we: What she would have me, said he: What is that? said we: To fetch her
meat, drink, and corn, said he: Where had thou it? said we: In every house,
said he: Name the houses, said we: At Petmans, at Farms, at Millens, at
Fullers, and in every house. After this, we commanded Satan in the name of
Jesus Christ to depart from her, and never to trouble her any more, nor any man
else: Then he said, He would go, he would go; but he went not: Then we
commanded him as before with some more words. Then he said, I go, I go; and so
he departed. Then said the maid, He is gone, Lord have mercy upon me, for he
would have killed me. And then we kneeled down and gave God thanks, with the
maiden; praying that God would keep her from Satan's power, and assist her with
his grace. And noting this in a piece of paper, we departed. Satan's voice did
differ much from the maids voice, and all that he spoke, was in his own name:
Subscribed thus:

Witnesses to this, that heard and saw this whole matter, as follows: Roger
Newman, Vicar of Westwell. John Brainford Vicar of Kenington. Thomas Tailor.
Henry Tailors Wife. John Tailor. Thomas Frenchborne Wife. William Spooner. John
Frenchborne and his wife.


CHAP. II.
How the lewd practice of the Pythonist of Westwell came to light, and by whom
she was examined; and that all her Diabolical speech was but Ventriloquie and
plain cousenage, which is proved by her own confession.

IT is written, That in the latter days there shall be showed strange
illusions, Mat. 24.24.
etc. insomuch as (if it were possible) the very elect shall be deceived:
Howbeit, St. Paul says, There shall be lying and false Wonders. Nevertheless,
this sentence, and such like, have been often laid in my dish, and are urged by
diverse writers, to approve the miraculous working of Witches, whereof I will
treat more largely in another place: Howbeit, by the way, I must confess, that
I take that sentence to be spoken of Antichrist, to wit, the Pope; who
miraculously, contrary to Nature, Philosophy, and all Divinity, being of birth
and calling base; in learning gross; in valor, beauty, or activity most
commonly a very lubber, has placed himself in the most lofty and delicate
seat, putting almost all Christian Princes heads not only under his girdle, but
under his foot, etc.

Surely, the tragedy of this Pythonist is not inferior to a thousand stories,
which will hardly be blotted out of the memory and credit either of the common
people, or else of the learned. How hardly will this story suffer discredit,
having testimony of such authority? How could Mother Alice escape condemnation
and hanging, being arraigned upon this evidence: when a poor Woman has been
cast away, upon a cosening Oracle, or rather a false lie, devised by Feats the
Jugler, through the malicious instigation of some of her adversaries?

But how cunningly soever this last cited Certificate be penned, The
Ventriloqua of Westwel discovered.
or what show soever it carries of truth and plain dealing, there may be found
contained therein matter enough to detect the cosening knavery thereof; and yet
diverse have been deeply deceived therewith, and can hardly be removed from the
credit thereof, and without great disdain cannot endure to hear the reproof
thereof. And know you this by the way, that heretofore Robin Goodfellow, and
Hobgoblin, were as terrible, and also as credible to the people, as Hags and
Witches be now; and in time to come, a Witch will be as much derided and
condemned, and as plainly perceived, as the illusion and knavery of Robin
Goodfellow. And in truth, they that maintain walking spirits, with their
transformation, etc. have no reason to deny Robin Goodfellow, upon whom there
have gone as many and as credible tales, as upon Witches; saving that it has
not pleased the translators of the Bible, to call Spirits, by the name of Robin
Goodfellow, as they have termed Diviners, Soothsayers, Prisoners, and Coseners
by the name of Witches.

But to make short work with the confutation of this bastardly queans
enterprise, and cosenage; you shall undestand, that upon the bruit of her
divinity and miraculous trances, she was convented before M. Thomas Wotton of
Bocton Malherbe, a man of great worship and wisdom, and for deciding and
ordering of matters in this Commonwealth, of rare and singular dexterity;
through whose discreet handling of the matter, with the assistance and aid of
M. George Darrel, Esquire being also a right good and discreet Justice of the same
limit, the fraud was found, The Pythonist of Westwel convicted by her own
confession.
and the cosenage confessed, and she received condign punishment: Neither was
her confession won, according to the form of the Spanish Inquisition, to wit,
through extremity of tortures, nor yet by guile or flattery, nor by
presumptions; but through wise and perfect trial of every circumstance the
illusion was manifestly disclosed: not so (I say) as Witches are commonly
convinced and condemned; to wit, through malicious accusations, by guesses,
presumptions, and extorted confessions, contrary to sense and possibility, and
for such actions as they can show no trial nor example before the wise, either
by direct or indirect means; but after her due trial, she showed her feats,
illusions, and trances, with the residue of all her miraculous works, in the
presence of diverse Gentlemen and Gentlewomen of great worship and credit, at
Bocton Malherbe, in the house of the said Mr. Wotton. Now compare this wench
with the Witch of Endor, and you shall see that both the cosenages may be done
by one art.

CHAP. III. Bodins stuff concerning the Pythonist
of Endor, with a true story of a counterfeit Dutchman.

J. Bodin lib. de demon. 3 cap. 2.
UPon the like tales both Bodin built his doctrine, calling them Atheists that
will not believe him, adding to this kind of Witchcraft, the miraculous works
of diverse maidens, that would spue pins, clowts, etc. as one Agnes Brigs, and
Rachel Pinder of London did, till the miracles were detected, and they set to
open penance. Others he cites of that sort, the which were bound by Devils
with garters, or some such like stuff to posts, etc. with knots that could not
be undone, which is an Egyptians juggling or cosening feat. And of such foolish
lies joined with bawdy tales, his whole book consists; wherein I warrant you
there are no fewer then two hundred fables, and as many impossibilities. And as
these two Wenches, with the Maiden of Westwell, were detected of cosenage; so
likewise a Dutchman at Maidstone, long after he had accomplished such
knaveries, to the astonishment of a great number of good men, was revealed to
be a cosening knave; although his miracles were imprinted and published at
London, Anno 1572. with this title before the book, as follows.

A very wonderful and strange Miracle of God showed upon a Dutchman of the age
of 23 years, which was possessed of ten Devils, and was by Gods mighty
providence dispossessed of them again, the 27 of January last past, 1572.
Unto this the Mayor of Maidstone, with diverse of his Brethren subscribed,
chiefly by the persuasion of Nicasius Vander-Sceure, the Minister of the
Dutch-Church there, John Stikelbow, whom (as it is there said) God made the
instrument to cast out the Devils, and four other credible persons of the
Dutch-Church. The history is so strange, and so cunningly performed, that had
not his knavery afterward brought him into suspicion, he should have gone away
unsuspected of this fraud. A great many other such miracles have been lately
Printed, whereof diverse have been bewrayed; all the residue doubtless, if trial
had been made, would have been found like unto these. But some are more finely
handled then othersome. Some have more advantage by the simplicity of the
audience; some by the majesty and countenance of the confederates: as namely,
that cosening of the holy Maid of Kent. Some escape utterly unsuspected. Some
are prevented by death, so as that way their examination is untaken. Some are
weakly examined: but the most part are so reverenced, as they which suspect
them, are rather called to their answers, then the others.

CHAP. IV.
Of the great Oracle of Apollo the Pythonist, and how men of all sorts have
been deceived, and that even the Apostles have mistaken the nature of Spirits,
with an unanswerable argument, that Spirits can take no shapes.

WIth this kind of Witchcraft, Apollo and his Oracles abused and cosened the
whole World: which Idol was so famous, that I need not stand long in the
description thereof. The Princes and Monarchs of the earth reposed no small
confidence therein: the Priests, which lived thereupon, were so cunning, as
they also overtook almost all the godly and learned men of that age; partly
with their doubtful answers, as that which was made unto Pyrrhus, in these
words, Aio te Aeacida Romanos vincere posse; The Amphibologies of Oracles.
and to Croesus his Ambassadors, in these words, Si Croesus arma Persis
inferat, magnum Imperium evertet; and otherwise thus, Croesus Halin penetrans,
magnam subvertet opum vim: or thus, Croesus perdet Halin, transgressus plurima
regna, etc. partly through confederacy, whereby they knew men's errands ere they
came; and partly by cunning, as promising victory upon the sacrificing of some
person of such account, as victory should rather be neglected, then the murder
accomplished. And if it were, yet should there be such conditions annexed
thereunto, The subtilty of our Oracles.
as always remained unto them a starting hole, and matter enough to cavil
upon, as that the party sacrificed must be a Virgin, no bastard, etc.
Furthermore, of two things only proposed, and where yea or nay only does answer
the question, it is an even lay, that an Idiot shall conjecture right: So as,
if things fell out contrary, the fault was always in the Interpreter, and not
in the Oracle or the Prophet. But what marvel (I say) though the multitude and
common people have been abused herein, since Lawyers, Philosophers, Physicians,
Astronomers, Divines, General Councels, and Princes, have with great negligence
and ignorance been deceived and seduced hereby, as swallowing up and devouring
an inveterate opinion, received of their elders, without due examination of the
circumstance?

Howbeit, the godly and learned Fathers (as it appears) have always had a
special care and respect, that they attributed not unto God such devilish
devices; but referred them to him who indeed is the inventer and author, though
not the personal executioner, in manner and form as they supposed: so as the
matter of faith was not thereby by them impeached. But who can assure himself
not to be deceived in matters concerning Spirits, when the Apostles themselves
were so far from knowing them, as even after the Resurrection of Christ, John
20.9.
having heard him preach and expound the Scriptures, all his life time, they
showed themselves not only ignorant therein, but also to have misconceived
thereof? Did not the Apostle Thomas think that Christ himself himself had been
a Spirit, until Christ told him plainly, that a Spirit was no such creature as
had flesh and bones, the which (he said) Thomas might see to be in him? And for
the further certifying and satisfying of his mind, he commended unto him his
hands to be seen, and his sides to be felt. Thomas, if the answer be true that
some make hereunto, to wit, that Spirits take forms and shapes of bodies at
their pleasure, might have answered Christ, and remaining unsatisfied might
have said, Oh Sir, what do you tell me that Spirits have no flesh and bones?
Why they can take shapes and forms, and so perchance have you done. Which
argument all the Witchmongers in the World shall never he able to answer.

Some of them that maintain the Creation, the Transformation, the
Transportation, and Transubstantiation of Witches, object that Spirits are not
palpable, though visible, and answer the place by me before cited: so as the
feeling and not the seeing should satisfy Thomas. But he that shall well weigh
the text and the circumstances thereof, shall perceive, that the fault of
Thomas his incredulity was secondly bewrayed, and condemned, in that he would
not trust his own eyes, nor the view taken by his fellow-Apostles, who might
have been thought too credulous in this case, John 20.29.
if Spirits could take shapes at their pleasure. Jesus says to him, because
thou have seen (and not, because thou have felt) thou believe. Item, he
says, Blessed are they that believe and see not, (and not, they that believe
and feel not.) Whereby he notes, that our corporal eyes may discern betwixt a
Spirit and a natural body; reproving him, because he so much relied upon his
external senses, in cases where faith should have prevailed; and here, in a
matter of faith revealed in the Word, would not credit the miracle which was
exhibited unto him in a most natural and sensible sort.

Eras. fol. 62.
Howbeit, Erastus says, and so does Hyperius, Hemingius, Danaeus, M. Mal.
Bodin, etc. that evil Spirits eat, drink, and keep company with men, and that
they can take palpable forms of bodies, producing examples thereof, to wit,
Spectrum Germanicum seu Augustanum, and the Angel whose feet Lot washed; as
though because God can indue his Messengers with bodies at his pleasure,
therefore the Devil and every Spirit can do the like. How the eleven Apostles
were in this case deceived, Luke 24.37. Mark 16.14 Mat. 14.26. Chap. 20. and
16.11.
appears in Luke 24. and in Mark 16. and also in Matthew. 14. where the
Apostles and Disciples were all deceived, taking Christ to be a Spirit, when he
walked on the Sea. And why might not they be deceived herein, as well as in
that they thought Christ had spoken of a temporal Kingdom, when he preached of
the Kingdom of Heaven? Which thing they also much misconceived; as likewise
when he did bid them beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, they understood
that he spoke of material bread.

CHAP. V.
Why Apollo was called Pytho, whereof those Witches were called Pythonists:
Gregory his Letter to the Devil.

BUt to return to our Oracle of Apollo at Delphos, who was called Pytho, for
that Apollo slew a Serpent so called, whereof the Pythonists take their name: I
pray you consider well of this tale, which I will truly rehearse out of the
Ecclesiastical history, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 25.
written by Eusebius, wherein you shall see the absurdity of the opinion, the
cosenages of these Oracles, and the deceived mind or vain opinion of so great a
Doctor bewrayed and deciphered altogether as follows.

Gregory Neocaesariensis in his journey and way to pass over the Alps, came to
the Temple of Apollo; where Apollo's Priest living richly upon the revenues and
benefit proceeding from that Idol, did give great entertainment unto Gregory,
and made him good cheer: But after Gregory was gone, Apollo waxed dumb, so as
the Priests gains decayed; for the Idol growing into contempt, the Pilgrimage
ceased. The Spirit taking compassion on the Priests case, and upon his grief of
mind in this behalf, appeared unto him, and told him flatly, that his late
guest Gregory was the cause of all his misery: For (says the Devil) he has
banished me, so that I cannot return without a special license or pasport from
him. It was no need to bid the Priest make haste, for immediately he took
post-horse, and galloped after Gregory, till at length he overtook him, and
then expostulated with him for his discourtesie proffered in recompense of his
good cheer; and said, that if he would not be so good unto him, as to write his
Letter to the Devil in his behalf, he should be utterly undone: To be short,
his importunity was such, that he obtained of Gregory his Letter to the Devil,
who wrote unto him in manner and form following, word for word, Permitto tibi
redire in locum tuum, and agere qua consuevisti: which is in English, I am
content thou return into thy place, and do as thou wast wont. Immediately upon
the receipt of this Letter, the Idol spoke as before. And here is to be noted,
Note the cosenage of Oracles.
that as well in this, as in the execution of all their other Oracles and
Cosenages, the answers were never given Ex tempore, or in that day wherein the
question was demanded; because, forsooth, they expected a Vision (as they said)
to be given the night following, whereby the cosenage might the more easily be
wrought.

CHAP. VI.
Apollo, who was called Pytho, compared to the Rood of Grace: Gregory's Letter
to the Devil confuted.

WHat need many words to confute this fable? For if Gregory had been an honest
man, he would never have willingly permitted, that the people should have been
further Cosened with such a lying spirit; or if he had been half so holy as
Eusebius makes him, he would not have consented or yielded to so lewd a
request of the Priest, nor have written such an impious Letter, no not though
good might have come thereof: And therefore as well by the impossibility and
folly contained therein, as of the impiety (whereof I dare excuse Gregory) you
may perceive it to be a lie. Me thinks they which still maintain that the Devil
made answer in the Idol of Apollo, etc. may have sufficient persuasion to
revoke their erroneous opinions, in that it appears in record, that such men
as were skilful in Augury, did take upon them to give Oracles at Delphos in the
place of Apollo; of which number Tisanius the son of Antiochus was one: But
vain is the answer of Idols. Our Rood of grace, Zach. 10.
with the help of little S. Rumbal, was not inferior to the Idol of Apollo; for
these could not work eternal miracles, but manifest the internal thoughts of
the heart, I believe with more lively show, both of humanity and also of
Divinity, then the other. As, if you read M. Lamberts book of the perambulation
of Kent, it shall partly appear. W. Lambert in titulo Boxley.
But if you talk with them that have been beholders thereof, you will be
satisfied herein. And yet in the blind time of Popery, no man might under pain
or damnation, nor without danger of death, suspect the fraud. Nay, what Papists
will yet confess they were Idols, though the wiers that made their eyes gogle,
the pins that fastened them to the posts to make them seem heavy, were seen and
burnt together with the Images themselves, the knavery of the Priests bewrayed,
and every circumstance thereof detected and manifested?

CHAP. VII.
How diverse great Clerks and good Authors have been abused in this matter of
spirits through false reports, and by means of their credulity have published
lies, which are confuted by Aristotle and the Scriptures.

PLutarch, Livy, and Valerius Maximus, with many other grave Authors, being
abused with false reports, write, that in times past beasts spoke, and that
Images could have spoken and wept, and did let fall drops of blood, yea and
could walk from place to place; which they say was done by procreation of
spirits. But I rather think with Aristotle, that it was brought to pass,
Hominum and sacerdotum deceptionibus, to wit, by the cosening art of crafty
Knaves and Priests. And therefore let us follow Isaiah's advice, who says,
When they shall say unto you, Isa. 8.19.
enquire of them that have a spirit of Divination, and at the Soothsayers,
which whisper and mumble in your ears to deceive you, etc. enquire at your own
God, etc. And so let us do. And here you see they are such as run into corners,
and cosen the people with lies, etc. for if they could do as they say, they
could not aptly be called liars, neither need they to go into corners to
whisper, etc.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Witch of Endor, and whether she accomplished the raising of Samuel
truly, or by deceit; the opinion of some Divines hereupon.

1 Samuel 28.
THe Woman of Endor is comprised under this word Ob; for she is called
Pythonissa. It is written in 1 Samuel 28. that she raised up Samuel from death;
and the other words of the text are strongly placed, to enforce his very
resurrection. The mind and opinion of Jesus Sirach evidently appears to be,
that Samuel in person was raised out from his grave, as if you read Eccl.
46.19, 20. you shall plainly perceive. Howbeit, he disputes not there, whether
the story be true or false, but only cites certain verses of 1 Samuel 28. simply
according to the letter, persuading to manners and the imitation of our
virtuous predecessors, and repeating the examples of diverse excellent men,
namely, of Samuel; even as the text it self urges the matter, according to the
deceived mind and imagination of Saul, and his Servants: And therefore in
truth, Sirach spoke there according to the opinion of Saul, which so supposed;
otherwise it is neither Heresy nor Treason to say he was deceived.

He that weighs well that place, and looks it advisedly, shall see that
Samuel was not raised from the dead, but that it was an illusion or cosenage
practiced by the Witch: Sap. 3. Psalm. 92. and 97. Chrysostom. Hom. 21. in Matthew.
Luke 16.
For the souls of the righteous are in the hands of God: according to that
which Chrysostom says, Souls in a certain place expecting judgment, and
cannot remove from thence. Neither is it Gods will, that the living should be
taught by the dead. Which things are confirmed and approved by the example of
Lazarus and Dives; where it appears, according to Deuteronomy. 18. that he will not
have the living taught by the dead, but will have us stick to his Word, wherein
his will and testament is declared. Indeed Lyra and Dionysius incline greatly
to the latter. And Lyra says, That as when Balaam would have raised a Devil,
God interposed himself; so did he in this case bring up Samuel, when the Witch
would have raised her Devil: which is a probable interpretation. But yet they
dare not stand to that opinion, August. lib. quae vet. and novi. Testam.
quaest. 27. item, part. 2. cap. 26. item, quaest. 5. nec mirum. ad Simplician.
li. 2.93. ad Dulcitium. quae. 6. item, lib. 2 de doct. Chri. Deuteronomy. 18. Exodus 20.
least they should impeach S. Augustines credit, who, they confess, remained in
judgment and opinion, without contradiction of the Church, that Samuel was not
raised; for he says directly, That Samuel himself was not called up. And
indeed, if he were raised, it was either willingly, or per force; if it were
willingly, his sin had been equal with the Witches.

And Peter Martyr, me thinks, says more to the purpose, in these words, to
wit, This must have been done by Gods good will, or per force of art magic: it
could not be done by his good will, because he forbad it; nor by art, because
Witches have no power over the godly. Where it is answered by some, that the
commandment was only to prohibit the Jews to ask counsel of the dead, and so
no fault in Samuel to give counsel: We may as well excuse our Neighbors wife,
for consenting to our filthy desires, because it is only written in the
Decalogue, Thou shall not desire thy neighbors wife. But, indeed, Samuel was
directly forbidden to answer Saul before he dyed; and therefore it was not
likely that God would appoint him when he was dead, to do it.

CHAP. IX.
That Samuel was not raised indeed, and how Bodin and all Papists dote herein,
and that souls cannot be raised by Witchcraft.

FUrthermore, it is not likely that God would answer Saul by dead Samuel, when
he would not answer him by living Samuel; and most unlikely of all, that God
would answer him by a Devil, that denied to do it by a Prophet. That he was not
brought up per force, the whole course of the Scripture witnesses, and
proves; as also our own reason may give us to understand. For what quiet rest
could the souls of the elect enjoy or possess in Abraham's bosom, if they were
to be plucked from thence at a Witches call and commandment? But so should the
Devil have power in heaven, where he is unworthy to have any place himself, and
therefore unmeet to command others.

Many other of the Fathers are flatly against the raising up of Samuel; namely,
Tertullian in his book De anima: Justin Martyr, In explicatione, quae. 25.
Rabanus, In epistolis ad Bonos. Abat. Origin, In historia de Bileamo, etc. Some
other dote exceedingly herein, as namely, Bodin and all Papists in general;
also Rabbi Sedias Hajas, and also all the Hebrews, saving R. David Kimchi,
which is the best writer of all the Rabbis; though never a good of them all.
But Bodin, J. Bod. lib. de dam. 2. cap. 3. 1 Samuel 28. 1 Cor. 5. J. Martyr in
colloquio cum Triphone Judaeo.

Lact. lib. 7. c. 13.


in maintenance thereof, falls into many absurdities, proving by the small
faults that Saul had committed, that he was an elect; for the greatest matter,
says he, laid unto his charge, is the reserving of the Amalekites cattle, etc.
He was an elect, etc. confirming his opinion with many ridiculous fables, and
with this argument, to wit, his fault was too little to deserve damnation; for
Paul would not have the incestuous man punished too sore, that his soul might
be saved. Justin Martyr in another place was not only deceived in the actual
raising up of Samuels soul, but affirmed, that all the souls of the Prophets
and just men are subject to the power of Witches. And yet were the Heathen much
more fond herein, who (as Lactantius affirms) boasted that they could call up
the souls of the dead, and yet did think that their souls dyed with their
bodies. Whereby is to be seens how always the world has been abused in the
matters of Witchcraft and Conjuration. The Necromancers affirm, that the spirit
of any man may be called up, or recalled (as they term it) before one year be
past, after their departure from the body: Which C. Agrippa, in his book De
occulta Philosophia says, may be done by certain natural forces and bonds. And
therefore corpses in times past were accompanied and watched with lights,
sprinkled with holy water, perfumed with incense, and purged with prayer all
the while they were above ground: otherwise the Serpent (as the Masters of the
Hebrews say) would devour them, as the food appointed him by God, Genesis 3.
alleging also this place, We shall not all sleep, 1 Cor. 15.51.
but we shall be changed; because many shall remain for perpetual meat to the
Serpent: whereupon rises the contention between him and Michael, Jud. verse. 9.
concerning the body of Moses, wherein Scripture is alleged. I confess that
Augustine, and the residue of the Doctors, that deny the raising of Samuel,
conclude, that the Devil was fetched up in his likeness; from whose opinions
(with reverence) I hope I may dissent.

CHAP. X.
That neither the Devil nor Samuel was raised, but that it was a mere cosenage,
according to the guise of our Pythonists.

AGain, if the Devil appeared, and not Samuel, why is it said in Eccl. that he
slept? for the Devil neither sleeps nor dies. But in truth we may gather,
that it was neither the Devil in person, nor Samuel: but a circumstance is here
described according to the deceived opinion and imagination of Saul. Howbeit
Augustine says, that both these sides may easily be defended. But we shall not
need to fetch an exposition so far off: for indeed (me thinks) it is Long
petita; nor to descend so low as hell, to fetch up a Devil to expound this
place. Pompanacius lib. de incant. cap. 2.
For it is ridiculous (as Pompanacius says) to leave manifest things, and such
as by natural reason may be proved, to seek unknown things, which by no
likelihood can be conceived, nor tried by any rule of reason. But insomuch as
we have liberty by S. Augustines rule, in such places of Scripture as seem to
contain either contrariety or absurdity, to vary from the letter, and to make a
godly construction agreeable to the word; let us confess that Samuel was not
raised, for that were repugnant to the word, and see whether this illusion may
not be contrived by the art and cunning of the Woman, without any of these
supernatural devices; for I could cite a hundred Papistical and cosening
practices, as difficult as this, and as cleanly handled. And it is to be surely
thought, if it had been a Devil, the text would have noted it in some place of
the story, J. Bod. lib. de dam. 2. cap. 3.
as it does not: But Bodin helps me exceedingly in this point, wherein he
forsakes, he says, Augustine, Tertullian, and D. Kimchi who say it was the
Devil that was raised up; which, says Bodin, could not be; for that in the
same communication between Saul and Samuel, the name of Jehovah is five times
repeated, of which name the Devil cannot abide the hearing.

CHAP. XI.
The objection of the Witchmongers concerning this place fully answered, and
what circumstances are to be considered for the understanding of this story,
which is plainly opened from the beginning of 1 Samuel 28. to ver. 12.

WHere such a supernatural miracle is wrought, no doubt it is a testimony of
truth, P. Martyr in comment. in 1 Samuel 28.9.
as Peter Martyr affirms. And in this case it should have been a witness of
lies; for, says he, a matter of such weight cannot be attributed to the Devil,
but it is the mighty power of God that does accomplish it. And if it lay in a
Witches power to call up a Devil; yet it lies not in a Witches power to work
such miracles; Isa. 42.8.
for, God will not give his power and glory to any creature. To understand this
place, we must diligently examine the circumstance thereof: It was well known,
that Saul, before he resorted to the Witch, was in despair of the mercies and
goodness of God; partly for that Samuel told him long before, that he should be
overthrown, and David should have his place; and partly, because God before had
refused to answer him, either by Samuel when he lived, or by any other Prophet,
or by Urim or Thummim, etc. And if you desire to see this matter discussed, 1 Samuel 28.
turn to 1 Samuel 28. and confer my words therewith.

Verse. 7.
Saul seeing the host of the Philistines come upon him, which thing could not
be unknown to all the people, fainted, because he saw their strength, and his
own weakness, and specially that he was forsaken: so as being now strait of
mind, desperate, and a very fool, he goes to certain of his servants that saw
in what taking he was, and asked them for a Woman that had a familiar Spirit,
and they told him by and by, that there dwelt one at Endor. By the way you
shall understand, that both Saul and his Servants, meant such a one as could by
her Spirit raise up Samuel, or any other that was dead and buried: Wherein you
see they were deceived, though it were true, that she took upon her so to do.
To what use then served her familiar spirit, which you conceive she had,
because Saul's servants said so? Surely, as they were deceived and abused in
part, so doubtless were they in the rest; for to what purpose, I say, should
her familiar serve, if not for such intents as they reported, and she
undertook? I think you will grant, that Saul's men never saw her familiar; for I
never heard any yet of credit say, that he was so much in the Witches favor,
as to see her Devil; although indeed we read amongst the Popish trumpery, S.
Cicilies familiar.
that S. Cicilie had an Angel to her familiar, and that she could show him to
whom she would, and that she might ask and have what she or her friend list; as
appears in the lesson read in the Popish Church on S. Cicilies day. Well, I
perceive the Woman of Endors spirit was a counterfeit, and kept belike at her
closet at Endor, or in the bottle, with mother Alices Devil at Westwell, and
are now bewrayed and fled together to Limbo patrum, etc. And though Saul were
bewitched and blinded in the matter, yet doubtless a wise man would have
perchance espied her knavery. Me thinks Saul was brought to this Witch, Dr.
Burcot. Feats.
much after the manner that Doctor Burcot was brought to Feats, who sold master
Doctor a familiar, whereby he thought to have wrought miracles, or rather to
have gained good store of money. This fellow by the name of Feats was a Jugler,
by the name of Hills a Witch or Conjurer, every way a Cosener; his qualities
and feats were to me, and many others, well known and detected: And yet the
opinion conceived of him, was most strange and wonderful, even with such and in
such cases, as it grieveth me to think of; specially because his knavery and
cosenage reached to the shedding of innocent blood. But now forsooth, Saul
covers himself with a net; 1 Samuel 28.8.
and because he would not be known, he put on other garments: but to bring that
matter to pass, he must have been cut shorter by the head and soulders, Ibid.
10.23.
for by so much he was higher then any of the people: and therefore whatsoever
face the crafty queen did set upon it, she knew him well enough. And for
further proof thereof, you may understand, that the Princes of the Jews were
much conversant with the people. And it appears manifestly, that Saul dwelt
very near to Endor, so as she should the rather know him; for in the evening he
went from his lodging unto her house: neither should it seem that she was gone
to bed when he came; but because that may be uncertain, you may see in the
process of the text, That in a piece of the night he went from his house to
hers, Ibid. 28.8.
and with much ado entreated her to consent to his request. She finished her
conjuration, so as both Saul's part, the Witches part, and also Samuels part was
played; and after the solemnization thereof, a Calf was killed, a batch of
Bread baked, and a supper made ready and eaten up; and after all this, he went
home the same night; and had need so to do, for he had some business the next
day. By these and many other circumstances, it may be gathered, that she
dissembled, in saying, she knew him not, and consequently counterfeited, and
made a fool of him in all the rest.

It appears there, that he, with a couple of his men, went to her by night,
and said, Ibidem.
Conjecture unto me by thy familiar spirit, and bring me up whom I shall name
unto thee. The godly-learned know, that this was not in the power of the Witch
of Endor, but in the God of heaven only to accomplish. Howbeit, Saul was
bewitched so to suppose; and yet is he more simple that will be overtaken with
the devises of our old Witches, which are produced to resemble her. And why
should we think, that God would rather permit the Witch to raise Samuel, then
that Dives could obtain Lazarus to come out of Abraham's bosom, upon more
likely and more reasonable conditions? Well now does this strumpet (according
to the guise of our cosening Witches and Conjurers) make the matter strange
unto Saul, saying, that he came to her in a snare, etc. 1 Samuel 28.9.
But Witches seldom make this objection, saving when they mistrust that he
which comes to them will epsy their Juggling: for otherwise, where the
Witchmonger is simple and easy to be abused, the Witch will be as easy to be
entreated, and nothing dangerous of her cunning; as you see this Witch was soon
persuaded, notwithstanding that objection, because she perceived and saw that
Saul was afraid and out of his wits: 1 Samuel 28.11.
And therefore she said unto him, Whom shall I raise up? As though she could
have brougt unto him Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob; who cannot hear us, Isa. 83.15,
16.
therefore cannot rise at our call: For it is written, Look thou down from
heaven and behold us, etc. as for Abraham he is ignorant of us, and Israel
knows us not.

CHAP. XII.
1 Samuel 28.12, 13, 14. expounded, wherein is showed, That Saul was cosened and
abused by the Witch; and that Samuel was not raised, is proved by the Witches
own talk.

THe manner and circumstance of their communion, or of her conjuration, is not
verbatim set down and expressed in the text; but the effect thereof briefly
touched: yet will I show you the common order of their conjuration, The manner
of the Witch of Endors cosening of Saul.
and specially of hers at this time used. When Saul had told her, that he would
have Samuel brought up to him, she departed from his presence into her Closet,
where doubtless she had had her familiar, to wit, some lewd crafty Priest, and
made Saul stand at the door like a fool (as it were with his finger in a hole)
to hear the cosening answers, but not to see the cosening handling thereof, and
the counterfeiting of the matter: And so goes she to work, using ordinary
words of Conjuration, of which there are sundry varieties and forms (whereof I
shall have occasion to repeat some in another place) as you see the Juglers
(which be inferior Conjurors) speak certain strange words of course, to lead
away the eye from espying the manner of their conveyance, whilst they may
induce the mind to conceive and suppose that he deals with Spirits, saying,
Hay, fortune fury, nunque credo, pass, pass, when come you sir! So belike
after many such words spoken, she said to her self, Lo now the matter is
brought to pass, for I see wonderful things: So as Saul hearing these words,
longed to know all, and asked her what she saw: whereby you may know that Saul
saw nothing, 1 Samuel 28.13.
but stood without like a mome, whilst she played her part in her closet, as
may most evidently appear by the 21 ver. of this Chap. where it is said, Verse.
21.
Then the woman came out unto Saul. Howbeit, a little before she cunningly
counterfeited that she saw Samuel, and thereby knew that it was Saul that was
come unto her: whereby all the world may perceive the cosening, and her
dissimulation; for by that which has been before said, it must needs be that
she knew him. And (I pray you) why should she not have suspected as well him to
be Saul before, when in express words he required her to bring unto him Samuel,
as now when Samuel appeared unto her?

Well, to the question before proposed by Saul, she answers and lies, that
she saw Angels or Gods ascending up out of the earth. Verse. 13.
Then proceeds she with her enchanting phrases and words of course, so as
thereby Saul gathers and supposes that she has raised a man; for otherwise
his question depends not upon any thing before spoken: For when she has
said, I saw Angels ascending, etc. the next word he says is, What fashion is
he of? which (I say) hangs not upon her last expressed words: And to this she
answered not directly, that it was Samuel; but that it was an old man lapped in
a mantle: as though she knew not him that was the most notorious man in Israel,
that had been her neighbor by the space of many years, and upon whom (while he
lived) every eye was fixed, and whom also she knew within less then a quarter
of an hour before; Verse. 12.
as by whose means also she came acquainted with Saul. Read the text and see.

But she describes his personage, and the apparel which he did usually wear
when he lived; which if they were both buried together, were consumed and
rotten, or devoured with worms before that time. Belike he had a new mantle
made him in heaven; and yet they say Tailors are skanty there, for that their
consciences are so large here. In this Country men give away their garments
when they dye; if Samuel had so done, he could not have borrowed it again; for,
of likelihood, it would have been worn out in that space, except the donor had
been a better husband than I; for the testator was dead (as it is supposed) two
years before.

CHAP. XIII.
The residue of 1 Samuel 28. expounded; wherein is declared, how cunningly this
Witch brought Saul resolutely to believe that she raised Samuel: what words are
used to color the cosenage, and how all might also be wrought by Ventriloquie.

NOw comes in Samuel to play his part; but I am persuaded it was performed, in
the person of the Witch her self, or of her confederate. He says to Saul, Why
have thou disquieted me, to bring up? 1 Samuel 28.15. ibidem.
As though without guile or packing, it had been Samuel himself. Saul answered,
that he was in great distress; for the Philistines made war upon him. Whereby
the Witch, or her confederate Priest might easily conjecture that his heart
failed, and direct the Oracle or Prophecy accordingly: especially,
understanding by his present talk, and also by former Prophesies and doings
that were past, that God had forsaken him, and that his people were declining
from him. For when Jonathan (a little before) overthrew the Philistines, being
thirty thousand chariots, 1 Samuel 14.5, 15.
and six thousand horsemen: Saul could not assemble above six hundred
soldiers. Then said Samuel (which some suppose was Satan, and as I think, was
the Witch, with a confederate; for what need so far fetches as to fetch a Devil
supernaturally out of hell, when the illusion may be here by natural means
decyphered? And if you note the words well, you shall perceive the phrase not
to come out of a spiritual mouth of a Devil; but from a lying corporal tongue
of a Cosener, that cares neither for God nor the Devil; from whence issues
such advice and communication, as greatly disagreeth from Satan's nature and
purpose.) For thus (I say) the said Samuel speaks, Wherefore do thou asks
of me, seeing the Lord is gone from thee, and is thine enemy? Even the Lord
has done unto him as he spoke by my hands; 1 Samuel 28.16, 17.

and 15.28.


for the Lord will rent thy Kingdom out of thine hand, and give it to thy
neighbor David; because thou obeyedst not the voice of the Lord, etc. This (I
say) is no phrase of a Devil, but of a Cosener, which knew before what Samuel
had Prophesied concerning Saul's destruction. For it is the Devils condition to
allure the people unto wickedness, and not in this sort to admonish, warn, and
rebuke them from evil. And the Popish writers confess, That the Devil would
have been gone at the first naming of God. If it be said, That it was at God's
special commandment and will, that Samuel or the Devil should be raised, to
propound this admonition, to the profit of all posterity. I answer, that then
he would rather have done it by some of his living Prophets, and that Satan had
not been so fit an instrument for that purpose. After this falls the Witch (I
would say Samuel) into the vein of Prophesying, and speaks to Saul on this
wise, The Lord will rent thy Kingdom out of thine hand, and give it to thy
neighbor David; 1 Samuel 28.17, 18, 19.
because thou obeyedst not the voice of the Lord, nor executedst his fierce
wrath upon the Amalekites, therefore has the Lord done this unto thee this
day. Moreover, the Lord will deliver thee into the hands of the Philistines,
and to morrow shall thou and thy sons be with me, and the Lord shall give the
host of Israel into the hands of the Philistines. What could Samuel have said
more?

Me thinks the Devil would have used another order, encouraging Saul rather
than rebuking him for his evil. The Devil is craftier than to leave such an
admonition to all posterities, as should be prejudicial unto his Kingdom, and
also be void of all impiety. But so divine a sentence makes much for the
maintenance of the Witches credit, and to the advancement of her gains.
Howbeit, concerning the verity of this Prophecy, there be many disputable
questions: First, Whether the battle were fought the next day? Secondly,
Whether all his sons were killed with him? Item, Whether they went to heaven or
hell together; as being with Samuel, they must be in heaven; and being with
Satan, they must be in hell. 2 Reg. 4.
But although every part of this Prophecy were false, as that all his sons
were not slain ( Ishbosheth living and reigning in Israel two years after Saul's
death) and that the battle was not on the morrow, and that wicked Saul, after
that he had killed himself, was not with good Samuel, yet this Witch did give a
shrewd guess to the sequel: Which, whether it were true or false, pertains not
to my purpose, and therefore I will omit it. But as touching the opinion of
them that say it was the Devil, because that such things came to pass; I would
fain know of them where they learn that Devils foreknow things to come? If they
say, he guesseth only upon probabilities, the Witch may also do the like. But
here I may not forget the Decrees, Canon. 26. quaest. c. 5. nec mirum.
which conclude, That Samuel appeared not unto Saul; but that the
Historiographer set forth Saul's mind and Samuels estate, and certain things
that were said and seen, omitting whether they were true or false: and further,
that it were a great offense for a man to believe the bare words of the story.
And if this exposition like you not, I can easily frame my self to the opinion
of some of great learning expounding this place, and that with great
probability, Right Ventriloquie.
in this sort, to wit, that this Pythonist being Ventriloqua, that is,
speaking, as it were, from the bottom of her belly, did cast her self into a
trance, and so abused Saul, answering to Saul in Samuels name, in her
counterfeit hollow voice: as the Wench of Westwel spoke, whose history I have
rehearsed before at large, in page 71, 72. and this is right Ventriloquie.

CHAP. XIV.
Opinions of some learned men, that Samuel was indeed raised, not by the
Witches art or Power, but by the special miracle of God: that there are no such
visions in these our days; and that our Witches cannot do the like.

AJas and Sadajas write, That when the Woman saw the miracle indeed, and more
then she looked for, or was wont to do, she began to cry out, that this was a
vision indeed, and a true one, not done by her art, but by the power of God.
Which exposition is far more probable than our late writers judgments
hereupon, and agrees with the exposition of diverse good Divines. Gelasius
says, It was the very spirit of Samuel: and where he suffered himself to be
worshipped, it was but in civil salutation and courtesy: and that God did
interpose Samuel, as he did Elias to the messenger of Ochosias, when he sent to
Beelzebub the God of Acharon. J. Bod and L. Vairus differ herein.
And here is to be noted, that the Witchmongers are set up in this point: for
the Papists say, that it cannot be a Devil, because Jehovah is thrice or five
times named in the story. Upon this piece of Scripture, arguments are daily
devised, to prove and maintain the miraculous actions of Witchcraft, and the
raising of the dead by Conjurations, And yet, if it were true, that Samuel
himself were raised, or the Devil in his likeness; and that the Witch of Endor
by her art and cunning did it, etc. it makes rather to the disproof than to
the proof of our Witches, which can neither do that kind of miracle, or any
other, in any such place or company, where their juggling and cosenage may be
seen and laid open. A bold, discreet and faithful challenge.
And I challenge them all (even upon the adventure of my life) to show one
piece of a Miracle, such as Christ did truly, or such as they suppose this
Witch did diabolically, be it not with art nor confederacy, whereby some color
thereof may be made; neither are there any such visions in these days showed.

Heretofore God did send his visible Angels to men; but now we hear not of such
apparitions, neither are they necessary. Indeed it pleased God heretofore, by
the hand of Moses, and his Prophets, and specially by his Son Christ and his
Apostles, to work great Miracles for the establishing of the faith; but now,
whatsoever is necessary for our salvation, is contained in the Word of God: our
faith is already confirmed, and our Church established by Miracles; so as now
to seek for them is a point of Infidelity. Which the Papists (if you note it)
are greatly touched withal, as in their lying Legends appears. But in truth
their Miracles are knaveries most commonly, and specially of Priests, whereof I
could cite a thousand. If you read the story of Bell and the Dragon, you shall
find a cosening Miracle of some antiquity. If you will see newer devices, read
Wierus, Cardanus, Baleus, and specially Lavaterus, etc. There have been some At
Canterbury by R. Lee Esquire and others, Anno 1573. At Rye by Mr. Maymor and
others, Anno 1577.
walking spirits in these parts, so conjured, not long since, as afterward
they little delighted to make any more apparitions.

CHAP. XV.
Of vain Apparitions: how people have been brought to fear Bugs; which is
partly reformed by the Preaching of the Gospel: the true effect of Christ's
Miracles.

BUt certainly, some one knave in a white sheet has cosened and abused many
thousands that way; specially when Robin Good Fellow kept such a coil in the
Country. But you shall understand, that these Bugs specially are spyed and
feared of sick folk, children, women, and cowards, which through weakness of
mind and body, are shaken with vain dreams and continual fear. The Scythians,
being a stout and a warlike Nation (as diverse writers report) never see any
vain sights, or spirits. It is a common saying, A Lion fears no Bugs. J.
Wier. l. ^.3. c. 8. Theodor. Biz^ntius. Lavit. de. spect. Carda^. de var. rerum.
But in our childhood, our Mothers maids have so terrified us with an ugly
Devil having horns on his head, fire in his mouth, and a tail in his breech,
eyes like a basin, fangs like a Dog, claws like a Bear, askin like a Niger, and
a voice roaring like a Lion, whereby we start and are afraid when we hear one
cry Bough: and they have so frayed us with Bul-beggers, Spirits, Witches,
Urchens, Elves, Hags, Fairies, Satyrs, Pans, Faunes, Sylens, Kit with the
canstick, Tritons, Centaures, Dwarfes, Giants, Imps, Calcars, Conjurers,
Nymphs, Changelings, Incubus, Robin Goodfellow, the Spoorn, the Mare, the man
in the Oak, the Hell-wain, the firedrake, the Puckle, Tom-thombe, Hob-goblin,
Tom-tumbler, Boneless, and such other Bugs, that we are afraid of our own
shadows: insomuch that some never fear the Devil, but in a dark night; and then
a polled Sheep is a perilous beast, and many times is taken for our Fathers
soul, specially in a Churchyard, where a right hardy man heretofore scant durst
pass by night, but his hair would stand upright. For right grave writers
report, Peucer, etc. Lavat. de spect.
that spirits most often and specially take the shape of women appearing to
Monks, etc. and of Beasts, Dogs, Swine, Horses, Goats, Cats, Hares; of Fowls,
as Crows, night Owls, and shreek Owls; but they delight most in the likeness
of Snakes and Dragons. Well, thanks be to God, this wretched and cowardly
infidelity, since the Preaching of the Gospel, is in part forgotten: and
doubtless, the rest of those illusions will in short time (by Gods grace) be
detected and vanish away.

Diverse writers report, that in Germany, since Luthers time, Cardan. de var.
rerum.

J. Wier. de praest. daemo. etc. Athanas. de. humanitate verbi.


Spirits and Devils have not personally appeared, as in times past they were
wont to do. This argument is taken in hand or the ancient Fathers, to prove the
determination and ceasing of Oracles. For in times past (says Athanasius)
Devils in vain shapes did intricate men with their illusions, hiding themselves
in waters, stones, woods, etc. But now, that the word of God has appeared,
those sights, Spirits and mockeries of Images are ceased. Truly, if all such
Oracles, as that of Apollo, etc. (before the coming of Christ) had been true,
and done according to the report, which has been brought through diverse ages,
and from far Countries unto us, without Priestly fraud or guil, or as the
spirits of Prophecy, and working of Miracles, had been inserted into a Idol,
as has been supposed; yet we Christians may conceive, that Christ's coming was
not so fruitless and prejudicial in this point unto us, as to take away his
spirit of Prophecy and Divination from out of the mouth of his elect people,
and good Prophets, giving no answer of any thing to come by them, nor by Urim
nor Thummim, as he was wont, etc. And yet to leave the Devil in the mouth of a
Witch, or an Idol to Prophecy or work Miracles, etc. to the hinderance of his
glorious Gospel, to the discountenance of his Church, and to the furtherance of
Infidelity and false religion; whereas the working of Miracles was the only,
The true end of Miracles.
or at least, the most special means that moved men to believe in Christ, as
appears in sundry places of the Gospel, and specially in John, John 2.23.
where it is written, That a great multitude followed him, because they saw his
Miracles which he did, Acts 2.22. John 5.
etc. Nay, is it not written, That Jesus was approved by God among the Jews,
with miracles, wonders and signs? etc. And yet, if we confer the Miracles
wrought by Christ, and those that are imputed to Witches; Witches miracles
shall appear more common, and nothing inferior unto his.

CHAP. XVI.
Witches Miracles compared to Christ's; that God is the creator of all things;
of Apollo, and of his names and portraiture.

An Ironical collation.
IF the Witch of Endor had performed that, which many conceive of the matter, it
might have been compared with the raising up of Lazarus. I pray you, is not the
converting of water into milk, as hard a matter as the turning of water into
wine? And yet, as you may read in the Gospel, That Christ did the one, Mal
Malef. par. 2. quae. 1. c. 14. Acts 17. 1. Tim. ^.13. Col. 1.16. Athanas.
symbol.
as his first miracle; so may you read in M. Mal. and in Bodin, that Witches
can easily do the other; yea, and that which is a great deal more, of Water
they can make Butter. But to avoid all cavils, and least there should appear
more matter in Christ's miracle, then the others, you shall find in M. Mal.
that they can change water into Wine: and, What is it to attribute to a
Creature, the power and work of the Creator, if this be not? Christ says,
Opera quae ego facio nemo potest facere. Creation of substance was never
granted to Man nor Angel; Ergo, neither to Witch nor Devil; for God is the only
giver of life and being, and by him all things are made, visible and invisible.

Finally, this woman of Endor is in the Scripture called Pythonissa; whereby it
may appear that she was but a very cosener: for Pytho himself, whereof
Pythonissa is derived, Apollo, Pytho, uncased.
was a counterfeit. And the original story of Apollo, who was called Pytho,
because he killed a Serpent of that name, is but a Poetical fable; for the
Poets say, he was the God of Music, Physic, Poetry and Shooting. In heaven he
is called Sol, in earth Liber Pater, in hell Apollo. He flourishes always
with perpetual youth, and therefore he is painted without a beard; his picture
was kept as an Oracle-giver; and the Priests that attended thereon at Delphos
were coseners, and called Pythonists of Pytho, as Papists of Papa; and
afterward all Women that used that trade, were named Pythonissae, as was this
Woman of Endor. But because it concerns this matter, I will briefly note the
opinions of diverse learned men, and certain other proofs, which I find in the
Scripture touching the ceasing of Miracles, Prophesies and Oracles.

BOOK VIII.
CHAP. I.
That Miracles are ceased.

ALthough in times past, it pleased God, extraordinarily to show Miracles
amongst his people, for the strengthening of their faith in the Messiah; and
again, at his coming to confirm their faith by his wonderful doings, and his
special graces and gifts bestowed by him upon the Apostles, etc. yet we
ordinarily read in the Scriptures, Psalm. 136.4. and 72.18. and 88.11. Isa.
42.8. John 3.2. and 7.16. In annotat. in Joan 3.
That it is the Lord that works great wonders. Yea, David says, That among
the dead (as in this case of Samuel) God himself shows no wonders. I find
also, That God will not give his glory and power to a creature. Nicodemus being
a Pharisee, could say, That no man could do such Miracles as Christ did, except
God were with him: according to the saying of the Prophet to those Gods and
Idols, which took on them the power of God, Do either good or ill if you can,
etc. So as the Prophet knew and taught thereby, That none but God could work
Miracles. Isa. 45.
Infinite places for this purpose might be brought out of the Scripture, which
for brevity I omit and overslip.

St. Augustine, among other reasons, August. de verbis Dom. secundum. Mat. ser.
18.
whereby he proves the ceasing of Miracles, says, Now blind flesh does not
open the eyes of the blind by the Miracle of God, but the eyes of our heart
are opened by the word of God. Now is not our dead carcass raised any more up
by Miracle, but our dead bodies be still in the grave, and our souls are raised
to life by Christ. Now the ears of the deaf are not opened by Miracle, but they
which had their ears shut before, have them now opened to their salvation. The
miraculous healing of the sick, by anointing, spoken of by S. James, is
objected by many, specially by the Papists, James 5.15.
for the maintenance of their Sacrament of Extreme Unction; which is apishly
and vainly used in the Romish Church, as though the miraculous gift had
continuance till this day: Herein you shall see what Calvin speaks in his
Institutions, J. Calvin. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 19. sect. 18.
The grace of hearing (says he) spoken of by S. James, is vanished away, as
also the other miracles, which the Lord would have showed only for a time, that
he might make the new preaching of the Gospel mavelous for ever. Idem. ibid.
sect. 19.

Isa. 9.7.


Why (says he) does not these (meaning Miracle-mongers) appoint some Siloah to
swim in, whereinto at certain ordinary recourses of times sick folk may plunge
themselves? Why do they not lie along upon the dead, Act. 20.10.
because Paul raised up a dead child by that means? Verily (says he) James in
the miracle to anoint, Idem. ibid. nempe J. Call.
spoke for that time, whiles the Church still enjoyed such blessing of God.
Item, he says, That the Lord is present with his in all ages; and so often as
need is, he helps their sicknesses, no less then in old time. But he does not
so utter his manifest power, nor distributeth miracles, as by the hands of the
Apostles, because the gift was but for a time. Calvin even there concludes
thus, They say such virtues or miracles remain, but experience says nay. And
see how they agree among themselves. Danaeus says, that neither Witch nor
Devil can work miracles. Giles Alley says directly, That Witches work
Miracles. Calvin says, They are all ceased. All Witchmongers say, They
continue. But some affirm, That Popish Miracles are vanished and gone away;
howbeit Witches miracles remain in full force. So as S. Loy is out of credit
for a horse-leach; Master T. and Mother Bungie remain in estimation for
Prophets; nay Hobgoblin and Robin-Goodfellow are contemned among young
children, and Mother Alice and Mother Bungie are feared among old fools. The
estimation of these continue, because the matter has not been called in
question: the credit of the other decays, because the matter has been looked
into: Whereof I say no more, but that S. Anthonies bliss will help your pig,
Prove. 5.1.
whenever Mother Bungie does hurt it with her curse; and therefore we are
warned by the Word of God, in any wise not to fear their curses. But let all
the Witchmongers, and specially the Miraclemongers in the World answer me to
this supposition; Put the case, that a Woman of credit, or else a Woman-witch
should say unto them, that she is a true Prophet of the Lord, and that he
reveals those secret mysteries unto her, whereby she detecteth the lewd acts
and imaginations of the wicked, and that by him she works Miracles, H. Card.
de. Miracul.
and Prophesies, etc. I think they must either yield, or confess, that
Miracles are ceased. But such things (says Cardigan) as seem miraculous, are
chiefly done by Deceit, Legierdemain, or Confederacy; or else, they may be
done, and yet seem unpossible; or else, things are said to be done, and never
were nor can be done.

CHAP. II.
The gift of Prophecy is ceased.

THat Witches, nor the Woman of Endor, nor yet her Familiar or Devil can tell
what is to come, may plainly appear by the words of the Prophet, who says,
Isa. 41.23.
Show what things are to come, and we will say, you are gods indeed: Eccl.
6.12. 1 Samuel 28. Romans 12. 1 Cor. 12. 1 Pet. 1.
According to that which Solomon says, Who can tell a man what shall happen
him under the sun? Marry that can I (says the Witch of Endor to Saul.) But I
will rather believe Paul and Peter, which say, That Prophecy is the gift of
God, and no wordly thing; then a cosening queen, that takes upon her to do all
things, and can do nothing but beguile men: Up steppeth also another Bungie,
and she can tell you where your Horse or your Ass is bestowed, or any thing
that you have lost is become, as Samuel could; and what you have done in all
your age past, as Christ did to the Woman of Sichar at Jacobs well; yea, and
what your errand is, John. 4.
before you speak, as Elizeus did.

P. Marytr. loc. com. 9. sect. 17.
Peter Martyr says, That only God and man knows the heart of man, and
therefore, that the Devil must be secluded; alleging these places; Solus Deus
est scrutator cordium; Only God is the searcher of hearts: And, Nemo scit quae
sunt hominis, nisi spiritus hominis qui est in eo; None knows the things of
man, but the spirit of man which is within him: Solomon says, Tu solus nosti
cogitationes hominum; Thou only know the thoughts of men. And Jeremiah
says, in the person of God, Ego Deus scrutans corda and renes; I am God
searching hearts and reins: Also, Matthew says of Christ, Jesus autem videns
cogitationes eorum; And Jesus seeing their thoughts, who in Scripture is called
the searcher and knower of the thoughts in the heart, as appears in Act. 1.
and 15. Romans 8. Mat. 9.12. and 22. Mark 2. Luke 6. and 7. and 11. John 1.2.6.
and 13. Apoc. 2. and 3. and in other places infinite.

P. Martyr in loc. com.
The same Peter Martyr, also says, That the Devil may suspect, but not know our
thoughts; for if he should know our thoughts, he should understand our faith,
which if he did, he would never assault us with one temptation. Indeed we read
that Samuel could tell where things lost were strayed, etc. but we see that
gift also ceased by the coming of Christ, according to the saying of Paul, At
sundry times, Heb. 1.2.
and in diverse manners God spoke in the old times by our Fathers the Prophets;
in these last days he has spoken unto us by his son, etc. And therefore I
say, that gift of Prophecy, wherewith God in times past endued his people, is
also ceased, and counterfeits and coseners, are come in their places, according
to this saying of Peter, 2 Pet. 2.1.
There were false Prophets among the people, even at there shall be false
teachers among you, etc. And think not that so notable a gift should be taken
from the beloved, and the elect people of God, and committed to Mother Bungie,
and such like of her profession.

The words of the Prophet Zechary are plain, Zech. 13.2, 3.
touching the ceasing both of the good and bad Prophet, to wit, I will cause
the Prophets and unclean spirits to depart out of the land, and when any shall
yet Prophecy, his parents shall say to him, Thou shall not live, for thou
speak lies in the name of the Lord; and his Parents shall thrust him through
when he Prophesies, etc. No, no; the foretelling of things to come, J.
Chrysostom. in Evang. Johan. Hom. 18.

Pet. Blessed. Epi. 49.


is the only work of God, who disposes all things sweetly, of whose, counsel
there has never yet been any man; And to know our labors, the times and
moments God has placed in his own power. Also Phavorinus says, That if these
cold Prophets or Oraclers tell thee of prosperity, and deceive thee, thou art
made a miser through vain expectation; if they tell thee of adversity, etc. and
lie, thou art made a miser through vain fear. And therefore I say, we may as
well look to hear Prophesies at the Tabernacle, in the bush; of the Cherubin,
among the clouds, from the Angels, within the Ark, or out of the flame, etc. as
to expect an oracle of a Prophet in these days.

But put the case, that one in our Commonwealth should step up and say he were
a Prophet (as many frantic persons do) who would believe him, or not think
rather that he were a lewd person? Canon. de malef. and Mathemat.
See the Statutes Eliz. 5. whether there be not laws made against them,
condemning their arrogance and cosenage: so also the canon laws to the same
effect.

Chap. III.
That Oracles are ceased.

TOuching Oracles, which for the most part were Idols of silver, gold, wood,
stones, Thucydid. lib. 2. Cicer. de Divin. lib. 2.
etc. within whose bodies some say unclean spirits hid themselves, and gave
answers, as others say, that exhalations rising out of the ground, inspire
their minds, whereby their Priests gave out Oracles; so as spirits and winds
rose up out of that soil, and endued those men with the gift of Prophecy of
things to come, though in truth they were all devices to cosen the people, and
for the profit of Priests, who received the Idols answers over night, and
delivered them back to the idolaters the next morning: you shall understand,
that although it had been so, as it is supposed; yet by the reasons and proofs
before rehearsed, they should now cease: and whatsoever has affinity with such
miraculous actions, as Witchcraft, Conjuration, etc. is knocked on the head,
and nailed on the cross with Christ, who has broken the power of Devils, and
satisfied Gods justice, who also has trodden them under his feet, and subdued
them, etc. At whose coming the Prophet Zachary says, Zech. 13.2.
That the Lord will cut the names of Idols out of the Land, and they shall be
no more remembered; and he will then cause the Prophets and unclean spirits to
depart out of the land. Mich. 5.12.
It is also written, I will cut off thine Inchanters out of thine hand, and
than shall have no more Soothsayers. And indeed, the Gospel of Christ has so
laid open their knavery, etc. that since the preaching thereof, their combs
are cut, and few that are wise regard them. And if ever these Prophesies came
to take effect, it must be upon the coming of Christ, whereat you see the
Devils were troubled and fainted, when they met him, saying, or rather
exclaming upon him on this wise, Fili Dei, cur venisti nos cruciare ante
tempus? O thou Son of God, why come thou to molest us (or confound us) before
our time appointed? which he indeed prevented, and now remains he our
defender and keeper from his claws: So as now you see here is no room left for
such guests.

Howbeit, you shall hear the opinion of others, that have been as much deceived
as your selves in this matter; and yet are driven to confess, that God has
constituted his Son to beat down the power of Devils, and to satisfy Gods
justice, and to heal our wound received by the fall of Adam, according to Gods
promise in Genesis 3. Genesis 3. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 1. Idem. ibid. Porphyr. in lib.
contra Christ. relig.

Cic. de divin. lib. 2.

J. Chrysostom. de laud.

Paul. hom. 4.


The seed of the woman shall tread down the serpent, or the Devil. Eusebius (in
his first book De praedicatione Evangelii, the title whereof is this, That the
power of Devils is taken away by the coming of Christ) says, All answers made
by Devils, all Soothsayings and Divinations of men are gone and vanished away.
Item, he cites Porphyry, in his book against Christian Religion, wherein these
words are rehearsed, It is no marvel, though the Plague be so hot in this City;
for ever since Jesus has been worshipped, we can obtain nothing that good is
at the hands, of our Gods. And of this defection and ceasing of Oracles writes
Cicero long before, and that to have happened also before his time. Howbeit,
Chrysostom living lone since Cicero, says, That Apollo was forced to grant,
that so long as any relike of a Martyr was held to his nose, he could not make
any answer or Oracle. So as one may perceive, that the Heathen were wiser in
this behalf then many Christians, who in times past were called Oppugnatores
incantamentorum, as the English Princes are called Defensores fidei. Plutarch
calls Boeotia (as we call bablers) by the name of Many words, because of the
multitude of Oracles there; which now (says he) are like to a spring or
fountain which is dried up. If any one remained, I would ride five hundred
miles to see it: but in the whole world there is not one to be seen at this
hour; Popish cosenages excepted.

But Plutarch says, That the cause of this defection of Oracles, was the
Devils death, whose life he held to be determinable and mortal, saying, they
dyed for very age; and that the divining Priests were blown up with a
Whirle-winde, and sunk with an earthquake. Porphyr. writes verses in Apollo's
name, of the death of Apollo, cited by J. Bod. fol. 6.
Others imputed it to be the sight of the place of the Planets, which when they
passed over them, carried away that art with them, and by revolution may
return, etc. Eusebius also cites out of him the story of Pan, which because it
is to this purpose, I will insert the same; and since it mentions the Devils
death, you may believe it if you list, for I will not, as being assured, that
he is reserved alive to punish the wicked, and such as impute unto those Idols
the power of Almighty God.

CHAP. IV.
A tale written by many grave Authors, and believed by many wise men of the
Devils death. Another story written by Papists, and believed of all Catholics,
approving the Devils honestly, conscience and courtesy.

PLutarch says, That his Countreyman Epitherses told him, that as he passed by
Sea into Italy, many passengers being in his boat, in an evening when they were
about the Islands Echinadae, the wind quite ceased, and the ship driving with
the tide, was brought at last to Pax; and whilst some slept, and others quaft,
and othersome were awake (perhaps in as ill case as the rest) after supper
suddenly a voice was heard calling Thamus, in such sort as every man
marvelled. This Thamus was a Pilot born in Egypt, Thamus having little to do,
thought to play with his company, whom he might easily overtake with such a
jest.
unknown to many that were in the ship: wherefore being twice called, he
answered nothing; but the third time he answered: and the other with a louder
voice commanded him, that when he came to Palodes, he should tell them, That
the great God Pan was departed. Whereat every one was astonyed (as Epitherses
affirmed.) And being in consultation what were best to do, Thamus concluded,
that if the wind were high, they must pass by with silence; but if the weather
were calm, he must utter that which he had heard. But when they came to
Palodes, and the weather calm, Thamus looking out toward the land, cried
aloud, that the great God Pan was deceased; and immediately there followed a
lamentable noise of a multitude of people, as it were, with great wonder and
admiration. And because there were many in the ship, they said, the fame
thereof was speedily brought to Rome, and Thamus sent for by Tiberius the
Emperor, who gave such credit thereto, that he diligently inquired and asked
who that Pan was. The learned men about him supposed, that Pan was he who was
the son of Mercury and Penelope, etc. Eusebius says, That this chanced in the
time of Tiberius the Emperor, when Christ expelled all Devils, etc. Paulus
Martius, in his Notes upon Ovids Fasti, says, that this voice was heard out of
Paxe, that very night that Christ suffered, in the year of Tiberius the
nineteenth. Surely, this was a merry jest devised by Thamus, A detection of
Thamus his knavery.
who with some confederates thought to make sport with the passengers, who were
some asleep, and some drunk, and some other at play, etc. whiles the first
voice was used: And at the second voice, to wit, when he should deliver his
message, he being an old Pilot, knew where some noise was usual, by means of
some Echo in the Sea, and thought he would (to the astonishment of them)
accomplish his device, if the weather proved calm: Whereby may appear, that he
would in other cases of tempests, etc. rather attend to more serious business,
then to that ridiculous matter; for why else should he not do his errand in
rough weather, as well as in calm? or, what need he tell the Devil thereof,
when the Devil told it him before, and with much more expedition could have
done the errand himself?

But you shall read in the Legend a fable, an Oracle I would say, Legend aur.
in vita sancti Andreae. fol. 39.
more authentic; for many will say, that this was a profane story, and not so
canonical as those which are verified by the Popes authority: and thus it is
written. A Woman in her travel sent her Sister to Diana, which was the Devil in
an Idol (as all those Oracles are said to be) and willed her to make her
Prayers, or rather a request, to know of her safe delivery; which thing she
did: But the Devil answered, Why prayest thou to me? I cannot help thee, A
gentle and a godly Devil.
but go pray to Andrew the Apostle, and he may help thy sister, etc. Lo, this
was not only a gentle, but a godly Devil, pitying the Woman's case, who
revealing his own disability, enabled S. Andrew more. I know some Protestants
will say, That the Devil, to maintain Idolatry, etc. referred the Maid to S.
Andrew: But what answer will the Papists make, who think it great piety to pray
unto Saints, and so by consequence a honest courtesy in the Devil, to send her
to S. Andrew, who would not fail to serve her turn, etc?

CHAP. V.
The judgments of the ancient Fathers touching Oracles, and their abolishment,
and that they be now transferred from Delphos to Rome.

THe opinions of the Fathers, That Oracles are ceased by the coming of Christ,
you shall find in these places following, to wit, Justinus, Indialogis adversus
Judaeos; Athanasius, De humanitate verbi; Augustine, Athanas. de human. verb.
fol. 55. and 64.
De Civitate Dei; Eusebius, lib. 7. cap. 6. Item, lib. 5. cap. 1.8. Rupertus,
in Joan. lib. 10.12. Plutarch. De abolitione oraculorum; Pliny lib. 30.
Natural. Historiae. Finally, Athanasius concludes, That in times past, there
were Oracles in Delphos, Boeotia, Lycia, and other places; but now, since
Christ is preached unto all men, this madness is ceased. So as you see, that
whatsoever estimation in times past, the ancient Fathers conceived (by hearsay)
of those miraculous matters of Idols and Oracles, etc. they themselves refuse
now, not only to bear witness of, but also affirm, That ever since Christ's
coming, their miracles have been stopped.

For the ceasing of the knaveries and cosening devices of Priests, I see no
authority of Scripture, or ancient Father, but rather the contrary, to wit,
that there shall be strange illusions showed by them even unto the end. And
truly, whosoever knows and notes the order and devices of and in Popish
Pilgrimages, shall see both the Oracles and their conclusions remaining, and as
it were transferred from Delphos to Rome, where that adulterous generation
continually seeks a sign, though they have Moses and the Prophets, yea even
Christ and his Apostles also, etc.

CHAP. VI.
Where and wherein Coseners, Witches, and Priests were wont so give Oracles,
and to work their feats.

THese cosening Oracles, or rather Oraclers used (I say) to exercise their
feats, and to do their miracles most commonly in Maids, in Beasts, in Images,
in Dens, in Cloisters, in dark holes, in Trees, in Churches or Churchyards,
etc. where Priests, Monks, and Friars, had laid their plots, and made their
confederacies aforehand, to beguil the world; to gain money, and to add credit
to their profession. Strabo Geog. lib. 16.

J. Wier. lib. 1. de praest. daem. cap. 12.


This practice began in the Oaks of Dodona, in the which was a wood, the Trees
thereof (they say) could speak. And this was done by a knave in a hollow-tree,
that seemed sound unto the simple people. This Wood was in Molossus a part of
Greece, called Epyrus, and it was named Dodonas Oracle. There were many Oracles
in Egypt, namely, of Hercules, of Apollo, of Minerva, of Diana, of Mars, of
Jupiter, and of the Ox Apys, who was the son of Jupiter, but his image was
worshipped in the likeness of an Ox. Latona, who was the Mother of Apollo, was
an Oracle in the City of Bute. The Priests of Apollo, who always counterfeited
fury and madness, gave Oracles in the Temple called Clarius, within the City of
Colophon in Greece. At Thebes in Boeotia, and also in Loebadia, Trophonius was
the chief Oracle. At Memphis, a Cow; at Corinth, an Ox, called Mineus; in
Arsinoe, a Crocodile; in Athens, a Prophet called Amphiaraus, who indeed dyed
at Thebes, where they say, the earth opened and swallowed him up quick. At
Delphos was the great Temple of Apollo, where Devils gave Oracles by maids (as
some say) though indeed it was done by Priests. It was built upon Parnassus
hill in Greece. And the defenders of Oracles say, that even as rivers
oftentimes are diverted to another course; so likewise the spirit, which
inspired the chief Prophets, may for a time be silent, and revive again by
revolution.

Demetrius says, That the spirits which attended on Oracles, waxed weary of
the peoples curiosity and importunity, and for shame forsook the Temple. But as
one that of late has written against Prophesies, H. Haw. in his defensative
against Prophesies.
says, It is no marvel, that when the familiars that speak in trunks were
repelled from their harbor for fear of discovery, the blocks almighty lost
their senses; for these are all gone now, and their knavery is espied, so as
they can no longer abuse the world with such bables. But whereas these great
Doctors suppose, that the cause of their dispatch was the coming of Christ; if
they mean that the Devil dyed, so soon as He was born; or, that then he gave
over his occupation, they are deceived: For the Popish Church has made a
continual practice hereof, partly for their own private profit, lucre, and
gain; and partly to be had in estimation of the World, and in admiration among
the simple. But indeed, men that have learned Christ, and been conversant in
his Word, have discovered and shaken off the vanity and abomination hereof. But
if those Doctors had lived till this day, they would have said and written,
that Oracles had ceased, or rather been driven out of England, in the time of
King Henry the Eight, In whose days Oracles ceased in England.
and of Queen Elizabeth his Daughter; who have done so much in that behalf, as
at this hour, they are not only all gone, but forgotten here in this English
Nation, where they swarmed as thick as they did in Boeotia, or in any other
place in the world. But the credit they had, depended not upon their desert,
but upon the credulity of others. Now therefore I will conclude and make an end
of this matter, with the opinion and saying of the Prophet, Zech. 10.2. Psalm.
115.5, 6. Isa. 41.23.
Vain is the answer of Idols. For they have eyes and see not, ears and hear
not, mouths and speak not, etc. and, Let them show what is to come, and I will
say, they are gods indeed.

BOOK IX.
CHAP. I.
The Hebrew word Kasam expounded, and how far a Christian may conjecture of
things to come.

KAsam (as John Wierius upon his own knowledge affirms, J. Wier. lib. de
praest. demon.
and upon the word of Andraeas Masius reports) differs little in
signification from the former word Ob; betokening Viticinari, which is, To
Prophecy, and is most commonly taken in evil part, as in Deuteronomy. 18. Jerem. 27.
etc. howbeit, sometime in good part, as in Isa. 3.2. All Divinations are not
condemnable.
To foretell things to come upon probable conjectures, so as therein we reach
no further then becomes humane capacity, is not (in mine opinion) unlawful,
but rather a commendable manifestation of Wisdom and Judgment, the good gifts
and noble blessings of GOD, for the which we ought to be thankful; as also to
yield due honor and praise unto him, for the noble order which he has
appointed in nature: praying him to lighten our hearts with the beams of his
wisdom, that we may more and more profit in the true knowledge of the
workmanship of his hands. But some are so nice, that they condemn generally all
sorts of Divinations, denying those things that in nature have manifest causes,
and are so framed, as they foreshew things to come, and in that show admonish
us of things after to ensue, exhibiting signs of unknown and future matters to
be judged upon, by the order, law, and course of nature proposed unto us by God.

And some on the other side are so bewitched with folly, as they attribute to
creatures that estimation, which rightly and truly appertains to God the
Creator of all things; affirming, That the public and private destinies of all
humane matters, and whatsoever a man would know of things come or gone, is
manifested to us in the heavens; so as by the Stars and Planets all things
might be known. These would also, that nothing should be taken in hand or gone
about, without the favorable aspect of the Planets. By which, and other the
like devices they deprave and profane the ancient and commendable observations
of our forefathers, as did Colebrasus, Colebrasus erroneous and impious
opinion.
who taught, That all man's life was governed by the seven Planets; and yet a
Christian, and condemned for Heresy. But let us so far forth embrace and allow
this Philosophy and Prophesying, as the Word of God gives us leave, and
commends the same unto us.

CHAP. II.
Proofs by the old and new Testament, that certain observations of the Weather
are lawful.

WHen God by his Word and Wisdom had made the Heavens, and placed the Stars in
the firmament, Genesis 1.14.
he said, Let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years.
When he created the rainbow in the clouds, and 9.13.
he said it should be for a sign and token unto us. Which we find true, not
only of the flood past, but also of the showers to come. And therefore, Ecclus.
43. Psalm. 19.1, 2. and 50.6.
according to Jesus Sirachs advice, Let us behold it, and praise him that made
it. The Prophet David says, The heavens declare the glory of God, and the
earth shows his handy work: day unto day utters the same, and night unto
night teaches knowledge. Ecclus. 43. Baruch. 3.
It is also written, That by the commandment of the the holy one, the Stars
are placed, and continue in their order, and fail not in their watch. It should
appear, that Christ himself did not altogether neglect the course and order of
the heavens, Luke 12.54, 55.
in that he said, When you see a cloud rise out of the west, straightway you
say a shower comes; and so it is: And when you see the southwinde blow, Mat.
16.2, 3.
you say it will be hot, and so it comes to pass. Again, When it is evening,
you say fair weather, for the sky is red; and in the morning you say, today
shall be a tempest, for the sky is red and lowering. Wherein as he notes that
these things do truly come to pass, according to ancient observation, and to
the rule Astronomical; so does he also by other words following admonish us,
that in attending too much to those observations, we neglect not specially to
follow our Christian Vocation.

The Physician is commended unto as, and allowed in the Scriptures: but so to
put trust in him, as to neglect and distrust God, is severely forbidden and
reproved. Surely, it is most necessary for us to know and observe diverse rules
Astological; otherwise we could not with opportunity dispatch our ordinary
affairs. Lactant. contra Astrologos. Peucer. de Astrol. page 383.
And yet Lactantius, condemns and recounteth it among the number of
Witchcrafts; from whose censure Calvin does not much vary. The poor husbandman
perceives that the increase of the Moon makes Plants and living creatures
fruitful; so as in the Full Moon they are in best strength, decaying in the
wane, and in the conjunction do utterly wither and fade. Which when by
observation, use and practice, they have once learned, they distribute their
business accordingly; as their times and seasons to sow, to plant, to prune, to
let their Cattle blood, to cut, etc.

CHAP. III.
That certain observations are indifferent, certain ridiculous, and certain
impious; whence that cunning is derived of Apollo, and of Aruspices.

The ridiculous Art of Nativity-casting.
I Know not whether to disallow or discommend the curious observation used by
our elders, who conjectured upon Nativities; so as, if Saturn and Mercury were
opposite in any brute sign, a man then born should be dumb or stammer much;
whereas it is daily seen, that children naturally imitate their Parents
conditions in that behalf. Also they have noted, that one born in the Spring of
the Moon, shall be healthy; in that time of the wane, when the Moon is utterly
decayed, the child then born cannot live; and in the conjunction, it cannot
long continue.

Julius Maternus his most impious opinion.
But I am sure the opinion of Julius Maternus is most impious, who writes, that
he which is born when Saturn is in Leo, shall live long, and after his death
shall go to heaven presently. And so is this of Allumazar, who says, that
whosoever prays to God, when the Moon is in Capite Draconis, shall be heard,
and obtain his Prayer. Furthermore, to play the cold Prophet, as to recount it
good or bad luck, when Salt or Wine falls on the table, or is shed, etc. or
to prognosticate that guests approach to your house, upon the chattering of
Pies or Haggisters, whereof there can be yielded no probable reason, is
altogether vanity and superstition; as hereafter shall be more largely showed.
But to make simple people believe, that a Man or Woman can foretell good or evil
fortune, is mere Witchcraft or Cosenage; for God is the only searcher of the
heart, and delivers not his counsel to so lewd reprobates. I know diverse
writers affirm, Bodinus. Danaeus. Erastus. Hemingius. Mal. Malef. Thom.
Aquinas, etc.
that Witches foretell things, as prompted by a real Devil; and that he again
learneth it out of the Prophesies written in the Scriptures, and by other
nimble sleights, wherein he passes any other earthly creature; and that the
same Devil, or some of his fellows runs or flies as far as Rochester, to Mother
Bungie; or to Canterbury to M.T. or to Delphos, to Apollo; or to Aesculapius,
in Pergamo; or to some other Idol or Witch; and there, by way of Oracle,
answers all Questions, through his understanding of the Prophesies contained in
the Old Testament, especially in Daniel and Isaiah; whereby the Devil knew of
the translation of the Monarchy from Babylon to Graecia, etc. But either they
have learned this of some Oracle or Witch; or else I know not where the Devil
they find it. Marry certain it is, that herein they show themselves to be
Witches and fond Diviners: for they find no such thing written in Gods Word.

Of the Idol called Apollo, I have somewhat already spoken in the former title
of Ob or Pytho, and some occasion I shall have to speak thereof hereafter; and
therefore at this time it shall suffice to tell you, that the credit gained
thereunto, was by the craft and cunning of the Priests, which tended thereupon;
who with their counterfeit miracles so bewitched the people, as they thought
such virtue to have been contained in the bodies of those Idols, as God has
not promised to any his Angels, or elect people: For it is said, Apollos
passions.
that if Apollo were in a chafe, he would sweat; if he had remorse to the
afflicted, and could not help them, he would shed tears, which I believe might
have been wiped away with that handkerchief, that wiped and dried the Rood of
Graces face, being in the like perplexities. Even as another sort of Witching
Priests called Aruspices prophesied victory to Alexander, because an Eagle
lighted on his head: which Eagle might (I believe) be cooped or caged with
Mahomets Dove, that picked peason out of his ear.

CHAP. IV.
The predictions of Soothsayers, and lewd Priests; the prognostications of
Astronomers and Physicians allowable: Divine Prophecy holy and good.

THe cosening tricks of Oracling Priests and Monks, are and have been specially
most abominable. The superstitious observations of senceless Augurers, and
Soothsayers (contrary to Philosophy, and without authority of Scripture) are
very ungodly and ridiculous. What Prophesies allowable.
Howbeit I reject not the Prognostications of Astronomers, nor the conjectures
or forewarnings of Physicians, nor yet the interpretations of Philosophers;
although in respect of the Divine Prophesies contained in holy Scriptures, they
are not to be weighed or regarded: For the end of these, and the other, is not
only far differing; but whereas these contain only the words and will of God,
with the other are mingled most horrible lies and cosenages; for though there
be many of them learned and godly, yet lurk there in corners, of the same
profession, a great number of counterfeits and coseners. J. Bodin lib. de
demon. l. 1. c. 4.
J. Bodin puts this difference between Divine Prophets and Inchanters; to
wit, the one says always true, the others words (proceeding from the Devil)
are always false; or for one truth, they tell a hundred lies. And then, why
may not every. Witch be thought as cunning as Apollo? and, why not every
counterfeit cosener, as good a Witch as Mother Bungie? For it is odds, but they
will hit the truth once in a hundred Divinations, as well as the best.

CHAP. V.
The diversity of true Prophets; of Urim, and of the Prophetical use of the
twelve precious stones contained therein; of the divine voice called Echo.

Diverse degrees of Prophecy.
IT should appear, that even of holy Prophets, there were diverse sorts: for
David and Solomon, although in their Psalms and Parables are contained most
excellent Mysteries, and notable Allegories; yet they were not endued with that
degree of Prophecy, that Ely and Elisha were, etc. For as often as it is said,
2 Reg. 2.
that God spoke to David or Solomon, it is meant to be done by the Prophets;
for NATHAN or GAD were the Messengers and Prophets to reveal Gods will to
David. And Ahiam the Shilonite was sent from God to Solomon. Item, the spirit
of Prophesied which Elias had, was doubled upon Elisha. Also, some Prophets
prophesied all their lives, some had but one vision, and some had more
according to Gods pleasure; yea, some prophesied unto the people of such things
as came not to pass, and that was where Gods wrath was pacified by Repentance.
But these Prophets were always reputed among the people to be wise and godly;
whereas the Heathen Prophets were evermore known and said to be mad and
foolish, as it is written both of the Prophets of Sibylla, and also of Apollo;
and at this day also in the Indies, etc.

J. Bodin.
But that any of these extraordinary gifts remain at this day, Bodin, nor any
Witchmonger in the World shall never be able to prove; though he in his book of
Devilish madness would make men believe it: for these were miraculously
maintained by God among the Jews, who were instructed by them of all such
things as should come to pass; or else informed by Urim: so as the Priest by
the brightness of the twelve precious stones contained therein, could
Prognosticate or expound any thing: Joseph. de antiquit.

Josue filius Levi lib. Pirkeaboth.


Which brightness and virtue ceased (as Josephus reports) two hundred years
before he was born. So as since that time, no answers were yielded thereby of
Gods will and pleasure. Nevertheless, the Hebrews write, That there has been
ever since that time, a Divine voice heard among them, which in Latin is called
Filia vocis, in Greek (...), in English the Daughter of speech.

CHAP. VI.
Of Prophesies conditional; whereof the Prophesies in the old Testament do
entreat, and by whom they were published; Witchmongers answers to the
objections against Witches supernatural actions.

CHrist and his Apostles prophesied of the calamities and afflictions, which
shall grieve and disturb the Church of God in this life; also, of the last day,
and of the signs and tokens that shall be showed before that day: and finally,
of all things which are requisite for us to foreknow. Howbeit, such is the
mercy of God, that all Prophesies, Threatenings, Plagues, and Punishments are
annexed to conditions of Repentance: Prophesies conditional.
as on the other side, corporal blessings are tied under the condition of the
cross and castigation. So as by them the mysteries of our salvation being
discovered unto us, we are not to seek new signs and miracles; but to attend
to the doctrine of the Apostles, who preached Christ exhibited and crucified
for our sins, his Resurrection, Ascension, and thereby the Redemption of as
many as believe, etc.

The Prophesies in the old Testament, treat of the continuance, the government,
and the difference of Estates; or the distinction of the four Monarchies, of
their order, decay and instauration; The subject of the Prophesies of the Old
Testament.
of the changes and ruins of the Kingdoms of Juda, Israel, Egypt, Persia,
Graecia, etc. and specially of the coming of our Savior Jesus Christ, and how
he should be born of a Virgin, and where, of his Tribe, Passion, Resurrection,
etc. These Prophesies were published by Gods special and peculiar Prophets,
endued with his particular and excellent gifts, according to his promise, Deuteronomy.
18.15.
I will raise them up a Prophet out of the midst of their Brethren, I will put
my words in his mouth, etc. Which though it were specially spoken of Christ,
yet was it also spoken of those particular Prophets, which were placed among
them by God to declare his will; which were also figures of Christ the Prophet
himself. Now if Prophecy be an extraordinary gift of God, and a thing peculiar
to himself, as without whose special assistance, no creature can be a Prophet,
or show what is to come: Why should we believe, that those lewd persons can
perform by Divinations and Miracles, that which is not in humane, but in Divine
power to accomplish?

Howbeit, when I deny that Witches can ride in the Air, and the miraculous
circumstance thereof; by and by it is objected to me, That Enoch and Elias were
rapt into the heavenly bodily: and Habacuck was carried in the Air, to feed
Daniel: and so falsely oppose a Devils or a Witches power against the virtue of
the holy Ghost. If I deride the Poets opinions, saying, that Witches cannot
Coelo deducere Lunam, fetch the Moon from Heaven, etc they tell me, that at
Joshuah's battle, the sun stayed; and at the passion of Christ, there was
palpable darkness. If I deny their cunning in the exposition of Dreams,
advising them to remember Jeremiah's connsel, not to follow or credit the
expositors of Dreams; they hit me in the teeth with Daniel and Joseph; for that
the one of them expounded Pharaoh the Egyptian Kings, the other Nebuchadnezzar
the Persian Kings dream. Eccles. 9.5. 1 Samuel 28.
If I say with Solomon, That the dead know nothing, and that the dead know us
not, neither are removeable out of Abraham's bosom, etc. they produce the story
of Samuel: wherein, I say, they set the power of a Creature as high as the
Creator. If I say, that these Witches cannot transubstantiate themselves, nor
others into beasts, etc. they cite the story of Nebuchadnezzar, as though
indeed he were made a material beast, and that also by Witchcraft; and
strengthen that their assertion with the fables of Circe and Ulysses his
companions, etc.

CHAP. VII.
What were the Miracles expressed in the old Testament; and what are they in
the new Testament; and that we are not now to look for any more Miracles.

THe Miracles expressed in the old Testament were many, but the end of them all
was one, though they were diverse and differing in show: as where the sacrifices
of Moses, Elias, and Solomon, Genesis 11.6.
being abundantly wet, were burnt with fire from heaven, etc. The variety of
tongues at the building of Babylon; Isaacs birth of Sarah being by nature past
children; Genesis 21. Dan. 11.
the passage through the Red Sea; Daniels foretelling of the four Monarchies,
in the fourth whereof he apparently foresheweth the coming of the Lord. All
these, and many other, which are expressed in the old Testament, were merciful
instructions, and notable miracles to strengthen the faith of Gods people in
their Messiah. If you had gone to Delphos, Apollo would have made you believe
with his Amphibological answers, that he could have foretold you all these
things.

The Miracles wrought by Christ were the raising up of the dead (which many
would impute to the woman of Endor, A sum of Christ's Miracles.
and also to our Witches and conjurors) the restoring of the lame to limbs; the
blind to sight; the dumb to speech; and finally, the healing of all diseases;
which many believe our Witches can do; yea, and as they themselves will take it
upon them: As for casting out of Devils (which was another kind of Miracles
usual with Christ) Witches and Conjurors are said to be as good thereat, as
ever he was: and yet, if you will believe Christ's words, it cannot be so; for
he says, Every Kingdom divided against it self, Mat. 12.25, 26.
shall be brought to naught, etc. If Satan cast out Satan, he is divided, etc.
and his Kingdom shall not endure, etc:

Peter's Chains fell off in Prison, so did Richard Gallisies fetters at Winsor;
marry the Prison doors opened not to Richard, as they did to Peter. Elias by
special grace obtained rain, our Witches can make it rain when they list, etc.
But sithhence Christ did these Miracles, and many more, and all to confirm his
truth, and strengthen our faith, and finally, for the conversion of the people
(as appears in John 6.7. and 12. insomuch as he vehemently reproved such as
upon the sight of them would not believe, Luke 10.13.
saying, Woe be to thee Corazin, woe be to thee Bethsaida; if the miracles had
been done in Tire and Sidon, which have been done in you, they had a great
while ago repented, etc. Let us settle and acquit our Faith in Christ, and
believing all his wondrous works, let us reject all these old wives fables, as
lying vanities: whereof you may find in the Golden Legend, M. Mal. and
specially in Bodin miraculous stuff, enough to check all the Miracles
expressed in the old and new Testament; which are of more credit with many
bewitched people, then the true Miracles of Christ himself: Insomuch as they
stand in more awe of the menacies of a Witch, then of all the threatenings and
curves pronounced by God, and expressed in his Word. And thus much touching the
word Kasam.

BOOK X.
CHAP. I.
The interpretation of this Hebrew word Onen; of the vanity of Dreams, and
Divinations thereupon.

ONEN differs not much from Kasam, but that it is extended to the
Interpretation of Dreams. And as for Dreams, whatsoever credit is attributed
unto them, proceeds of folly; and they are fools that trust in them; for why?
Ecclus. 24. Jerem. 27. Eccl. 5.
they have deceived many. In which respect the Prophet gives us good warning,
Not to follow nor harken to the Expositors of Dreams, for they come through the
multitude of business. And therefore those Witches, that make men believe they
can Prophecy upon Dreams, as knowing the interpretation of theme, and either
for money or glory abuse men and women thereby, are mere coseners, and worthy
of great punishment, as are such Witchmongers, as believing them, attribute
unto them such Divine power as only belongs to God, Jerem. 23.25, 26, 27.
read the words.
as appears in Jeremiah the Prophet.

CHAP. II.
Of Divine, Natural, and Casual Dreams; with their differing causes and effects.

MAcrobius recounteth five differences of Images, or rather Imaginations
exhibited unto them that sleep, which for the most part do signify somewhat in
admonition. There be also many subdivisions made hereof, which I think needless
to rehearse. In Jasper Peucer they are to be seen, Peucer in divinat. ex
somniis.
with the causes and occasions of Dreams. There were wont to be delivered from
God himself or his Angels, certain Dreams and Visions unto the Prophets, and
holy Fathers, according to the saying of Joel, I will power my spirit upon all
flesh, Joel 2.28.
your young men shall dream Dreams, and your old men shall see Visions. These
kind of Dreams (I say) were the admonishments and forewarnings of God to his
people; as that of Joseph, To abide with Mary his wife, Mat. 1.20. and 2.13.
after she was conceived by the holy Ghost; as also, To convey our Savior
Christ into Egypt, etc. the interpretation whereof are the peculiar gifts of
God, which Joseph the Patriarch, Genesis 39. and 40. and 41. Dan. 2.
and Daniel the Prophet, had most specially.

As for Physical conjectures upon Dreams, the Scriptures reprove them not; for
by them the Physicians many times do understand the state of their Patients
bodies: For some of them come by means of Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy, or Blood;
and some by Love, Surfeit, hunger, thirst, etc. Galen and Boethius, were said to
deal with Devils, because they told their Patients Dreams, or rather by their
Dreams, their special Diseases. Howbeit, Physical Dreams are natural, and the
cause of them dwells in the nature of Man; for they are the inward actions of
the mind in the spirits of the brain, whilst the body is occupied with sleep:
for as touching the mind it self, it never sleeps. These Dreams vary,
according to the difference of humors and vapors. There are also casual Dreams,
which (as Solomon says) come through the multitude of business: Eccles. 5.3.
for as a looking-glass shows the image or figure thereunto opposite; so in
Dreams, the fantasy and imagination informs the understanding of such things
as haunt the outward sense: whereupon the Poet says: Somnia ne cures; nam men's
humana quod optat,
Dum vigilat sperans, per somnum cernit id ipsum.
Englished by Abraham Fleming: Regard no Dreams, for why? the mind
Of that in sleep a view does take,
Which it does wish and hope to find,
At such time as it is awake.


CHAP. III.
The opinion of diverse old Writers touching Dreams, and how they vary in
nothing; the causes thereof.

A dissonancy in opinions about Dreams.
SYnesius, Themistius, Democritus, and others grounding themselves upon example
that chance has sometimes verified, persuade men, that nothing is dreamed in
vain; affirming, that the heavenly influences do bring forth diverse forms in
corporal matter, and of the same influences, visions, and dreams are printed in
the fantastical power, which is instrumental, with a Celestial disposition,
meet to bring forth some effect, especially in sleep, when the mind (being free
from bodily cares) may more liberally receive the heavenly influences, whereby
many things are known to them sleeping in Dreams, which they that wake cannot
see. Plato attributes them to the forms and engendered knowledges of the soul:
Avicen to the last intelligence that moves the Moon, through the light that
lighteneth the fantasy in sleep; Aristotle to the Fantastical sense: Averroes
to the imaginative: Albert to the influence of superior bodies.

CHAP. IV.
Against Iterpreters of Dreams; of the ordinary cause of Dreams: Hemingius his
opinion of Diabolical Dreams; the Interpretation of Dreams ceased.

THere are Books carried about concerning this matter, under the name of
Abraham, who (as Philo, in lib. gigantum, says) was the inventor of the
exposition of Dreams; and so likewise of Solomon and Daniel. But Cicero, in
lib. de divinatione, confuteth the vanity and folly of them that give credit to
Dreams. And as for the Interpreters of Dreams, as they know not before the
Dream, nor yet after, any certainty; yet when any thing afterward happens,
then they apply the Dream to that which has chanced.

Certainly, men never lightly fail to Dream by night, of that which they
meditate by day: and by day they see diverse and sundry things, and conceive
them severally in their minds: Then those mixed conceits being laid up in the
closet of the memory, strive together; which, because the fantasy cannot
discern nor discuss, some certain thing gathered of many conceits is bred and
contrived in one together. And therefore in my opinion, it is time vainly
employed, The pleasant Art of the Interpretation of Dreams.
to study about the interpretation of Dreams. He that list to see the folly and
vanity thereof, may read a vain Treatise, set out by Thomas Hill a Londoner,
1568.

Lastly, there are Diabolical Dreams, N. Hemin. in admonitionib. de
superstitionib. Magicis vitandis.
which Nicholaus Hemingius divides into three sorts. The first is, when the
Devil immediately of himself (he means corporally) offers any matter of
Dream. Secondly, when the Devil shows Revelations to them that have made
request unto him therefore. Thirdly, when Magicians by Art bring to pass, that
other men Dream what they will. Assuredly these, and so all the rest (as they
may be used) are very Magical and Devilish Dreams. For although we may receive
comfort of mind by those which are called Divine Dreams, and health of body
through Physical Dreams: yet if we take upon us to use the office of God in the
Revelation, The end and use of Prophecy, interpretation of dreams, operation
of Miracles, etc.
or rather the Interpretation of them; or if we attribute unto them miraculous
effects (now when we see the gifts of Prophecy, and of interpretation of
Dreams, and also the operation of Miracles are ceased, which were special and
peculiar gifts of God, to confirm the truth of the Word, and to establish his
people in the faith of the Messiah, who is now exhibited unto us both in the
Testament, and also in the blood of our Savior Jesus Christ) we are bewitched,
and both abuse and offend the Majesty of God, and also seduce, delude and cosen
all such as by our persuasion, and their own light belief, give us credit.

CHAP. V.
That neither Witches, nor any other, can either by words or herbs, thrust
into the mind of a sleeping man, what Cogitations or Dreams they list; and
whence Magical Dreams come.

I Grant there may be herbs and stones found and known to the Physicians, Seek
for such stuff in my book of Hart^mim.
which may procure Dreams; and other herbs and stones, etc. to make one bewray
all the secrets of his mind, when his body sleeps, or at leastwise to
procure speech in sleep: But that Witches or Magicians have power by words,
herbs, and imprecations to thrust into the mind or conscience of man, what it
shall please them, by virtue of their charms, herbs, stones or familiars,
etc. according to the opinion of Hemingius, I deny; though therewithal I
confess, that the Devil both by day and also by night, travelleth to seduce
man, and to lead him from God; yea, and that no way more then this, where he
places himself as God in the minds of them that are so credulous, to attribute
unto him, or unto Witches, that which is only in the office, nature, and power
of God to accomplish.

Does not Daniel the Prophet say, even in this case, Dan. 2. Genesis 11.8. Genesis
37. and 11. Isa. 11. Dan. 2.
It is the Lord only that knows such secrets, as in exposition of Dreams is
required? And does not Joseph repeat those very words to Pharaohs officers, who
consulted with him therein? Examples of Divine Dreams you may find a great
number in the Scriture; such (I mean) as it pleased God to reveal his pleasure
by. Of Physical Dreams we may both read in Authors, and see in our own
experience daily, or rather nightly. Such Dreams also as are casual, they are
likewise usual, and come (as has been said) through the multitude of affairs
and business. Those which in these days are called Magical or Diabolical
Dreams, may rather be called Melancholical. For out of that black vapor in
sleep, Aristot. de somnio.
through Dreams appears (as Aristotle says) some horrible thing, and as it
were the image of an ugly Devil: sometimes also other terrible visions,
imaginations, counsels, and practices. As, where we read of a certain man, that
Dreamed there appeared one unto him that required him to throw himself into a
deep pit, and that he should reap great benefit thereby at Gods hands: So as
the miserable wretch giving credit thereunto, performed the matter and killed
himself. Now I confess, that the Interpretation or execution of that Dream, was
indeed Diabolical; but the Dream was casual, derived from the heavy and black
humor of Melancholy.

CHAP. VI.
How men have been bewitched, cosened or abused by Dreams to dig and seach for
Money.

Such would be embarked in the ship of fools.
HOw many have been bewitched with Dreams, and thereby made to consume
themselves with digging and searching for Money, etc. whereof they or some
other have dreamt, I my self could manifest, as having known how many wise men
have been that way abused by very simple persons, even where no dream has been
met withal, but waking dreams. And this has been used heretofore, as one of
the finest cosening feats; insomuch as there is a very formal art thereof
devised, with many excellent and Superstitions and Ceremonies thereunto
belonging, which I will set down as briefly as may be. Albeit that here in
England, An English Proverb.
this Proverb has been current, to wit, Dreams prove contrary: according to
the answer of the Priests boy to his Master, who told his said boy, that he
dreamt he kissed his tail: Yea Master (says he) but dreams prove contrary, you
must kiss mine.

CHAP. VII.
The Art and Order to he used in digging for money, revealed by Dreams: how to
procure pleasant Dreams: of morning and midnight Dreams.

Note this superstitious dotage.
THere must be made upon a hazel wand, three crosses, and certain words both
blasphemous and impious, must be said over it; and hereunto must be added
certain characters, and barbarous names. And whilst the Treasure is a digging,
there must be read the Psalms, De profundis, Missa, Misereatur nostri, Requiem,
Pater Noster, Ave Maria, Et ne nos inducas in tentationem, sed libera nos a
malo, Amen. A porta inferni credo videre bona, etc. Expectate Dominum, Requiem
aeternam. And then a certain prayer. And if the time of digging be neglected,
the Devil will carry all the treasure away. See other more absolute
Conjurations for this purpose, in the word Iidoni following.

J. Bap. Neap. in Natural. Mag. lib. 2. cap. 26. fol. 83. and 84.
You shall find in Johannes Baptista Neapolitanus, diverse Receipts by herds
and potions, to procure pleasant or fearful Dreams; and Perfumes also to that
effect: who affirms, That Dreams in the dead of the night are commonly
preposterous and monstrous; and in the morning when the gross humors be spent,
there happen more pleasant and certain Dreams, the blood being more pure than
at other times: the reason whereof is there expressed.

CHAP. VIII.
Sundry Receipts and Ointments made and used for the transportation of Witches
and other miraculous effects: an instance thereof reported and credited by some
that are learned.

IT shall not be amiss here in this place, to repeat an Ointment greatly to
this purpose, rehearsed by the aforesaid Johannes Baptista Neapolitanus,
wherein, though he may be overtaken and cosened by an old Witch, and made not
only to believe, but also to report a false tail; yet because it greatly
overthrows the opinion of M. Mal. Bodin, and such other, as write so
absolutely in maintenance of Witches transportations, I will set down his words
in this behalf.

The Receipt is as follows:

The fat of young children, and sees it with water in a brazen vessel,
Confections or Receipts for miraculous transportation of Witches.
reserving the thickest of that which remains boiled in the bottom, which
they lay up and keep, until occasion serves to use it. They put hereunto
Eleoselinum, Aconitum, Frondes populeas, Mountain parsley, Wolves-bane, leaves
of the Poplar and Soot.

Another Receipt to the same purpose:

Sium, Acarum vulgar, Pentaphyllon, yellow Watercresses, common Acorus,
Cinquefoil, the blood of a Flitter-Mouse, Solanum Somniferum and oleum,
Sleeping Nightshade and Oil: They stamp all these together, and then they rub
all parts of their bodies exceedingly, till they look red, and be very hot, so
as the pores may be opened, and their flesh soluble and loose: They join
herewithal, either fat, or oil in stead thereof, that the force of the Ointment
may the rather pierce inwardly, and so be more effectual.

By this means (says he) in a Moonlight night, they seem to be carried in the
Air, to Feasting, Singing, Dancing, Kissing, Culling, and other acts of Venery,
with such youths as they love and desire most: For the force (says he) of
their imagination is so vehement, that almost all that part of the brain,
wherein the memory consists, is full of such conceits. And whereas they are
naturally prone to believe any thing, so do they receive such impressions and
steadfast imaginations into their minds, as even their spirits are altered
thereby; not thinking upon any thing else, either by day or by night. Vetulae,
quas a strigis similitudine, striges vocant, quaeque noctu puerulorum sanguinem
in cunis cubantium exsorbent.
And this helps them forward in their imaginations, that their usual food is
none other commonly but Beets, Roots, Nuts, Beans, Pease, etc.

Now (says he) when I considered thoroughly hereof, remaining doubtful of the
matter, there fell into my hands a Witch, who of her own accord did promise me
to fetch me an errand out of hand from far Countries, and willed all them, whom
I had brought to witness the matter, to depart out of the chamber. And when she
had undressed her self, and froted her body with certain Ointments (which
action we beheld through a chink or little hole of the door) she fell down
through the force of those Soporiferous or Sleepy Ointments into a most sound
and heavy sleep; so as we did break open the door, and did beat her
exceedingly; but the force of her sleep was such, as it took from her the sense
of feeling; and we departed for a time. Now when her strength and powers were
weary and decayed, she awoke of her own accord, and began to speak many vain
and doting words, affirming, that she had passed over both Seas and Mountains;
delivering to us many untrue and false reports: we earnestly denied them, she
impudently affirmed them. This (says he) will not so come to pass with every
one, but only with old Women that are melancholic, whose nature is extreme
cold, and their evaporation small: and they both perceive and remember what
they see in that case and taking of theirs.

CHAP. IX.
A confutation of the former follies, as well concerning Ointments, Dreams etc.
as also of the assembly of Witches, and of their consultations and bankets at
sundry places, and all in Dreams.

BUt if it be true that S. Augustine says, and many other writers, That
Witches nightwalkings are but Fantasies and Dreams; then all the reports of
their bargain, transporting, and meetings with Diana, Minerva, etc. are but
fables; and then do they lie that maintain those actions to be done in deed and
verity, which in truth are done no way. It were marvel on the one side (if
those thing happened in Dreams, which nevertheless the Witches affirm to be
otherwise) that when those Witches awake, they neither consider nor remember
that they were in a Dream. It were marvel that their Ointments, by the
Physicians opinions having no force at all to that effect, as they confess
which are Inquisitors, should have such operation. It were marvel that their
Ointments cannot be found any where, saving only in the Inquisitors Books. It
were marvel, that when a stranger is anointed therewith, they have sometimes,
and yet not always, the like operation as with Witches; which all the
Inquisitors confess.

Bar. Spin. qu. de strigil. c. 30, 31.
But to this last, Friar Bartholomaeus says, That the Witches themselves,
before they anoint themselves, do hear in the night time, a great noise of
Minstrels, which fly over them, with the Lady of the Fairies, and then they
address themselves to their journey. New matter and worthy to be marvelled at.
But then I marvel again, that no body hears nor sees this troop of
Minstrels, especially riding in a Moonlight night. It is marvel, that they
that think this to be but in a Dream, can be persuaded that all the rest is any
other then Dreams. It is marvel, that in Dreams, Witches of old acquaintance
meet so just together, and conclude upon Murders, and receive Ointments,
Roots, Powders, etc. (as Witchmongers report they do, and as they make the
Witches confess) and yet lie at home fast asleep. It is marvel, that such
preparation is made for them (as Sprenger, Bartholomew, and Bodin report) as
well in Noble-mens houses, as in Alehouses; and that they come in dreams, and
eat up their meat: and the Alewife specially is not wearyed with them for
non-payment of their score, or false payment; to wit, with imaginary money,
which they say is not substantial, and that they talk not afterward about the
reckoning, and so discover the matter. And it is most marvel of all, that the
Hostess, etc. does not sit among them, and take part of their good cheer: For
so it is, that if any part of these their meetings and league be true, it is as
true and as certainly proved and confessed, that at some Alehouse, or some time
at some Gentleman's house, there is continual preparation made monthly for this
assembly: Legend. aur. in vita S. Germani.
as appears in S. Germans story.

CHAP. X.
That most part of Prophesies in the Old Testament were revealed in Dreams:
that we are not to look for such Revelations: of some who have dreamt of that
which has come to pass: that Dreams prove contrary. Nebuchadnezzars rule to
know a true Expositor of Dreams.

IT is held and maintained by diverse, and gathered out of the 12 of Numbers,
that all which was written or spoken by the Prophets, among the children of
Israel (Moses excepted) was propounded to them by Dreams. And indeed it is
manifest, that many things, which are thought by the unlearned to have been
really finished, have been only performed by Dreams and Visions. As where
Solomon required of God the gift of Wisdom, 1 Kin. 3.5, 15. 1 King. 9.5. Isa.
6. Ezekiel. 12. Jerem. 13.
that was (I say) in a Dream: and also, where he received promise of the
continuance of the Kingdom of Israel in his line. So was Isaiah's vision, in
the 6. of his Prophecy: as also that of Ezekiel the 12. Finally, where
Jeremiah was commanded To hide his girdle in the clift of a rock at the river
Euphrates in Babylon; and that after certain days, it did there putrify, it
must needs be in a Dream; for Jeremiah was never (or at leastwise not then) at
Babylon. We that are Christians must not now slumber and dream, but watch and
pray, and meditate upon our salvation in Christ both day and night. And if we
expect revelations in our Dreams, now, when Christ is come, we shall deceive
our selves; for in him are fulfilled all Dreams and Prophesies. J. Bodin lib.
de daem. 1. cap. 5.
Howbeit, Bodin holds, That Dreams and Visions continue till this day, in as
miraculous manner as ever they did.

If you read Artemidorus, you shall read many stories of such as dreamt of
things that afterward came to pass. But he might have cited a thousand for one
that fell out contrary; for, as for such Dreams among the Jews themselves as
had not extraordinary Visions miraculously exhibited unto them by God, they
were counted coseners, as may appear by these words of the Prophet Zechary,
Surely the Idols have spoken vanity, and the Soothsayers have seen a lie, Zech.
10.2. Eccles. 5.3. Jerem. 23.
and the Dreamers have told a vain thing. According to Solomon's saying, In the
multitude of dreams and vanities are many words. It appears in Jeremiah 23.
that the false Prophets, whilst they illuded the people with lies,
counterfeiting the true Prophets, used to cry out, Dreams, dreams; We have
dreamed a dream, etc. Finally, Nebuchadnezzar teaches all men to know a true
Expositor of Dreams; to wit, such a one as has his Revelation from God; Dan. 2.
for he can (as Daniel did) repeat your Dream before you discover it; which
thing, it any Expounder of Dreams can do at this day, I will believe him.

BOOK XI.
CHAP. I.
The Hebrew word Nahas expounded; of the Art of Augury; who invented it; how
slovenly a Science it is; the multitude of Sacrifices, and Sacrifices of the
Heathen, and the causes thereof.

NAHAS, is to observe the flying of Birds, and comprehends all such other
observations, where men do guess upon uncertain toys. It is found in Deuteronomy.
18. and in 2 Chronicles. 33. and elsewhere. Of this Art of Augury, Tyresias the King
of the Thebans is said to be the first inventor; but Tages first published the
discipline thereof, being but a little boy, as Cicero reports out of the
books of the Hetruscans themselves. The slovenly Art of Augury.
Some points of this Art are more high and profound then some others, and yet
are they more homely and slovenly then the rest; as namely, the Divination upon
the entrails of beasts, which the Gentiles in their sacrifices specially
observed. Insomuch as Marcus Varro, seeing the absurdity thereof, said, that
these gods were not only idle, but very slovens, that used so to hide their
secrets and councels in the guts and bowels of Beasts.

How vainly, absurdly, and superstitiously the Heathen used this kind of
Divination in their sacrifices, is manifested by their actions and ceremonies
in that behalf practiced, as well in times past, as at this hour. The
Egyptians had 666 several sorts and kinds of Sacrifices: the Romans had almost
as many: the Grecians had not so few as they: the Persians and Medes were not
behind them: the Indians and other Nations have at this instant their
Sacrifices full of variety, and more full of barbarous impiety; for in sundry
places, these offer sacrifices to the Devil, hoping thereby to move him to
lenity; yea, these commonly sacrifice such of their enemies, as they have taken
in war: as we read that the Gentiles in ancient time did offer sacrifice, to
appease the wrath and indignation of their feigned gods.

CHAP. II.
Of the Jews sacrifice to Moloch, a discourse thereupon, and of Purgatory.

THe Jews used one kind of Diabolical Sacrifice, never taught them by Moses, 2
Reg. 23.10. 2 Chr. 33.6.
namely, To offer their children to Moloch, making their sons and their
daughters to run through the fire: supposing such grace and efficacy to have
been in that action, as other Witches affirm to be in Charms and Words; and
therefore among other points of Witchcraft, Deuteronomy. 18.10. Levit. 18.21. and 20.2.
this is specially and namely forbidden by Moses. We read of no more Miracles
wrought hereby, then by any other kind of Witchcraft in the old or new
Testament expressed. It was no ceremony appointed by God, no figure of Christ;
perhaps it might be a sacrament, An invincible argument against Purgatory.
or rather a figure of Purgatory, the which place was not remembered by Moses.
Neither was there any sacrifice appointed by the law for the relief of
Israelites souls that there should be tormented. Which without all doubt should
not have been omitted, if any such place of Purgatory had been then, as the
Pope has lately devised for his private and special lucre. This Sacrificing to
Moloch (as some affirm) was usual among the Gentiles, from whence the Jews
brought it into Israel; and there (of likelihood) the Eutichists learned the
abomination in that behalf.

CHAP. III.
The Canibals cruelty: of Popish Sacrifices exceeding in tyranny the Jews or
Gentiles.

THe incivility and cruel Sacrifices of Popish Priests do yet exceed both the
Jew and the Gentile; Against the Papists abominable and blasphemous Sacrifice
of the Mass.
for these take upon them to sacrifice Christ himself. And to make their
tyranny the more apparent, they are not contented to have killed him once, but
daily and hourly torment him with new deaths; yea they are not ashamed to
swear, that with their carnal hands they tear his humane substance, breaking it
into small gobbets; and with their external teeth chew his flesh and bones,
contrary to Divine or humane nature; and contrary to the Prophecy, which
says, There shall not a bone of him be broken. Psalm. 34.20.
Finally, in the end of their sacrifices (as they say) they eat him up raw, and
swallow down into their guts every member and parcel of him: and last of all,
that they convey him into the place where they bestow the residue of all that
which they have devoured that day. And this same barbarous impiety exceeds
the cruelty of all others; for all the Gentiles consumed their sacrifices with
fire, which they thought to be holy.

CHAP. IV.
The superstition of the Heathen about the element of fire, and how it grew in
such reverence among them; of their corruptions, and that they had some inkling
of the godly Fathers doings in that behalf.

AS touching the element of fire, and the superstition thereof about those
businesses, you shall understand, that many superstitious people of all Nations
have received, and reverenced, as the most holy thing among their sacrifices;
insomuch (I say) as they have worshipped it among their gods, calling it
Orimasda (to wit) holy fire, and Divine light: The Greeks called it (...), the
Romans, Vesta, which is, The fire of the Lord. Surely they had heard of the
fire that came down from heaven, and consumed the oblations of the Fathers; and
they understood it to be God himself: For there came to the Heathen, the bare
names of things, from the doctrine of the godly Fathers and Patriarchs, and
those so obscured with fables, and corrupted with lies, so overwhelmed with
superstitions, and disguised with ceremonies, that it is hard to judge from
whence they came. Some cause thereof (I suppose) was partly the translations of
Governments, whereby one Nation learned folly of another; and partly blind
devotion, without knowledge of Gods Word; but specially the want of Grace,
which they sought not for, according to Gods commandment and will. And that
the Gentiles had some inkling of the godly Fathers doings, may diversely appear.
Do not the Muscovits, and Indian prophets at this day, The Gymnosophists of
India their apish imitation of Esaias.
like apes, imitate Esaias? Because he went naked certain years, they forsooth
counterfeit madness, and drink potions for that purpose; thinking that
whatsoever they say in their madness, will certainly come to pass. But hereof
is more largely discoursed before in the word Kasam.

CHAP. V.
Of the Roman Sacrifices: of the estimation they had of the Augury; of the
twelve Tables.

THe Romans, even after they were grown to great civility, and enjoyed a most
flourishing State and Commonwealth, would sometimes sacrifice themselves,
sometimes their children, sometimes their friends, etc. consuming the same with
fire, which they thought holy. Such estimation (I say) was attributed to that
of Divination upon the entrails of Beasts, etc. At Rome, the chief Princes
themselves exercised the same; namely, Romulus, Fabius Maximum, etc. insomuch
as there was a decree made there, by the whole Senate, that six of the chief
Magistrates Sons should from time to time be put forth, to learn the mystery of
these Arts of Augury and Divination, at Hetruria, where the cunning and
knowledge thereof most abounded. When they came home well informed and
instructed in this Art, their estimation and dignity was such, as they were
accounted, reputed, and taken to be the interpreters of the gods, or rather
between the gods and them. No high Priest, nor any other great officer was
elected, but these did absolutely nominate them, or else did exhibit the names
of two, whereof the Senate must choose the one.

The law of the twelve tables.
In their ancient Laws were written these words: Prodigia and portenta ad
Hetruscos aruspices (si Senatus jusserit) deferunto, Hetruriaeque principes
disciplinam discunto, Quibus divis decreverunt, procuranto, isdem fulgura and
ostenta pianto, auspicia servanto, auguri parento: the effect of which words
are this, Let all prodigious and portentous matters be carried to the
Soothsayers of Hetruria, at the will and commandment of the Senate; and let
the young Princes be sent to Hetruria, there to learn that Discipline, or to be
instructed in that Art and Knowledge. Let there be always some Solicitor, to
learn with what gods they have decreed or determined their matters; and let
Sacrifices be made unto them in times of lightening, or at any strange or
supernatural show. Let all such conjecturing tokens be observed; whatsoever the
Soothsayer commands, let it be religiously obeyed.

CHAP. VI.
Colleges of Augurers, their office, their number, the signification of
Augury, that the practisers of that Art were coseners; their profession, their
places of exercise, their apparel, their superstition.

ROmulus erected three Colleges or Centuries of those kinds of Soothsayers,
which only (and none other) should have authority to expound the minds and
admonishment of the gods. Afterward that number was augmented to five, and
after that to nine: for they must needs be odd. In the end they increased so
fast, that they were fain to make a decree for stay, from the further
proceeding in those erections; Magna Charta 3 H. 36.7 Ed. 1.15.2 R. 5.
like to our Statute of Mortmaine. Howbeit, Sylla (contrary to all orders and
constitutions before made) increased that number to four and twenty.

And though Augurium be most properly that Divination which is gathered by
Birds; yet because this word Nahas comprehends all other kinds of Divination,
as Extispicium, aruspicium, etc. which is as well the guessing upon the
entrails of beasts, as diverse other ways: omitting Physiognomy and Palmestry,
and such like, for the tediousness and folly thereof; I will speak a little of
such Arts as were above measure regarded of our elders; neither mind I to
discover the whole circumstance, but to refute the vanity thereof, and
specially of the Professors of them, which are and always have been cousening
Arts, and in them contained both special and several kinds of Witchcrafts: For
the Masters of these faculties have ever taken upon them to occupy the place
and name of God; blasphemously ascribing unto themselves his Omnipotent Power
to foretell, etc. whereas in truth, they could or can do nothing, but make a
show of that which is not.

One matter, to bewray their cosening, is; that they could never work nor
foreshew any thing to the poor or inferior sort of people: A manifest discovery
of Augurers cosenage.
for portentous shows (say they) always concerned great Estates. Such matters
as touched the baser sort, were inferior causes; which the superstition of the
people themselves would not neglect to learn. Howbeit, the Professors of this
Art descended not so low, as to communicate with them: for they were Priests
(which in all Ages and Nations have been jolly fellows) whose office was, to
tell what should come to pass, either touching good luck, or bad fortune; to
expound the minds, admonitions, warnings and threatenings of the Gods, to
foreshew calamities, etc. which might be (by their Sacrifices and common
contrition) removed and qualified. And before their entrance into that action,
they had many observations, which they executed very superstitiously;
pretending that every Bird and Beast, etc. should be sent from the Gods as
fore-shewers of somewhat. And therefore first they used to choose a clear day,
and fair weather to do their business in: for the which their place was
certainly assigned, as well in Rome as in Hetruria, wherein they observed every
quarter of the element, which way to look, and which way to stand, etc. Their
Apparel was very Priest-like, of fashion altered from all others, specially at
the time of their Prayers, wherein they might not omit a word nor a syllable:
in respect whereof one read the Service, and all the residue repeated it after
him, in the manner of a Procession.

CHAP. VII.
The Times and Seasons to exercise Augury, the Manner and Order thereof, of the
Ceremonies thereunto belonging.

NO less regard was there had of the times of their practice in that ministry:
for they must begin at midnight, and end at noon, Note the superstitious
Ceremonies of Augurers.
not traveling therein in the decay of the day, but in the Increase of the
same; neither in the sixth or seventh hour of the day, nor yet after the month
of August; because then young Birds then fly about, and are diseased and
unperfect, mounting their feathers, and flying out of the Country: so as no
certain guess is to be made of the Gods purposes by them at those seasons. But
in their due times they standing with a bowed wand in their hand, their face
toward the East, etc. in the top of an high Tower, the weather being clear,
watch for Birds, noting from whence they came, and whither they fly, and in
what sort they wag their wings, etc.

CHAP. VIII.
Upon what Signs and Tokens Augurers did Prognosticate; Observations touching
the Inward and Outward parts of Beasts, with notes of Beasts behavior in the
Slaughterhouse.

THese kind of Witches, whom we have now in hand, did also prognosticate good
or bad luck, according to the soundness or imperfection of the entrails of
Beasts; or according to the superfluities or infirmities of nature; or
according to the abundance of humors unnecessary, appearing in the inward
parts and bowels of the Beasts sacrificed: For as touching the outward parts,
it was always provided and foreseen, that they should be without blemish.
Observations in the Art augurifical.
And yet there were many tokens and notes to be taken of the external actions
of those Beasts, at the time of sacrifice: as if they would not quietly be
brought to the place of execution, but must be forcibly hailed; or if they
brake loose; or if by hap, cunning or strength they withstood the first blow,
or if after the Butchers blow they leaped up, roared, stood fast; or being
fallen, kicked, or would not quietly die, or bled not well; or if any ill news
had been heard, or any ill sight seen at the time of slaughter or sacrifice:
which were all significations of ill luck and unhappy success. On the other
side, if the slaughter man performed his office well, so as the beast had been
well chosen, not infected, but whole and sound, and in the end fair killed, all
had been safe: for then the Gods smiled.

CHAP. IX.
A confutation of Augury; Plato his reverend Opinion thereof, of contrary
Events, and false Predictions.

BUt what credit is to be attributed to such toys and chances, which grow not
of Nature, but are gathered by the superstition of the Interpreters? As for
Birds, who is so ignorant that conceives not, that one flies one way, another
another way, about their private necessities? And yet are the other divinations
more vain and foolish. Plato in Phaedro, in Timeo, in lib. de Republ.
Howbeit, Plato thinks a Commonwealth cannot stand without this Art, and
numbereth it among the liberal Sciences. These fellows promised Pompy, Cassius,
and Caesar, that none of them should die before they were old, and that in
their own houses, and in great honor; and yet they all died clean contrarily.
Wherein the Papists are more blameworthy then the Heathen.
Howbeit doubtless, the Heathen in this point were not so much to be blamed, as
the sacrificing Papists: for they were directed hereunto without the knowledge
of Gods promises, neither knew they the end why such Ceremonies and Sacrifices
were instituted; but only understood by an uncertain and slender report, that
God was wont to send good or ill success to the children of Israel, and to the
old Patriarchs and Fathers, upon his acceptance or disallowance of their
Sacrifices and Oblations. But men in all ages have been so desirous to know the
effect of their purposes, the sequel of things to come, and to see the end of
their fear and hope; that a silly Witch, which has learned any thing in the
Art of cosenage, may make a great many jolly fools.

CHAP. X.
The cosening Art of Sortilege or Lottery, practiced especially by Egyptian
Vagabonds, of allowed Lots, of Pythagoras his Lot, etc.

THe counterfeit Egyptians, which were indeed cosening Vagabonds, practicing
the Art called Sortilegium, Soritlege or Lotshare.
had no small credit among the multitude: Howbeit, their Divinations were as
was their fast and loose, and as the Witches cures and hurts, and as the
Soothsayers answers, and as the Conjurers raising up of spirits, and as
Apollo's or the Roed of Grace's Oracles, and as the Jugglers knacks of
Legierdemain, and as the Papists Exorcisms, and as the Witches charms, and as
the counterfeit Visions, and as the coseners Knaveries, Hereupon it was said,
Non inveniatur inter vos Menahas, that is, Sortilegus, which were like to these
Egyptian coseners. As for other lots, they were used, and that lawfully, as
appears by Jonas and others that were holy men, and as may be seen among all
Commonwealths, for the deciding of diverse Controversies, etc. wherein thy
neighbor is not misused, nor God any way offended. But in truth I think,
because of the cosenage that so easily may be used herein, God forbad it in the
Commonwealth of the Jews, though in the good use thereof it was allowed in
matters of great weight; as appears both in the Old and New Testament; and
that as well in doubtful cases and distributions, as in Elections, Levit. 16.1.
Numb. 33. and 36.

Josh. 14. 1. Chron. 24. and 26.

Proverb. 18. Jonas 1. Acts 1.


and Inheritances, and pacification of variances. I omit to speak any thing of
the Lots comprised in Verses, concerning the luck ensuing, either of Virgil,
Homer, or any other, wherein fortune is gathered by the sudden turning unto
them: because it is a childish and ridiculous toy, and like unto childrens play
at Primus, secundus, or the game called The Philosophers Table: but herein I
will refer you to the babble it self, or else to Bodin, or to some such sober
Written thereupon, of whom there is no want.

There is a Lot also called Pythagora's Lot, which (some say) Aristotle
believed: Of Pythagoras lot.
and that is, where the characters of letters have certain proper numbers;
whereby they divine (through the proper names of men) so as the numbers of each
letter being gathered in a sum, and put together, give victory to them whose
sum is the greater, whether the question be of War, Life, Matrimony, Victory,
etc. even as the unequal number of vowels in proper names portendeth lack of
sight, halting, etc. which the Godfathers and Godmothers might easily
prevent, if the case stood so.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Cabalistical Art, consisting of Traditions and Unwritten Varieties
learned without Book, and of the Division thereof.

HEre is also place for the Cabalistical Art, consisting of unwritten Verities,
which the Jews do believe and brag, that God himself gave to Moses in
Mount-Sinai; and afterward was taught only with lively voice, by degrees of
succession, without writing, until the time of Esdras; even the Scholars of
Archippus did use Wit and Memory in stead of Books. The Art Cabalistical
divided.
They divide this in twain; the one expounds with Philosophical reason the
Secrets of the Law and the Bible, wherein (they say) that Solomon was very
cunning; because it is written in the Hebrew Stories, that he disputed from the
Cedar to Libanus, even to the Hysope, also of Birds, Beasts, etc. The other is,
as it were, a Symbolical Divinity of the highest Contemplation, of the divine
and angelike virtues, of holy names and signs; wherein the letters, numbers,
figures, things and arms, the pricks over the letters, the lines, the points,
and the accents do all signify very profound things and great secrets. By
these Arts the Atheists suppose Moses wrote all his Miracles, and that hereby
they have power over Angels and Devils, as also to do miracles: yea, and that
hereby all the miracles that either any of the Prophets, or Christ himself
wrought, were accomplished.

But C. Agrippa having searched to the bottom of this Art, says, C. Agrippa
lib. de vanit. scient.
it is nothing but superstition and folly. Otherwise you may be sure Christ
would not have hidden it from his Church: For this cause the Jews were so
skilful in the Names of God, But there is none other Name in Heaven or Earth,
in which we might be saved, but Jesus: neither is that meant by his bare Name,
but by his virtue and goodness toward us. These Cabalists do further brag, The
blasphemy of the Cabalists.
that they are able hereby, not only to find out and know the unspeakable
mysteries of God, but also the secrets which are above Scripture; whereby also
they take upon them to Prophecy, and to work Miracles: yea hereby they can
make what they list to be Scripture; as Valeria Proba did pick certain Verses
out of Virgile, alluding them to Christ. And therefore these their Revolutions
are nothing but Allegorical Games, which idle men busied in Letters, Points,
and Numbers, (which the Hebrew tongue easily suffers) devise to delude and
cosen the simple and ignorant. And this they call Alphabetary or Arithmetical
Divinity, which Christ showed to his Apostles only, and which Paul says, he
speaks but among perfect men; and being high mysteries are not to be
committed unto writing, and so made popular. There is no man that reads any
thing of this Cabalistical Art, but must needs think upon the Popes cunning
practices in this behalf, In Council. Trident.
who has In scrinio pectoris, not only the Exposition of all Laws, both Divine
and Humane, but also Authority to add thereunto, or to draw back therefrom at
his pleasure: and this may he lawfully do even with the Scriptures, either by
addition or substraction, after his own pontifical liking. As for example, He
has added the Apocrypha (whereunto he might as well have joined S. Augustine's
Works, or the course of the Civil Law, etc.) Again, he has diminished from the
Decalogue or Ten Commandments, not one or two words, but a whole Precept,
namely the second, which it has pleased him to dash out with his pen: and
truly he might as well by the same authority have rased out of the Testament S.
Mark's Gospel.

CHAP. XII.
When, How, and in What sort Sacrifices were first Ordained, and how they were
profaned, and how the Pope corrupeth the Sacraments of Christ.

Genesis 2.17.
AT the first God manifested to our father Adam, by the prohibition of the
Apple, that he would have man live under a law, in obedience and submission;
and not to wander like a Beast without order or discipline. And after man had
transgressed, and deserved thereby Gods heavy displeasure, yet his mercy
prevailed; Genesis 3.6. Genesis 3.15.
and taking compassion upon man, he promised the Messiah, who should be born of
a woman, and break the Serpents head: declaring by evident testimonies, that
his pleasure was that man should be restored to savor and grace, through
Christ: and binding the minds of men to this promise, and to be fixed upon
their Messiah, established Figures and Ceremonies wherewith to nourish their
Faith, and confirmed the same with miracles, prohibiting and excluding all man's
devices in that behalf. Lev. 12.13, etc.
And upon his promise renewed, he enjoined (I say) and erected a new form of
worship, whereby he would have his promises constantly beheld, faithfully
believed, and reverently regarded. He ordained six sorts of divine Sacrifices;
three Propitiatory, not as meriting remission of sins, but as figures of
Christ's propitiation: the other three were of thanksgiving. These Sacrifices
were full of Ceremonies, they were powdered with consecrated Salt, and kindled
with fire, which was preserved in the Tabernacle of the Lord: which fire (some
think) was sent down from heaven. God himself commanded these Rites and
Ceremonies to our forefathers, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, etc. promising
therein both the amplification of their families, and also their Messiah. But
in tract of time (I say) wantonness, negligence, and contempt, through the
instigation of the Devil, abolished this institution of God: so as in the end,
God himself was forgotten among them, and they became Pagans and Heathens,
devising their own ways, until every Country had devised and erected both new
Sacrifices, and also new Gods particular unto themselves. Whose example the
Pope follows, in profaning of Christ's Sacraments, A gird at the Pope for his
sawciness in Gods matters.
disguising them with his devices and superstitious Ceremonies, contriving and
comprehending therein the folly of all Nations: the which, because little
children do now perceive and scorn, I will pass over, and return to the
Gentiles, whom I cannot excuse of cosenage, superstition, nor yet of vanity in
this behalf: For if God suffered false Prophets among the children of Israel,
being Gods peculiar people, and hypocrites in the Church of Christ, no marvel
if there were such people amongst the Heathen which neither professed nor knew
him.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Objects whereupon the Augurers used to Prognosticate, with certain
Cautions and Notes.

THe Gentiles, which treat of this matter, repeat an innumerable multitude of
Objects, whereupon they prognosticate good or bad luck. And a great matter is
made of sneezing, wherein the number of sneezings and the time thereof is
greatly noted; the tingling in the finger, the elbow, the toe, the knee, etc.
are singular notes also to be observed in this Art; though specially herein are
marked the flying of Fowls, and meeting of Beasts, with this general caution,
that the object or matter whereon men divine, must be sudden and unlocked for:
which regard, children and some old fools have to the gathering Prim-roses,
True-loves, and four-leaved grass: Item, the person unto whom such an object
offers it self unawares; Item, the intention of the diviner, whereof the
object which is met, is referred to Augury; Item, the hour in which the object
is without foreknowledge upon the sudden met withal, and so forth.

Pliny reports that Gryphes fly always to the place of slaughter, Plin.
lib. natural. hist. 10. c. 6.
two or three days before the battle is fought; which was seen and tried at
the battle of Troy; and in respect thereof, the Gryphe was allowed to be the
chief Bird of Augury. But among the innumerable number of the portentous Beast,
Fowls, Arist. in Auguriis.
Serpents, and other creatures, the Toad is the most excellent object, whose
ugly deformity signifies sweet and amiable fortune: in respect whereof some
superstitious Witches preserve Toads for their familiars. And some one of good
credit (whom I could name) having convented the Witches themselves, has
starved diverse of their Devils, which they kept in boxes in the likeness of
Toads.

Plutarch Cheronaeus says, that the place and site of the signs that we
receive by Augury, are specially to be noted: for if we receive them on the
left side, Plutarch doateth his leave for all his, learning.
good luck; if on the right side, ill luck insueth: because terrene and mortal
things are opposite and contrary to divine and heavenly things; for that which
the Gods deliver with the right hand, falls to our left side; and so
contrariwise.

CHAP. XIV.
The division of Augury; persons admittable into the Colleges of Augury; of
their Superstition.

THe latter Diviners in these mysteries, Aug. Niphus de Auguriis, lib. 1.
have divided their soothsayings into twelve Superstitions, as Augustinus
Niphus terms them. The first is prosperity; the second, ill luck, as when one
goes out of his house, and sees an unlucky beast lying on the right side of
his way; the third is destiny; the fourth is fortune; the fifth is ill hap, as
when an unfortunate beast feeds on the right side of your way; the sixth is
utility; the seventh is hurt; the eight is called a cautel, as when a beast
follows one, and stays at any side, not passing beyond him, which is a sign
of good luck; the ninth is infelicity, and that is contrary to the eight, as
when the beast passes before one; the tenth is perfection; the eleventh is
imperfection; the twelft is confusion. Thus far he.

Among the Romans none could be received into the College of Augurers that had
a bile, or had been bitten with a Dog, Who were not admittable into the
College of Augurers among the Romans.
etc. and at the times of their exercise, even at noon-days, they lighted
Candles. From whence the Papists convey unto their Church those points of
infidelity. Finally, their observations were so infinite and ridiculous, that
there flew not a sparkle out of the fire, but it betokened somewhat.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Common Peoples fond and superstitious Collections and Observations.

O vain folly and foolish vanity!
AMongst us there be many women, and effeminate men (marry Papists always, as
by their superstition may appear) that make great Divinations upon the shedding
of Salt, Wine, etc. and for the observation of days and hours use as great
Witchcraft as in any thing: For if one chance to take a fall from a Horse,
either in a slippery or stumbling way, he will note the day and hour, and count
that time unlucky for a journey. Otherwise, he that receives a mischance, will
consider whether he met not a Cat, or a Hare, when he went first out of his
doors in the morning; or stumbled not at the threshhold at his going out; or
put not on his shirt the wrong side outward; or his left shoe on his right
foot, which Augustus Caesar reputed for the worst luck that might befall. Martin
de Arles in tract. de superst. contra. maleficia.

Appian. de bello civils.


But above all other Nations (as Martinus de Arles witnesses) the Spaniards
are most superstitious herein; and of Spain, the people of the Province of
Lusitania is the most fond: For one will say, I had a dream to night, or a Crow
croaked upon my house, or an Owl flew by me, and screeched, (at which Augury
Lucius Sylla took his death), or a Cock crew contrary to his hour. Another
says, The Moon is at the prime; another, that the Sun rose in a cloud and
looked pale, or a Star shot and shined in the air; or a strange Cat came into
the house; Augurifical toys.
or a Hen fell from the top of the house. Many will go to bed again, if they
sneeze before their shoes be on their feet; some will hold fast their left
thumb in their right hand when they hickot; or else will hold their chin with
their right hand whiles a Gospel is sung. It is thought very ill luck of some,
that a child, or any other living creature, should pass between two friends as
they walk together; for they say it portendeth a division of friendship. Among
the Papists themselves, if any hunters, as they were a hunting, chanced to meet
a Friar, or a Priest, they thought it so ill luck, as they would couple up
their Hounds, and go home, being in despair of any further sport that day.
Marry if they had used venery with a beggar, they should win all the money they
played for that day at dice. The like folly is to be imputed unto them that
observe (as true or probable) old verses, wherein can be no reasonable cause of
such effects which are brought to pass only by Gods power, and at his pleasure.
Of this sort be these that follow: Vincenti festo si sol radiet memor esto.
Englished by Abraham Fleming: Remember on S. Vincents day,
If that the Sun his beams display.
Clara dies Pauli bona tempora denotat anni. Englished by Abraham Fleming: If
Paul the Apstoles day be clear,
It does fore-shew a lucky year.
Si sol splendescat Maria purificante,
Major erit glacies post festum quam fuit antc.
Englished by Abraham Fleming: If Mary's purifying day
Be clear and bright with Sunny ray,
Then frost and cold shall be much more
After the feast than was before.
Sero rubens coelum cras indicat esse serenum;
Si mane rubescit, ventus vel pluvia crescit.
Englished by Abraham Fleming: The sky being red at evening,
Fore-shews a fair and clear morning;
But if the morning rises red,
Of wind or rain we shall be sped.
Some stick a needle or a buckle into a certain tree, near to the Cathedral
Church of S. Christopher, or of some other Saint, hoping thereby to be
delivered that year from the headache. Item, Maids forsooth hang some of their
hair before the Image of S. Urbane, because they would have the rest of the
hair grow long and be yellow. Item, Women with child run to Church, and tie
their Girdles or Shooe-lachets about a Bell, and strike upon the same thrice,
thinking that the sound thereof hastes their good delivery. But sithence, Seek
more hereof in the word Habar.
these things begin to touch the vanities and superstitions of Incantations, I
will refer you thither, where you shall see of that stuff abundance, beginning
at the word Habar.

CHAP. XVI.
How old Writers vary about the matter, the manner, and the means, whereby
things augurifical are moved.

THeophrastus and Themistius affirm, that whatsoever happens unto man
suddenly and by chance, comes from the Providence of God. So as Themistius
gathers, that men in that respect Prophecy, when they speak what comes in
their brain upon the sudden, though not knowing or understanding what they say.
And that seeing God has a care for us, Averroes. 12. Metaphysic.
it agrees with reason (as Theophrastus says) that he show us by some mean
whatsoever shall happen: For with Pythagoras he concludes, that all foreshews
and auguries are the voices and words of God, by the which he foretells man
the good or evil that shall betide.

Trismegistus affirms, that all augurifical things are moved by Devils;
Porphyrie says by Gods, or tather good Angels, according to the opinion of
Plotinus and Jamblichus. Some other affirm, they are moved by the Moon wandering
through the twelve Signs of the Zodiake, because the Moon has dominion in all
sudden matters. The Egyptian Astronomers hold, that the Moon orders not
those portentous matters, but Stella errans, a wandering Star, etc.

CHAP. XVII.
How ridiculous an Art Augury is; how Cato mocked it; Aristotle's reason
against it; fond Collections of Augurers, who allowed, and who disallowed it.

The fond Art of Augury convinced.
VErily all these Observations being neither grounded on Gods Word, nor Physical
or Philosophical Reason, are Vanities, Superstitions, Lies, and mere
Witchcraft; as whereby the world has long time been, and is still abused and
cosened. It is written, Non est vestrum scire tempora and momenta, etc. It is
not for you to know the times and seasons, which the Father has put in his own
power. The most godly men and the wisest Philosophers have given no credit
hereunto. S. Augustine says, Qui his divinationibus credit, sciat se fidem
Christianam and baptismum praevaricasse, and Paganum Deique inimicum esse. He
that gives credit to these Divinations, let him know that he has abused the
Christian Faith and his Baptism, and is a Pagan, and an Enemy to God. One told
Cato, that a Rat had carried away and eaten his Hose, which the party said was
a wonderful sign. Nay (said Cato) I think not so; but if the Hose had eaten the
Rat, that had been a wonderful token indeed. When Nonius told Cicero that they
should have good success in battle, because seven Eagles were taken in Pompies
Camp, he answered thus; No doubt it will be even so, if that we chance to fight
with Pies. In like case also he answered Labienus, who prophesied like success
by such Divinations, That through the hope of such toys, Pompy lost all his
Pavillions not long before.

What wise man would think, that God would commit his council to a Daw, an Owl,
a Swine, or a Toad; or that he would hide his secret purposes in the dung and
bowels of Beasts? Arist. de some.
Aristotle thus reasons; Augury or Divinations are neither the causes nor
effects of things to come; Ergo, they do not thereby foretell things truly, but
by chance. As if I dream that my friend will come to my house, and he comes
indeed: yet neither dream nor imagination is more the cause of my friends
coming than the chattering of a Pie.

When Hannibal overthrew Marcus Marcellus, the Beast sacrificed wanted a piece
of his heart; therefore forsooth Marius when he sacrificed at Utica, and the
beast lacked his liver, he must needs have the like success. These are their
Collections, and as vain as if they said, that the building of
Tenderden-steeple was the cause of Goodwines-Sands, or the decay of
Sandwich-Haven. S. Augustine says, August. lib. de doct. chri. 2. cap. 2.3.
Psalm. 4.2. Plin. lib. natural. hist. 28. cap. 2. Tho.
that these Observations are most superstitious. But we read in the fourth
Psalm, a sentence which might dissuade any Christian from this folly and
impiety; O ye sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame, loving
vanity, and seeking lies? The like is read in many other places of Scripture.

Of such as allow this folly, I can commend Pliny best, who says, that the
operation of these Auguries is as we take them: For if we take them in good
part, they are signs of good luck; if we take them in ill part, ill luck
follows; if we neglect them, Aquin. lib. de sortib.
and weigh them not, they do neither good nor harm. Thomas of Aquine reasons
in this wise; The Stars, whose course is certain, have greater affinity and
community with man's actions, than Auguries; and yet our doings are neither
directed nor proceed from the Stars; Which thing also Ptolomey witnesses,
saying Sapiens dominabitur astris, A wiseman over-ruleth the Stars.

CHAP. XVIII.
Pond Distinctions of the Heathen Writers concerning Augury.

THe Heathen made a distinction between divine, natural, C* Epidius. Homer.
Iliad. 19.
and casual Auguries. Divine Auguries were such, as men were made believe were
done miraculously, as when Dogs spoke, as at the expulsion of Tarquinius out of
his Kingdom; or when Trees spoke, as before the death of Caesar; or when Horses
spoke, as did a Horse whose name was Zanthus. Many learned Christians confess,
that such things as may indeed have a divine cause, may be called divine
Auguries, or rather fore-warnings of God, and tokens either of his blessings or
discontentation; as the Star was a token of a safe passage to the Magicians
that sought Christ; so was the Cock-crowing an Augury to Peter for his
conversion. And many such other Divinations or Auguries (if it be lawful so to
term them) are in Scriptures to be found.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Natural and Casual Augury, the one allowed, and the other disallowed.

NAtural Augury is a Physical or Philosophical observation; because humane and
natural reason may be yielded for such events: as if one hear the Cock crow
many times together, a man may guess that rain will follow shortly, as by the
crying of Rooks, and by their extraordinary using of their wings in their
flight, because through a natural instinct, provoked by the impression of the
heavenly bodies, they are moved to know the times, according to the disposition
of the weather, as it is necessary for their natures. And therefore Jeremy
says, Milvus in coelo cognovit tempus suum. The Physician may argue a strength
toward his patient, when he hears him sneeze twice, which is a natural cause
to judge by, and conjecture upon. But sure it is mere casual, and also very
foolish and incredible, that by two sneezings, a man should be sure of good
luck or success in his business; or by meeting of a Toad, a man should escape a
danger, or atchieve an enterprise, etc.

CHAP. XX.
A Confutation of Casual Augury which is mere Witchcraft, and upon what
uncertainty those Divinations are grounded.

WHat imagination works in man or woman, many leaves would not comprehend;
for as the qualities thereof are strange, and almost incredible, so would the
discourse thereof be long and tedious, whereof I had occasion to speak
elsewhere. But the power of our imagination extends nor to Beasts, nor
reaches to Birds, and therefore pertains not hereunto. Neither can the
chance for the right or left side be good or bad luck in it self. Why should
any Occurrent or Augury be good, because it comes out of that part of the
Heavens, where the good or beneficial Stars are placed? By that reason, all
things should be good and happy that live on that side, but we see the contrary
by experience, and as commonly as that.

The like absurdity and error is in them that credit those Divinations, The
vanity of Casual Augury.
because the Stars over the ninth House have dominion at the time of Augury. If
it should betoken good luck, joy or gladness, to hear a noise in the house,
when the Moon is in Aries: and contrariwise, if it be a sign of ill luck,
sorrow, or grief for a Beast to come into the house, the Moon being in the same
sign: here might be found a foul error and contrariety. And for so much as both
may happen at once, the rule must needs be false and ridiculous. And if there
were any certain rules or notes to be gathered in these Divinations, the abuse
therein is such, Isa. 44.25.
as the Word of God must needs be verified therein; to wit, I will destroy the
tokens of Soothsayers, and make them that conjecture, fools.

CHAP. XXI.
The Figure-casters are Witches; the uncertainty of their Art, and of their
contradictions; Cornelius Agrippa's sentence against Judicial Astrology.

THese Casters of Figures may be numbered among the cosening Witches, whose
practice is above their reach, their purpose to gain, their knowledge stolen
from Poets, their uncertain and full vanity, more plainly derided in the
Scriptures, The vain and trifling tricks of Figure casters.
than any other folly. And thereupon many other trifling vanities are rooted
and grounded, as Physiognomy, Palmestry, interpreting of Dreams, Monsters,
Auguries, etc. the Professors whereof confess this to be the necessary Key to
open the knowledge of all their secrets. For these fellows erect a figure of
the Heavens, by the exposition whereof (together with the conjectures of
similitudes and signs) they seek to find out the meaning of the significators,
attributing to them the ends of all things, contrary to truth, reason, and
divinity: their rules being so inconstant, that few Writers agree in the very
principles thereof. For the Rabbbins, the old and new Writers, and the very
best Philosophers dissent in the chief grounds thereof, differing in the
propriety of the houses, whereout they wring the foretelling of things to
come, contending even about the number of spheres, being not yet resolved how
to erect the beginnings and ends of the houses: for Ptolomy makes them after
one sort, Campanus after another, etc.

And as Alpetragus thinks, that there be in the Heavens diverse movings as yet
to men unknown, so do others affirm (not without probability) that there may be
Stars and Bodies, to whom these movings may accord, which cannot be seen,
either through their exceeding highness, or that hitherto are not tried with
any observation of the Art. Johan. Montiregius in epist. ad Blanchim. and
Gulielmus de sancto Clodoald. Rabbi Levi. C. Agrip. in lib. de vanit. scient.
Archelaus. Cassand. Eudoxus, etc.
The true motion of Mars is not yet perceived, neither is it possible to find
out the true entering of the Sun into the equinoctal points. It is not denied,
that the Astronomers themselves have received their light, and their very Art
from Poets, without whose fables the twelve signs, and the northerly and
southerly figures had never ascended into Heaven. And yet (as C. Agryppa says)
Astrologers do sive, cosen men, and gain by these fables, whiles the Poets,
which are the inventers of them, do live in beggary.

The very skilfullest Mathematicians confess, that it is impossible to find out
any certain thing concerning the knowledge of Judgments, as well for the
innumerable causes which work together with the Heavens, being altogether, and
one with the other to be considered: as also because influences do not
constrain but incline: For many ordinary and extraordinary occasions do
interrupt them; as education, custom, place, honesty, birth, blood, sickness,
health, strength, weakness, meat, drink, liberty of mind, learning, etc. And
they that have written the rules of judgment, and agreee nearest therein, being
of equal authority and learning, publish so contrary opinions upon one thing,
that it is unpossible for an Astrologian to pronounce a certainty upon so
variable opinions; and otherwise, upon so uncertain reports no man is able to
judge herein. So as (according to Ptolomy) the foreknowledge of things to come
by the Stars, depends as well upon the affections of the mind, as upon the
observation of the Planets, proceeding rather from chance than Art, as whereby
they deceive others, and are deceived themselves also.

CHAP. XXII.
The subtilty of Astrologers to maintain the credit of their Art; why they
remain in credit, certain impieties contained in Astrologers assertions.

IF you mark the cunning ones, Astrologers Prognostications are like the
answers of Oracles.
you shall see them speak darkly of things to come, devising by artificial
subtilty, doubtful Prognostications, easily to be applied to every thing, Time,
Prince, and Nation; and if any thing come to pass according to their
Divinations, they fortify their old Prognostications with new reasons.
Nevertheless, in the multitude and variety of Stars, yea even in the very midst
of them, they find out some places in a good aspect, and some in an ill; and
take occasion hereupon to say what they list, promising unto some men Honor,
long Life, Wealth, Victory, Children, Marriage, Friends, Offices, and finally,
everlasting Felicity: But if with any they be discontented, they say the Stars
be not favorable to them, and threaten them with Hanging, Drowning, Beggary,
Sickness, Misfortune, etc. And if one of these Prognostications fall out right,
then they triumph above measure. If the Prognosticators be found to forge and
lie always (without such fortune as the blind man had in killing the Crow)
they will excuse the matter, saying, that Sapiens dominatur astris, whereas
(according to Agrippas words) neither the wiseman rules the Stars, nor the
Stars the Wiseman, but God rules them both. Corn. Tacitus says, That they are
a people disloyal to Princes, deceiving them that believe them. And Varro
says, That the vanity of all superstitions flows out of the bosom of
Astrology. And if our life and fortune depend not on the Stars, then it is to
be granted, that the Astrologers seek where nothing is to be found. But we are
so fond, mistrustful and credulous, that we fear more the fables of Robin
Goodfellow, Astrologers, and Witches, and believe more the things that are not,
than the things that are. And the more unpossible a thing is, the more we stand
in fear thereof; and the less likely to be true, the more we believe it. And if
we were not such, I think with Cornelius Agrippa, that these Diviners,
Astrologers, Conjurers, and Coseners would dye for hunger.

And our foolish light belief, forgetting things past, neglecting things
present, aad very hasty to know things to come, does so comfort and maintain
these coseners; that whereas in other men, for making one lie, the faith of him
that speaks is so much mistrusted, that all the residue being true is not
regarded: Contrariwise, in these cosenages among our Divinors, one truth spoken
by hap, gives such credit to all their lies, that ever after we believe
whatsoever they say, how incredible, impossible or false soever it be. Sir
Thomas Moore says, Sir Thomas Moors frump at judicial Astrologers.
they know not who are in their own chambers, neither who makes themselves
cockolds, that take upon them all this cunning, knowledge and great foresight.
But to enlarge their credit, or rather to manifest their impudency, they say
the gift of Prophecy, the force of Religion, the secrets of Conscience, the
power of Devils, the virtue of Miracles, the efficacy of Prayers, the state of
the life to come, etc. does only depend upon the Stars, and is given and known
by them alone: For they say, that when the sign of Gemini is ascended,
Astrological blasphemies.
and Saturn and Mercury be joined in Aquary, in the ninth house of the heavens,
there is a Prophet born; and therefore that Christ had so many virtues, because
he had in that place Saturn and Gemini. Yea, these Astrologers do not stick to
say, that the Stars distribute all sorts of Religions, wherein Jupiter is the
especial patron, who being joined with Saturn, makes the religion of the Jews;
with Mercury of the Christians; with the Moon of Antichristianity. Yea, they
affirm, that the faith of every man may be known to them as well as to God. And
that Christ himself did use the election of hours in his Miracles; so as the
Jews could not hurt him whilst he went to Jerusalem, and therefore that he
said to his Disciples that forbad him to go, Are there not twelve hours in the
day? John 11.8, 9.


CHAP. XXIII.
Who have power to drive away Devils with their only presence, who shall
receive of God whatsoever they ask in Prayer, who shall obtain everlasting life
by means of constellations, as Nativity-casters affirm.

THey say also, That he which has Mars happily placed in the ninth house of
the heavens, shall have power to drive away Devils with his only presence from
them that be possessed. And he that shall pray to God when he finds the Moon
and Jupiter joined with the Dragons-head in the midst of the heavens, shall
obtain whatsoever he asks; and that Jupiter and Saturn do give blessedness of
the life to come. The folly of our Genethliaks or Nativity-casters.
But if any in his nativity shall have Saturn happily placed in Leo, his soul
shall have everlasting life. And hereunto subscribe Peter de Appona, Roger
Bacon, Guido Bonatus, Arnold de villa nova, and the Cardinal of Alia.
Furthermore, the providence of God is denied, and the Miracles of Christ are
diminished, when these powers of the heavens and their influences are in such
sort advanced. Moses, Isaiah, Job, and Jeremiah, seem to dislike and reject it;
and at Rome in times past, it was banished, and by Justinian condemned under
pain of death. Senec. lib. de quaest. natural. 4.
Finally, Seneca derided these Soothsaying Witches in this sort, Amongst the
Cleones (says he) there was a custom, that the (...). (which were gazers in
the Air, watching when a storm of hail shoul fall) when they saw by any cloud
that the shower was imminent and at hand, the use was (I say) because of the
hurt which it might do to their vines, etc. diligently to warn the people
thereof; who used not to provide Cloaks, or any such defense against it, but
provided Sacrifices; the rich, Cocks and white Lambs; the poor would spoil
themselves by cutting their thombs, as though (says he) that little blood
would ascend up to the clouds, and do any good for their relief in this matter.

Hilarious Pirkmair in art Apodemica.
And here by the way, I will impart unto you a Venetian superstition of great
antiquity, and at this day (for ought I can read to the contrary) in use. It is
written, That every year ordinarily upon Ascension day, the Duke of Venice,
accompanied with the States, goes with great solemnity to the Sea, and after
certain ceremonies ended, casts thereinto a gold ring of great value and
estimation for a Pacificatory oblation; wherewithal their predecessors supposed
that the wrath of the Sea was assuaged. Joannes Garropius in Venet. and Hyperb.
Zac. 10.1, 2.
But this action, as a late writer says, they do Desponsare sibi mare, that
is, espouse the Sea unto themselves, etc.

Let us therefore, according to the Prophets advice, Ask rain of the Lord in
the hours of the latter time, and he shall send white clouds, and give us rain,
etc. for surely, the Idols (as the same Prophet says) have spoken vanity, the
Soothsayers have seen a lie, and the Dreamers have told a vain thing; they
comfort in vain, and therefore they went awaey like sheep, etc. If any
Sheepbiter or Witchmonger will follow them, they shall gone alone for me.

BOOK XII.
CHAP. I.
The Hebrew word Habar expounded, where also the supposed secret force of
Charms and Enchantments is showed, and the Efficacy of Words is diverse ways
declared.

THe Hebrew word Habar, being in Greek Epathin, and in Latin Incantare, is in
English to Inchant, or (if you had rather have it so) to Bewitch. In these
Enchantments, certain Words, Verses, or Charms, etc. are secretly uttered,
wherein there is thought to be miraculous efficacy. There is great variety
hereof: but whether it be by Charms, Voices, Images, Characters, Stones,
Plants, Metals, Herbs, etc. there must herewithal a special form of words be
always used, either Divine, Diabolical, Insensible, or Papistical, whereupon
all the virtue of the work is supposed to depend. This word is specially used
in the 58. Psalm; which place though it be taken up for mine Adversaries
strongest argument against me, yet me thinks it makes so with me, Psalm. 58.4.5.
as they can never be able to answer it: For there it plainly appears, That
the Adder hears not the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so cunningly:
contrary to the Poets fabling, Frigidus in pratis cantando rumpitur anguis.
Virgil. in Damone.
Englished by Araham Fleming: The coldish Snake in Meadows green,
With Charms is burst in pieces clean.


But hereof more shall be said hereafter in due place.

I grant that words sometimes have singular virtue and efficacy, either in
persuasion or disswasion, as also diverse other ways; so as thereby some are
converted from the way of perdition, to the estate of Salvation: and so
contrariwise, according to the saying of Solomon, Prove. 18. 2 Chronicles. 30. Psalm.
10. Psalm. 51. Psalm. 139. Jer. 32. Isa 6. Isa. 50. Exodus 7, 8, 9 Proverbs. 16.
Death and life are in the Instrument of the tongue: but even therein God
works all in all, as well in framing the heart of the one, as in directing
the tongue of the other, as appears in many places of the holy Scriptures.

CHAP. II.
What is forbidden in Scriptures concerning Witchcraft; of the operation of
words, the Superstition of the Cabalists and Papists; who creates Substances;
to imitate God in some cases is presumption; words of Sanctification.

THat which is forbidden in the Scriptures touching enchantment or Witchcraft
is not the wonderful working with words: For where words have had miraculous
operation, there has been always the special Providence, power and grace of
God uttered to the strengthening of the faith of Gods people, Acts 5.
and to the furtherance of the Gospel: as when the Apostle with a word slew
Ananias and Saphira. But the profanation of Gods Name, the seducing, abusing,
and cosening of the people, and man's presumption is hereby prohibited, as
whereby many take upon them after the recital of such names as God in the
Scripture seems to appropriate to himself, to foreshew things to come, to
work miracles, to detect fellonies, etc. as the Cabalists in times past took
upon them, by the ten Names of God, and his Angels, expressed in the
Scriptures, to work wonders: and as the Papists at this day by the like names.
by Crosses, by Gospels hanged about their necks, by Masses, by Exorcisms, by
Holy Water, and a thousand consecrated or rather execrated things, promise unto
themselves and others, both health of body and soul.

Jonas 1.
But as herein we are nor to imitate the Papists, so in such things as are the
peculiar actions of God, we ought not to take upon us to counterfeit or
resemble him which with his word created all things: For we, neither all the
Conjurers, Cabalists, Papists, Soothsayers, Inchanters, Witches, nor Charmers,
in the world, neither any other humane or yet diabolical cunning can add any
such strength to Gods workmanship, as to make any thing anew, or else to
exchange one thing into another. New qualities may be added by humane Art, but
no new substance can be made or created by man. And seeing that Art fails
herein, doubtless neither the illusions of Devils, nor the cunning of Witches,
can bring any such thing truly to pass. For by the sound of the words nothing
comes, nothing goes, otherwise than God in Nature has ordained to be done by
ordinary speech, or else by his special Ordinance. Indeed words of
sanctification are necessary and commendable, according to S. Paul's rule, Let
your meat be sanctified with the Word of God, 1 Timothy 4.5. Words of
sanctification, and wherein they consist.
and by Prayer. But sanctification does not here signify either change of
substance of the meat, or the adding of any new strength thereunto: but it is
sanctified, in that it is received with Thanksgiving and Prayers; that our
bodies may be refreshed, and our souls thereby made the apter to glorify God.

CHAP. III.
What Effect and Offense Witches Charms bring; how unapt Witches are, and how
unlikely to work those things which they are thought to do; what would follow
if those things were true which are laid to their charge.

THe words and other the Illusions of Witches, Charmers, and Conjurers, though
they be not such in operation and effect, as they are commonly taken to be: yet
they are offensive to the Majesty and Name of God, obscuring the truth of
Divinity, and also of Philosophy: For if God only give life and being to all
creatures, who can put any such virtue or lively feeling into a body of Gold,
Silver, Bread, or Wax, as is imagined? If either Priests, Devils, or Witches
could so do, the Divine Power should be cheked and outfaced by Magical cunning,
and Gods creatures made fervile to a Witches pleasure. An Ample description of
women commonly called Witches.
What is not to be brought to pass by these Incantations, if that be true which
is attributed to Witches? and yet they are women that never went to school in
their lives, nor had any teachers: and therefore without art or learning; poor,
and therefore not able to make any provision of metals or stones, etc. whereby
to bring to pass strange matters, by natural Magic; old and stiff, and
therefore not nimble-handed to deceive your eye with legierdemain; heavy, and
commonly lame, and therefore unapt to fly in the Air, or to dance with the
Fairies; sad, melancholic, sullen and miserable, and therefore it should be
unto them (Invita Minerva) to banquet or dance with Minerva; or yet with
Herodias, as the common opinion of all Writers herein is. On the other side, we
see they are so malicious and spiteful, that if they by themselves, or by their
Devils, could trouble the Element, we should never have fair weather. If they
could kill men, children, or cattle, they would spare none; but would destroy
and kill whole Countries and Households. If they could transfer Corn (as is
affirmed) from their neighbors field into their own, none of them would be
poor, none other should be rich. If they could transform themselves and others
(as it is most constantly affirmed) oh what a number of Apes and Owls should
there be of us! If Incubus could beget Merlins among us, we should have a jolly
many of cold Prophets.

CHAP. IV.
Why God forbad the practice of Witchcraft; the absurdity of the Law of the
twelve Tables, whereupon their estimation in miraculous actions is grounded, of
their wondrous works.

THough it be apparent, that the Holy Ghost forbids this Art, A common and
universal error.
because of the abuse of the Name of God, and the cosenage comprehended
therein: yet I confess, the Customs and Laws almost of all Nations do declare,
that all these miraculous works before by me cited, and many other things more
wonderful, were attributed to the power of Witches. The which Laws, with the
executions and judicials thereupon, and the Witches confessions, have beguiled
almost the whole world. What absurdities concerning Witchcraft are written in
The Laew of the Twelve Tables, which was the highest and most ancient Law of
the Romans? Whereupon the strongest argument of Witches omnipotent power is
framed; as that the wisdom of such Lawgivers could not be abused. Whereof (me
thinks) might be made a more strong argument on our side; to wit, if the chief
and principal Laws of the world be in this case ridiculous, vain, false,
incredible, yea and contrary to Gods Law; the residue of the laws and arguments
to that effect, are to be suspected. If that argument should hold, it might
prove all the Popish Laws against Protestants, and the Heathenish Princes Laws
against Christians, to be good and in force: for it is like they would not have
made them, except they had been good. Were it not (think you) a strange
Proclamation, that no man (upon pain of death) should pull the Moon out of
Heaven? I. Bodinus. Danaeus. Hyperius. Hemingius. Bar. Spineus. Mal. Malef.
And yet very many or the most learned Witchmongers make their arguments upon
weaker grounds; as namely in this form and manner; We find in Poets, that
Witches wrought such and such miracles; Ergo they can accomplish and do this or
that wonder. The words of the law are these; Qui fruges incantasset poenas
dato. Neve aelienam segetem pellexeris excantando, neque incaentando; Ne agrum
defruganto: the sense whereof in English is this; Let him be executed that
bewitcheth Corn; Transferr not other men's Corn into thy ground by Enchantment;
Take heed thou inchant not at all, neither make thy neighbors field barren: he
that does these things shall dye, etc.

CHAP. V.
An instance of one arraigned upon the Law of the Twelve Tables, where the said
Law is proved ridiculous; of two Witches that could do wonders.

ALthough among us, we think them bewitched that wax suddenly poor, and not
them that grow hastily rich; yet at Rome you shall understand, that (as Pliny
reports) upon these Articles one C. Furius Crassus was convented before
Spurius Albinus, for that he being but a little while free, and delivered from
bondage, occupying only tillage, grew rich on the sudden, as having good crops:
so as it was suspected that he transferred his neighbors Corn into his Fields.
No intercession, no delay, no excuse, A notable purgation of C. F. C. convented
for a Witch.
no denial would serve, neither in jest nor derision, nor yet through sober or
honest means: but he was assigned a peremptory day, to answer for life: And
therefore fearing the sentence of condemnation, which was to be given there, by
the voice and verdict of three men (as we here are tried by twelve) made his
appearance at the day assigned, and brought with him his Ploughs and Harrows,
Spades and Shovels, and other Instruments of husbandry, his Oxen, Horses, and
working Bullocks, his Servants, and also his Daughter, which was a sturdy Wench
and a good Houswife, and also (as Piso reports) well trimmed up in Apparel,
and said to the whole Bench in this wise; Lo here my Lords, here I make my
appearance, according to promise and your pleasures, presenting unto you my
Charms and Witchcrafts, which have so enriched me. As for the labor, sweat,
watching, care, and diligence, which I have used in this behalf, I cannot show
them at this time. And by this means he was dismissed by the consent of the
Court, who otherwise (as it was thought) should hardly have escaped the
sentence of condemnation, and punishment of death.

Mal. Malef. par. 2. quaest. 1. c. 5.
It is constantly affirmed in M. Mal. that Stafus used always to hide himself
in a Monshoal, and had a Disciple called Hoppo, who made Stadlin a Master
Witch, and could all when they list, invisibly transfer the third part of their
neighbors Dung, Hay, Corn, etc. into their own ground, make Hail, Tempests and
Floods, with Thunder and Lightning; and kill Children, Cattle, etc. reveal
things hidden, and many other Tricks, when and where they list. But these two
shifted not so well with the Inquisitors, as the other with the Roman and
Heathen Judges. Howbeit, Stafus was too hard for them all: for none of all the
Lawyers nor Inquisitors could bring him to appear before them, if it be true
that Witchmongers write in these matters.

CHAP. VI.
Laws provided for the punishment of such Witches as work Miracles, whereof
some are mentioned, and of certain Popish Laws published against them.

Punishment of impossibilities.
THere are other Laws of other Nations made to this incredible effect: as Lex
Salicarum provideth punishment for them that fly in the Air from place to
place, and meet at their nightly Assemblies, and brave banquets, carrying with
them Plate, and such stuff, etc. even as we should make a law to hang him that
should take a Church in his hand at Dover, and throw it to Caellice. And
because in this case also Popish laws shall be seen be to as foolish and lewd
as any other whatsoever, and specially as tyrannous as that which is most
cruel: you shall hear what trim new laws the Church of Rome has lately
devised. A wise Law of Pope Innocent and Julius, were it not that they wanted
wit when they made it.
These are therefore the words of Pope Innocent the eight to the Inquisitors of
Almaine, and of Pope Julius the second sent to the Inquisitors of Bergomen. It
is come to our ears, that many lewd persons of both kinds, as well male as
female, using the company of the Devils Incubus and Succubus, with
Incantations, Charms, Conjurations, etc. do destroy, etc. the births of women
with child, the young of all Cattle, the Corn of the Field, the Grapes of the
Vines, the fruit of the Trees: Ieem, Men, women, and all kind of Cattle and
Beasts of the field: and with their said Enchantments, etc. do utterly
extinguish, suffocate, and spoil all Vineyards, Orchards, Meadows, Pastures,
Grass, green Corn, and ripe Corn, and all other Podware: yea men and women
themselves are by their imprecations so afflicted with external and inward
pains and diseases, that men cannot beget, nor women bring forth any children,
nor yet accomplish the duty of wedlock, denying the Faith which they in Baptism
professed, to the destruction of their own own souls, etc. Our pleasure
therefore is, that all impediments that may hinder the Inquisitors Office, be
utterly removed from among the people, lest this blot of heresy proceed to
poison, and defile them that be yet innocent. And therefore we do ordain, by
virtue of the Apostolical Authority, that our Inquisitors of high Almaine, may
execute the Office of Inquisition by all tortures and afflictions, in all
places, and upon all persons, what and wheresoever, as well in every place and
Diocese, as upon any person; and that as freely, as though they were named,
expressed, or cited in this our Commission.

CHAP. VII.
Poetical Authorities commonly alleged by Witchmongers, for the proof of
Witches miraculous Actions, and for Confirmation of their Supernatural Power.

HEre have I a place and opportunity, to discover the whole Art of Witchcraft;
even all their Charms, Periapts, Characters, Amulets, Prayers, Blessings,
Cursings, Hurtings, Helpings, Knaveries, Cosenages, etc. But first I will show
what Authorities are produced to defend and maintain the same, and that in
serious sort, by Bodin, Spinaeus, Hemingius, Varius, Danaeus, Hyperius, M. Mal.
and the rest.

Carmina vel caelo possunt deducere lunam, Virg. Eclgg. 8.

Carminibus Circe socios mutavit Ulyssis,
Frigidus in pratis Cantando rumpitur anguis.
Enchantments pluck out of the Sky
The Moon though she be placed on high:
Dame Circe with her Charms so fine,
Ulysses mates did turn to Swine:
The Snake with Charms is burst in twain,
In Meadows where she does remain.
Again out of the same Poet they cite further matter.

Has herbas, atque haec Ponto mihi lecta venena, Virg. Eclog. 8.

Ipsa dedit Meris: nascuntur plurima Ponto.
His ego saepe lupam fieri, and se condere sylvis,
Maerim saepe animas imis exire sepulchris,
Atque satas alio vidi traducere messes.
These Herbs did Meris give to me,
And Poisons plucked at Pontus,
For there they grow and multiply.
And do not so amongst us.
With these she made herself become
A Wolf, and hid her in the Wood;
She fetch up Souls out of their Tomb,
Removing Corn from where it stood.
Furthermore out of Ovid they allege these following.

Nocte volant, puerosque petunt nutricis egentes, Ovid. fast. 6.

Et vitiant cunis corpora captae suis:
Carpere dicuntur lactentia viscera rostris,
Et plenum potu sanguine guttur habent:
To Children they do fly by night,
And catch them while their Nurses sleep,
And spoil their little bodies quite,
And home they bear them in their beak.
Again out of Virgil in form following

Virg. Aene. 4.
Hinc mihi Massylae gentis monstratae sacerdos,
Hesperidum Templi custos, epulasque draconi
Quae dabat, and sacros servabat in aerbore ramos,
Spargens humida mella, soporiferumque papaver.
Haec se carminibus promittit solvere mentes,
Quas velit, ast aliis dur as immittere curas;
Sistere aquam fluviis, and vertere sidera retro,
Nocturnosque ciet manes mugire videbis
Sub pedibus terram, and descendere montilus ornos.
Tho. Phaiers Translation of the former words of Virg.

From thence a Virgin Priest is come,
From out Massyla land,
Sometimes the Temple there she kept,
And from her heavenly hand
The Dragon meat did take: she kept,
Also the fruit divine,
With herbs and liquors sweet that still
To sleep did men incline.
The minds of men (she says) from love
With charms she can unbind,
In whom she list: but others can
She cast to cares unkind.
The running streams do stand, and from
Their course the Stars do wreath,
And Souls she conjure can: thou shaelt
See sister underneath
The ground with roaring gape, and trees
And Mountains turn upright, etc.
Ovid. Metamorph. 7.
Moreover out of Ovid they allege as follows.

Cum volui ripis ipsis mirantibus amnes
In fontes rediere suos, coneussaque sisto,
Stantia concutis, cantu freta nubila pello,
Nubilaque induco, ventos abigoque vocoque,
Vipere as rumpo verbis and carmine fauces,
Vivaque saexa sua convulsaque robora terra,
Et sylvas moveo, jubeoque tremiscere montes,
Et mugire solum, manesque exire sepulchris,
Teque luna traho, etc.
The Rivers I can make retire
Into the Fountains whence they flow,
(Whereat the banks themselves admire)
I can make standing Waters go;
With Charms I drive both Sea and Cloud,
I make it calm and blow aloud.
The Vipers jaws, the rockie stone,
With Words and Charms I brake in twain;
The force of Earth congealed in one,
I move, and shake, both Woods and Plain;
I make the Souls of Men arise,
I pull the Moon out of the Skies.
Also out of the same Poet.

Verbaque ter dixit placidos facientia somnos, Ovid. de Medea.

Quae mare turbatum, quae flumina concita sistant.
And thrice she spoke the words that caused
Sweet sleep and quiet rest;
She staid the raging of the Sea,
And mighty floods suppressed,
Et miserum tenues in jecur urget acus. Ovid de Medea, Epistola 4.

She strikes also Needles fine.
In Livers whereby men do pine.
Also out of other Poets, Carmine laesa Ceres, sterilem vanescit in herbam, 3.
Amo. Eclo. 6.

Deficiunt laesi carmine fontis aquae;
Ilicibus glandes, cantantaque viribus uva
Decidit, and nullo poma movente fluunt.
With Charms the Corn is spoiled so,
As that it vades the barren grass;
With Charms the Springs are dried low,
That none can see where Water was.
The Grapes from Vines, the Mast from Oaks,
And beats down fruit with charming strokes.
Quae sidera excantata voce Thessala Horac. epod. 4.

Lunamque coelo diripit.
She plucks down Moon and Stars from Sky,
With chaunting voice of Thessaly.
Hanc ego de coelo ducentem sidera vidi, Tibul de falscinatricae, lib. 1. cleg.
2.

Fluminis ac rapidi Carmine vertitier,
Haec cantu finditque solum, manesque Sepulchris
Elicit, and tepido devorat ossa rogo:
Cum lubet haec tristi depellit lumina coelo,
Cum lubet aestivo convocat orb nives.
She plucks each Star out of his throne,
And turns back the raging waves;
With Charms she makes the Earth to cone,
And raises Souls out of their graves:
She burns men's Bones as with fire,
And pulls down the Lights from Heaven,
And makes it snow at her desire
Even in the midst of Summer-season.
Men's hausti nulla sanie polluta veneni, Lucan. lib. de bello. civili. 6.

Incantata perit.
A man enchanted runs mad,
That never any poison had.
Idem. ibid.
Cessavere vices rerum, delataque longa
Haesit nocte dies; legi non paruit ether,
Torpuit and preceps audito carmine mundus.
The course of Nature ceased quite,
The Air obeyed not his law,
The Day delayed by length of Night,
Which made both Day and Night to yaw;
And all was through that charming gear,
Which caused the World to quake for fear.
Idem. ibid.
Carmine Thessalidum dura in praecordia fluxit
Non fatis adductus amor, flammisque severi
Illicitis arsere ignes.
With Thessal Charms, and not by Fate
Hot Love is forced for to flow;
Even where before has been debate,
They cause Affection for to grow.
Idem. ibid.
Gens invisa diis, maculandi callida coeli,
Quos genuit fera terra, mali qui sidera mundi
Juraque fixarum possunt pervertere rerum:
Nam nunc stare polos; and flumina mittere norunt,
Aethera sub terras adigunt, montesque revellunt.
These Witches hateful unto God,
And cunning to defile the Air,
Which can disorder with a nod
The course of Nature every where,
Do cause the wandering Stars to stay,
And drive the Winds below the ground.
They send the Streams another way,
And throw down Hills where they abound.
C. Manilius Astronom. sua lib. 1.
-- linguis dixere valucrum
Consultare fibras and rumpere vocibus angues,
Sollicitare umbras, ipsumque Acheronta movere,
In noctemque dies, in lucem vertere noctes,
Omnia conando docilis solertia vincit.
They talked with the tongues of Birds,
Consulting with the Salt-sea-coasts,
They burst the Snakes with witching words,
Soliciting the spiritual Ghosts;
They turn the Night into the Day,
And also drive the Light away:
And what is it that cannot be made
By them that do apply this Trade?


CHAP. VIII.
Poetry and Popery compared in Enchantments; Popish Witchmongers have more
advantage herein than Protestants.

YOu see in these verses, the Poets (whether in earnest or in jest, I know not)
ascribe unto Witches and to their Charms, more than is to be found in Humane or
Diabolical Power. I doubt not but the most part of the Readers hereof will
admit them to be fabulous; Ovid Metamorph. lib. 3. fab. 2. Ovid. Metamorph. l
14. fab. 5, 6.
although the most learned of mine adversaries (for lack of Scripture) are fain
to produce these Poetries for proofs, and for lack of judgment, I am sure, do
think, that Actaeons transformation was true. And why not as well as the
Metamorphosis or Transubstantiation of Ulysses his companions into Swine, which
S. Augustine and so many great Clerks credit and report?

Nevertheless, Popish Writers (I confess) have advantage herein of our
Protestants: for (besides these Poetical proofs) they have (for advantage) the
word and authority of the Pope himself, and others of that holy crew, whose
Charms, Conjurations, Blessings, Cursings, etc. I mean in part (for a taste) to
set down; giving you to understand, that Poets are not altogether so impudent
as Papists herein, neither seem they so ignorant, profane, oe impious. The
Authors transition to his purposed scope.
And therefore I will show you how loud also they lie, and what they on the
other side ascribe to their Charms and Conjurations; and together will set down
with them all manner of Witches Charms, as conveniently as I may.

CHAP. IX.
Popish Periapts, Amulets and Charms, Agnus Dei, a Wastecote of proof, a Charm
for the Falling-Evill, a Writing brought to S. Leo from Heaven by an Angel, the
virtues of S. Saviors Epistle, a Charm against Thieves, a Writing found in
Christ's Wounds, of the Cross, etc.

THese Virtues under these Verses (written by Pope Urbane the fifth to the
Emperor of the Grecians) are contained in a Periapt or Tablet, be continually
worn about one, called Agnas Dei, which is a little cake, having the picture of
a Lamb carrying of a flag on the one side, and Christ's head on the other side,
and is hollow: so as the Gospel of S. John, written in fine Paper, is placed in
the concavity thereof: and it is thus compounded or made, even as they
themselves report.

Balsamus and mundra cera, cum Chrismatis unda
Conficiunt agnum, quod munus do tibi magnum,
Font velut natum, per mystica sanctificatum:
Fulgura de sursum depellit, and omne malignum,
Peccatum frangit, ut Christi sanguis, and angit,
Pregnans servatur, simul and partus liberatur;
Dona refert dignis, virtutem destruit ignis,
Portatus munde de fluctibus eripit undae.
Englished by Abraham Fleming: Balm, Virgin Wax, and Holy Water, Beehive of
the Romish Church, lib. 4. cap. 1. fol. 243.

An Agnus Dei make,
A gift than which none can be greater,
I send thee for to take.
From Fountain clear the same has issue
In secret sanctified:
Against Lightning it has sovereign virtue,
And Thunder-cracks beside.
Each heinous sin it wears and wastes,
Even as Christ's precious blood;
And Women whiles their Travel lasts.
It saves, it is so good.
It does bestow great gifts and graces
On such as well deserve;
And born about in noisome places,
From peril does preserve.
The force of fire, whose heat destroys,
It breaks and brings down:
And he or she that this enjoys,
No water shall them drown.


A Charm against Shot, or Wastecoat of Proof.
BEfore the coming up of these Agnus Dei's, a holy Garment called a Wastecoat
for necessity, was much used of our forefathers, as a holy relic, etc. as
given by the Pope, or some such Arch-Conjuror, who promised thereby all manner
of immunity to the wearer thereof; insomuch as he could not be hurt with any
shot, or other violence. And otherwise, that woman that would wear it, should
have quick deliverance, the composition thereof was in this order following.

The manner of making a Wastecoat of Proof.
On Christmas Day at at night, a Thread must be spun of Flax, by a little
Virgin-girl, in the name of the Devil: and it must be by her woven, and also
wrought with the Needle. In the breast or forepart thereof must be made with
Needle Work two heads; on the head at the right side must be a Hat, and along
Beard; the left head must have on a Crown, and it must be so horrible, that it
may resemble Beelzebub, and on each side of the Wastecoat must be made a Cross.

Against the Falling-Evill.
Moreover, this ensuing is another counterfeit Charm of theirs, whereby the
Falling-evil is presently remedied.

Gaspar fert myrrham, thus Melchior, Balthazar aurum,
Haec tria qui secum portabit nomina regum,
Solvitur a morbo Christi pietate caduco.
Gasper with his myrrh began
These presents to unfold,
Then Melchior brought in Frankincense,
And Balthazar brought in Gold.
Now he that of these holy Kings
The Names about shall bear,
The falling ill by grace of Christ
Shall never need to fear.
The effects are too good to be true in such a patched piece of Popery.
THis is a true copy of the Holy-writing, that was brought down from Heaven by
an Angel to S. Leo, Pope of Rome; and he did bid him take it to King Charles,
when he went to the battle at Ronceval. And the Angel said, that what man or
woman bears this writing about them with good devotion, and says every day
three Pater-nosters, three Aves, and one Creed, shall not that day be overcome
or his Enemies, either bodily or ghostly; neither shall be robbed or slain of
Thieves, Pestilence, Thunder, or Lightning, neither shall be hurt with fire or
water, nor cumbred with Spirits, neither shall he have displeasure of Lords or
Ladies: he shall not be condemned with false witness, nor taken with Fairies,
or any manner of Axes, nor yet with the Falling-evil. Also, if a woman be in
Travel, lay this writing upon her belly, she shall have easy deliverance, and
the child right shape and Christendom, and the mother Purification of holy
Church, and all through virtue of these holy Names of Jesus Christ following:

Jesus Christus Messiah Soter Emmanuel Sabbath Adonai Unigenitus Majestas
Paracletus Salvatur noster Agiros iskiros Agios Adonatos Gasper Melchior and
Balthazar Matthaeus Marcios Lucos Johannes.

The Epistle of S. Savior, which Pope Leo sent to King Charles, saying, that
whosoever carries the same about him, or in what day soever he shall read it,
or shall see it, he shall not be killed with any Iron-tool, nor be burned with
fire, nor be drowned with water, neither any evil man or other creature may
hurt him. The Cross of Christ is a wonderful defense the cross of Christ be
always with me the cross is it which I do always worship the cross of Christ
is true health the cross of Christ does lose the bands of death the cross of
Christ is the truth and the way I take my journey upon the cross of the Lord
the cross of Christ bears down every evil the cross of Christ gives all good
things the cross of Christ takes away pains everlasting the cross of Christ
save me O cross of Christ be upon me, before me, and behind me because the
ancient Enemy cannot abide the sight of thee the cross of Christ save me, keep
me, govern me, and direct me Thomas bearing this note of thy divine Majesty
Alpha Omega first and last midst and end beginning first begotten wisdom virtue.

A Popish Periapt or Charm, which must never be said, but carried about one,
against Thieves.
I Do go, and I do come unto you with the love of God, with the humility of
Christ, with the holiness of our blessed Lady, with the Faith of Abraham, This
were a good preservative for a traveling Papist.
with the Justice of Isaac, with the Virtue of David, with the Might, of Peter,
with the Constancy of Paul, with the Word of God, with the Authority of
Gregory, with the Prayer of Clement, with the Flood of Jordan, p p p c g e g a
q q est p t 1 k a b g l k 2 a x t g t b a m g 2 4 2 1 que p x c g k q a 9 9 p o
q q r. Oh only Father oh only Lord And Jesus passing through the midst of them
went In the Name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost.

Another Amulet.
JOseph of Arimathea did find this Writing upon the wounds of the side of Jesus
Christ, written with Gods finger, when the Body was taken away from the Cross.
Whosoever shall carry this writing about him, shall not dye any evil death, if
he believe in Christ; and in all perplexities, he shall soon be delivered,
neither let him fear any danger, at all. Fons Alpha and Omega figa figalis
Sabbath Emmanuel Adonai o Neray Ela Ihe Rentone Neger Sahe Pangeton Commen a g
l a Mattheus Marcus Lucas Johannes titulus triumphalis Jesus Nasarenus rex
Judaeorum ecce dominica crucis signum fugite parts adversae, vicit leo de
tribu Judae, radix David, aleluijah, Kyrie eleeson, Christ eleeson, Pater
noster, Ave Maria, and ne nos, and veniat super nos salutare tuum. Oremus etc.

I find in a Primer, entitled The Hours of our Lady, after the use of the
Church of York, printed anno 1516. a Charm with this titling in red letters; To
all them that before this Image of pity devoutly shall lay five Pater nosters,
five Avies, If the party fail in the number, he may go whistle for a pardon.
and one Credo, piteously beholding these arms or Christ's passion, are granted
thirty two thousand seven hundred fifty five years of pardon. It is to be
thought that this pardon was granted in the time of Pope Boniface the ninth;
for Platina says, that the Pardons were sold so cheap, that the Apostolical
Authority grew into contempt.

A Papistical Charm.
SIgnum sanctae crucis defendat me a malis praesentibus, praeteritis, and
futuris, interioribus and exterioribus: That is, The sign of the Cross defend
me from evils present, past, and to come, inward and outward.

A Charm found in the Canon of the Mass.
ALso this charm is found in the Canon of the Mass, Haec sacrosancta commixtio
corporis and sanguinis domini nostri Jesu Christi fiat mihi omnibusque
sumentibus salus mentis and corporis, and ad vitam promerendam and capessendam
praeparatio salutaris; that is, Let this holy mixture of the body and blood of
our Lord Jesus Christ be unto me and unto all receivers thereof, health of mind
and body, and to the deserving and receiving of life an healthful preparative.

Other Papistical Charms.
Aqua benedicta sit mihi salus and vita. Englished by Abraham Fleming: Let holy
water he both health and life to me. Adque nomen Martini omnis haereticus
fugiat pallidus.
When Martins name is sung or said,
Let Heretics fly as men dismayed.


But the Papists have a harder Charm than that; to wit, Fire and faggot, Fire
and faggot.

A Charm of the Holy-Cross.
Sancta crux aequiparatur satutifero Christo. O blasphemiam inenarrabilem.
Nulla salus est in domo,
Nisi cruce munit homo
Superliminaria.
Neque sentit gladium,
Nec amisit filium,
Quisquis egit talia.
No health within the house does dwell,
Except a man do Cross him well
At every door or frame.
He never feels the Swords point,
Nor of his Son shall lose a joint,
That does perform the same
Furthermore as follows.

I sta suos fortiores
Semper facit, and victores;
Morbos sanat and languores,
Reprimit Daemonia.
Dat captivis libertatem,
Vitae confert novitatem,
Ad antiquam dignitatem
Crux reducit omnia.
O Crux lignum triumphale,
Mundi vera salus vale,
Inter ligna nullum tale,
Fronde, flore, germine.
Medicina Christiana,
Salva sanos, aegros sana;
Quod non valet vis humana,
Fit in tuo nomine, etc.
Englished by Abraham Fleming: It makes her soldiers excellent,
And crowns them with victory,
Restores the lame and impotent,
And heals every malady.
The Devils of Hell it conquereth,
Releaseth from imprisonment,
Newness of life it offers,
It has all at commandment.
O Cross of Wood incomparable.
To all the world most wholesome!
No Wood is half so honorable Beehive of the Romish

Church, lib. 4. cap. 3. fol. 251, 252.



In branch, in bud or blossom.
O medicine which Christ did ordain,
The sound save every hour,
The sick and sore make whole again,
By virtue of thy power,
And that which man's unablenss
Has never comprehended,
Grant by thy Name of holiness,
It may be fully ended, etc.


A Charm taken out of the Primer.
THis Charm following is taken out of the Primer aforesaid. Omnipotents Dominus
Christus Messiah with 34 names more, and as many Crosses, and then proceeds in
this wise; Ista nomina me protegant ah omni adversitate, plaga, and infirmitate
corporis and animae, plene liberent, and assistent in auxilium ista nomina
regum, Gasper, etc. and 12. Apostoli (videlicet) Petrus, etc. and 4.
Evangelistae (videlicet) Matthaeus, etc. mihi assistent in omnibus
necessitatibus meis, ac me defendant and liberent ab omnibus periculis and
corporis and anima, and omnibus malis praeteritis, praesentibus, and futuris,
etc.

CHAP. X.
How to make Holy Water, and the Virtues thereof; St. Ruffins Charm of the
wearing and hearing of the Name of Jesus; that the Sacrament of Confession, and
the Eucharist is of as much efficacy at other charms, and magnified by L.
Varius.

IF I did well, I should show you the confession of all their stuff, and how
they prepare it; but it would be too long. And therefore you shall only have in
this place a few notes for the composition of certain receipts, which instead
of an Apothecary, if you deliver to any morrow-mass Priest, he will make them
as well as the Pope himself. Mary now they wax every Parliament deerer and
deerer, although therewithal, they utter many stale drugs of their own.

If you look in the Popish, Pontifical, In Ecclesia dedications.
you shall see how they make their holy Water; to wit, in this sort: I conjure
thee thou creature of Water in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost, that thou drive the Devil out of every corner aend hole of this
Church, and Altar; so as he remain not within our Precincts that are just and
righteous. In Rationali divinorum Officiorum.
And water thus used (as Durandus says) has power of its own nature to drive
away Devils. If you will learn to make any more of this Popish stuff, you may
go to the very Mass Book, and find many good receipts: marry if you search
Durandus, etc. you shall find abundance.

I know that all these Charms, and all these paltrey Confections (though they
were far more impious and foolish) will be maintained and defended by
Massemongers, even as the residue will be by Witch-mongers: and therefore I
will in this place insert a Charm, the authority whereof is equal with the
rest, desiring to have their opinions herein. I find in a Book called Pomaerium
sermonum quadragesimalium, Pom. sermon. 32.
that S. Francis seeing Rufinus provoked of the Devil to think himself damned,
charged Rufinus to say this Charm, when he next met with this Devil; Aperi os;
and ibi imponam stercus, which is as much to say in English as, Open thy mouth,
and I will put in a plum: a very ruffinly Charm.

L. Varius. lib. de fascin. 3. cap. 10.
Leonard Varius writes, De veris, piis, ac sanctis amuletis fascinum atque
omnia veneficia destruentibus; wherein he specially commends the name of
Jesus to be worn. But the Sacrament of Confession he extolleth above all
things, saying, Idem. ibid.
that whereas Christ with his power did but throw Devils out of men's bodies,
the Priest drives the Devil out of man's soul by confession. For (says he)
these words of the Priest, when he says, Ego te absolvo, are as effectual to
drive away the Princes of darkness, through the mighty power of that saying, as
was the voice of God to drive away the darkness of the world, when at the
beginning he said Fiat lux. Idem. ibid.
He commends also as wholesome things to drive away Devils, the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, and solitariness, and silence. Finally he says, that if there
be added hereunto an Agnus Dei, and the same be worn about ones neck by one
void of sin, nothing is wanting that is good and wholesome for this purpose.
But he concludes, that you must wear and make dints in your forehead, with
crossing your self when you put on your shoes, and at every other action, etc.
and that is also a present remedy to drive away Devils, for they cannot abide
it.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Noble Balm used by Moses, apishly counterfeited in the Church of Rome.

THe noble Balm that Moses made, having indeed many excellent virtues, besides
the pleasant and comfortable favor thereof wherewithal Moses in his Politic
Laws enjoined Kings, Queens, and Princes to be anointed in their true and
lawful elections and Coronations, until the everlasting King had put on man
upon him, is apishly counterfeited in the Romish Church, with diverse terrible
Conjurations, three breathings, Cross-wise (able to make a quezie stomach spue)
nine mumblings and three curtsies, saying thereunto, Ave sanctum oleum, ter Ave
sanctum Balsamum. And so the Devil is thrust out, and the Holy Ghost let into
his place. But as for Moses his Balm, it is not now to be found either in Rome,
or elsewhere that I can learn. And according to this Papistical Order, Witches
and other superstitious people follow on with Charms and Conjurations made in
form; which many bad Physicians also practice when their learning fails, as
may appear by example in the sequel.

CHAP. XII.
The opinion of Ferrarius touchings Charms, Periapts, Appenssions, Amulets,
etc. Of Homerical Medicines, of constant Opinion, and the Effects thereof.

Arg. Fer. lib. de medendi method. 2. cap. 11.
ARgerius Ferrarius, a Physician in these days of great account, does say, that
for so much as by no diet nor Physic any disease can be so taken away or
extinguished, De Homerica medicatione.
but that certain dregs and relics will remain: therefore Physicians use
Physical Alligations, Appensions, Periapes, Amulets, Charms, Characters, etc.
which he supposes may do good; but harm he is sure they can do none: urging
that it is necessary and expedient for a Physician to leave nothing undone that
may be devised for his Patients recovery; and that by such means many great
cures are done. He cites a great number of experiments out of Alexander
Trallianus, Aetius, Octavianus, Marcellus, Philodotus, Archigenes,
Philostratus, This would be examined, to see if Galen be not slandered.
Pliny, and Dioscorides; and would make men believe that Galen (who in truth
despised and derided all those vanities) recanted in his latter days his
former opinion, and all his invectives tending against these magical cures.
writing also a book entitled De Homerica Medicatione, which no man could ever
see, but one Alexander Trallianus, who says he saw it: and further affirms,
that it is an honest man's part to cure the sick, by hook or by crook, or by any
means whatsoever. Yea, he says that Galen (who indeed wrote and taught that
Incantamenta sunt muliercularum figmenta, and be the only cloaks of bad
Physicians) affirms, that there is virtue and great force in Incantations. As
for example, (says Trallian) Galen being now reconciled to this opinion,
holds and writes, that the bones which stick in ones throat, are avoided and
cast out with the violence of Charms and Enchanting words; yea and that thereby
the Stone, the Colic, the Falling Sickness, and all Fevers, Gowts, Fluxes,
Fistula's, issues of blood, and finally whatsoever care (even beyond the skill
of himself, or any other foolish Physician) is cured and perfectly healed by
words of Enchantment. Marry M. Ferrarius (although he allowed and practiced
this kind of Physic) yet he protests that he thinks it none otherwise
effectual, than by the way of constant opinion: so as he affirms, that
neither the Character, nor the Charm, nor the Witch, nor the Devil accomplish
the cure; as (says he) the experiment of the Tooch-ach will manifestly
declare, wherein the cure is wrought by the confidence or diffidence as well of
the Patient, as of the Agent, according to the Poets saying: Nos habitat non
Tartara, sed nec sidera caeli,
Spiritus in nobis qui viget illa facit.
Englished by Abraham Fleming: Not hellish furies dwell in us,
Nor Stars with influence heavenlys
The spirit that lives and rules in us,
Does every thing ingeniously.
This (says he) comes to the unlearned, through the opinion which they
conceive of the Characters and holy words: but the learned that know the force
of the mind and imagination, work miracles by means thereof; so as the
unlearned must have external helps, to do that which the learned can do with a
word only. He says that this is called Homerica medicatio, because Homer
discovered the blood suppressed by words, and the infections healed by or in
mysteries.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Effects of Amulets, the drift of Argerius Ferrarius in the commendation
of Charms, amp;c. four sorts of Homerical Medicines, and the choice thereof; of
Imagination.

AS touching mine opinion of these Amulets, Characters, and such other bables,
I have sufficiently uttered it elsewhere: and I will bewray the vanity of the
superstitious trifles more largely hereafter. And therefore at this time I only
say, that those Amulets which are to be hanged or carried about one, if they
consist of Herbs, Roots, Stones, or some other metal, they may have diverse
medicinable operations; and by the virtue given to them by God in their
creation, may work strange effects and cures: and to impute this virtue to any
other matter is Witchcraft. And whereas A. Ferrarius commends certain Amulets
that have no show of Physical operation, as a nail taken from a Cross,
Holy Water, and the very sign of the Cross, with such like Popish stuff: I
think he labors thereby rather to draw men to Popery, than to teach or
persuade them in the truth of Physic or Philosophy. And I think thus the
rather, for that he himself sees the fraud hereof; confessing that where these
Magical Physicians apply three seeds of three-leaved grass to a Tertian Ague,
and four to a Quartain, that the number is not material.

Four sorts of Homerical medicines, and which is the principal.
But of these Homerical medicines, he says, there are four sorts, whereof
Amulets, Characters, and Charms, are three: howbeit he commends and
prefers the fourth above the rest; and that he says consists in
illusions, which he more properly calls stratagems. Of which sort of
illusions he alleges for example, how Philodotus did put a Cap of Lead upon
ones head who imagined he was headless, whereby the party was delivered from
his disease or conceit. Item, The force of fixed fancy opinion, or conceit.
Another cured a woman that imagined, that a Serpent or Snake did continually
gnaw and tear her entrails; and that was done only by giving her a Vomit, and
by foisting into the matter vomited a little Serpent or Snake, like unto that
which she imagined was in her belly.

Item, Another imagined that he always burned in the fire, under whose bed a
fire was privily conveyed, which being taken out before his face, his fancy
was satisfied, and his heat allayed. Hereunto pertains, that the Hickot is
cured with sudden fear or strange news: yea by that means Agues and many other
strange and extreme diseases have been healed. And some that have lien so sick
and sore of the Gowt, that they could not remove a joint, through sudden fear
of fire, or ruin of houses, have forgotten their infirmities and griefs and
have run away. But in my tract upon melancholy, and the effects of imagination,
and in the discourse of Natural Magic, you shall see these matters largely
touched.

CHAP. XIV.
Choice of Charms against the Falling-Evil, the biting of a mad Dog, the
stinging of a Scorpion, the Toothache, for a Woman in Travel, for the
King's Evil, to get a Thorn out of any member, or a Bone out of ones Throat;
Charms to be said Fasting, or at the gathering of Herbs, for sore Eyes, to open
Locks, against Spirits, for the Bots in a Horse, and specially for the Duke of
Alba's Horse, for sower, Wines, etc.

THere be innumerable Charms of Conjurers, bad Physicians, lewd Chirurgians,
Melancholic Witches, and Coseners, for all diseases and griefs; specially for
such as bad Physicians and Chirurgians know not how to cure, and in truth are
good stuff to shadow their ignorance; whereof I will repeat some.

For the Falling-Evill.
TAke the sick man by the hand, and whisper these words softly in his Ear, I
conjure thee by the Sun and Moon, and by the Gospel of this day delivered by
God to Hubert, Giles, Cornelius, and John, that thou rise and fall no more.
Otherwise, Drink in the night at a Spring water out of a skull of one that has
been slain: Otherwise, Eat a Pig killed with a knife that slew a man. Otherwise
as follows.

Ananizapta ferit mortem, dum laedere quaerit,
Est mala mors capta, dum dicitur Ananizapta:
Ananizapta Dei nunc miserere mei.
Englished by Abraham Fleming: Ananizapta smites death,
Whiles harm intends he,
This word Ananizapta say,
And death shall captive be,
Ananizapta O of God.
Have mercy now on me.


Against the biting of a Mad-Dog.
PUt a silver Ring on the finger, J. Bodinus lib. de demon. 3. cap. 5.
within the which these words are graven Habay habar hebar and say to the
person bitten with a mad Dog, I am thy Savior, lose not thy life: and then
prick him in the nose thrice, that at each time he bleed. Otherwise, take Pills
made of the skull of one that is hanged. Otherwise: write upon a piece of
bread, Irioni, khiriora, esser, khuder, feres; and let it be eaten by the party
bitten. Otherwise, O Rex gloriae Jesu Christ, veni cum pace: In nomine Patris
max. in nomine Filii max. in nomine Spiritus sancti prax. Gasper, Melchior,
Balthazar prax max Deus I max.

But in troth this is very dangerous; insomuch as if it be not speedily and
cunningly prevented, either death or frenzy insueth, through infection of the
humor left in the wound bitten by a mad Dog: which because bad Chirurgians
cannot cure, they have therefore used foolish cosening Charms. But Dodonaeus in
his Herbal says, that the herb Alysson cures it: which experiment, I doubt
not, will prove more true then all the Charms in the world. Bat where he says,
That the same hanged at a man's Gate or Entry, preserves him and his Cattle
from Enchantment, or bewitching, he is overtaken with folly.

Against the biting of a Scorpion.
SAy to an Ass secretly, and as it were whispering in his Ear, I am bitten with
a Scorpion.

Against the Toothache.
SCarifie the gums in the grief, with the Tooth of one that has been slain.
Otherwise, Galbes galbat, galdes galdat. Otherwise, A ab hur hus, etc.
Otherwise, At saccaring of Mass hold your teeth together, and say That is, you
shall not break or diminish a bone of him.
Os non comminuetis ex eo. Otherwise, Strigiles falcesque dentatae, dentium
dolorem persanate; O Horse-combs and sickles that have so many teeth, come heal
of my toothach.

A Charm to release a Woman in Travel.
THrow over the top of the house, where a woman in travel lies, a stone, or
any other thing that has killed three living creatures, namely, a man, a wild
bore, and a She-bear.

To heal the Kings or Queens Evil, or any other soreness in the Throat.
REmedies to cure the Kings or Queens-Evil, is first to touch the place with
the hand of one that died an untimely death: Otherwise, Let a Virgin fasting
lay her hand on the sore, and say, Apollo denies that the heat of the Plague
can increase where a naked Virgin quenches it: and spet three times upon it.

A Charm in the Romish Church, upon Saint Blazes day, that will fetch a Thorn
out of any place of ones body, a bone out of the Throat, etc. Lect. 3.
FOr the fetching of a Thorn out of any place of one body, or a bone out of the
throat, you shall read a charm in the Romish Church upon St. Blazes day; to
wit, Call upon God, and remember St. Blaze. This St. Blaze could also heal all
wild Beasts that were sick or lame, with laying on of his hands: as appears
in the lesson read on his day, where you shall see the matter at large.

A charm for the Headache.
Tie a halter about your head, wherewith one has been hanged.

A Charm to be said each morning by a Witch fasting, or at least before she go
abroad.
THe fire bites, the fire bites, the fire bites; Hogs-turd over it, Hogs-turd
over it, Hogs-turd over it; The Father with thee, the Son with me, the
Holy Ghost between us both to be: ter. Then spit over one shoulder, and then
over the other, and then three times right forward.

Another Charm that Witches use at the gathering of their Medicinable Herbs.
Hail be thou holy herb
Growing on the ground,
All in the Mount Though neither the Herb nor the Witch never came there.
Calvarie
First were thou found;
Thou art good for many a sore,
And healest many a wound,
In the Name of sweet Jesus
I take thee from the ground.
An old Woman's Charm, wherewith she did much good in the Country, and grew
famous thereby.
AN old woman that healed all diseases of Cattle (for the which she never took
any reward but a penny and a loaf) being seriously examined by what words she
brought these things to pass, confessed that after she had touched the sick
creature, she always departed immediately, saying,

My Loaf in my lap,
My Penny in my purse;
Thou art never the better,
And I am never the worse.
Another like Charm.
A Gentlewoman having sore eyes, made her moan to one that promised her help,
if she would follow his advice: which was only to wear about her neck a scroll
sealed up, whereinto she might not look; and she conceiving hope of cure
thereby, received it under the condition, and left her weeping and tears,
wherewith she was wont to bewail the miserable darkness which she doubted to
endure: whereby in short time her eyes were well amended: But alas! Note the
force of constant opinion, or fixed fancy.
she lost soon after, that precious Jewel, and thereby returned to her wonted
weeping, and by consequence too her sore eyes. Howbeit, her Jewel or scroll
being found again, was looked into by her deer friends, and this only Posie was
contained therein.

The Devil pull out both thine eyes,
And Spell the word backward, and you shall soon see this slovenly charm or
apphension.
etish in the holes likewise.
Whereby partly you may see what constant opinion can do, according to the
saying of Plato; If a man's fancy or mind give him assurance that a hurtful
thing shall do him good, it may do so, etc.

A Charm to open Locks.
AS the herbs called Aethiopides will open all locks (if all be true that
Inchanters say) with the help of certain words: Thievish charms.
so be there Charms also and Periapts, which without any herbs can do as much:
as for example. Take a piece of Wax crossed in baptism, and do but print
certain flowers therein, and tie them in the hinder skirt of your shirt; and
when you would undo the lock, blow thrice therein, saying; Arato hoc partiko
hoc maratarykin. I open this door in thy name that I am forced to break as thou
brakest Hell-gates, In Nomine Patris, and Filii, and spiritus sancti, Amen.

A Charm to drive away Spirits that haunt any House.
Hang in every of the four corners of your house, This is called and counted
the Paracelsian charm.

Psalm. 150. Luke 16. Psalm. 64.


this sentence written upon Virgin Parchment, Omnis spiritus laudet Dominum:
Mosen habent and Prophetas: Exurgat Deus, and dissipentur inimiciejus.

A pretty Charm or Conclusion for one Possessed.
THe possessed body must go upon his or her knees to the Church, how far so
ever it be off from their lodging; and so must creep without going out of the
way, being the common highway, in that sort, how foul and dirty soever the same
be; or whatsoever lie in the way, not shunning any thing whatsoever, until he
come to the Church, Where he must hear Mass devoutly, Memorandum that hearing
of Mass be in no case omitted, quoth Nota.
and then follows recovery.

Another for the same purpose.
THere must be commended to some poor beggar the saying of five Pater-nosters,
and five Aves; the first to be said in the name of the party possessed, or
bewitched: for that Christ was led into the garden; Secondly, for that Christ
did sweat both water and blood; Thirdly, for that Christ was condemned; for
that he was crucified guiltless; and fifthly, for that he suffered to take away
our sins. Then must the sick body hear Mass eight days together, standing in
the place where the Gospel is said, and must mingle holy Water with his meat
and his drink, and holy Salt also must be a portion of the mixture.

Another to the same effect.
THe sick man must fast three days, Johannes Anglicus ex Constantino,
Gualtero, Bernardo, Giberto, etc.
and then he with his Parents must come to Church, upon an embering Friday, and
must hear the Mass for that day appointed; and so likewise Saturday and Sunday
following. And the Priest must read upon the sick man's head that Gospel, which
is read in September, and in Grape-harvest, after the Feast of Holy-Cross. In
diebus quatuor temporum, in Ember-dayes: then let him write and carry it about
his neck, and he shall be cured.

Another Charm or Witchcraft for the same.
THis Office or Conjuration following was first authorized and printed at Rome,
and afterward at Avenion, Anno 1515. And lest that the Devil should lie hid in
some secret part of the body, every part thereof is named; Obsecro te Jesu
Christ, etc. that is, I beseech thee O Lord Jesus Christ, that thou pull out
of every member of this man all infirmities, from his head, from his hair, from
his brain, from his forehad, from his eyes, from his nose, from his ears, from
his mouth, from his tongue, from his teeth, from his jaws, from his throat,
from his neck, from his back, from his breast, from his paps, from his heart,
from his stomach, from his sides, from his flesh, from his blood, from his
bones, from his legs from his feet, from his fingers, from the soles of his
feet, from his marrow, from his sinews, from his skin, and from every joint of
his members, etc.

Doubtless Jesus Christ could have no starting hole, but was hereby every way
prevented and pursued; so as he was forced to do the cure: for it appears
hereby, that it had been insufficient for him to have said; Depart our of this
man thou unclean spirit, and that when he so said, he did not perform it. I do
not think that there will be found among all the Heathens superstitious Fables,
or among the Witches, Conjurers, Poets, Knaves, Coseners, Fools, etc. that ever
wrote, Barnard. de bustis in Rosar. sermon. 15.
so impudent and impious a lie, or Charm, as is read in Barnardine de bustis;
where to cure a sick man, Christ's body, to wit, a Wafer-cake, was outwardly
applied to his side, and entered into his heart, in the sight of all standers
by. Now, if grave Authors report such lies, what credit in these cases shall we
attribute unto the old wives tales, that Sprenger, Institor, Bodin, and others
write? Even as much as to Ovids Metamorphosis, Aesops Fables, Moor's Utopia,
and diverse other fancies; which have as much truth in them, as a blindman has
sight in his eye.

A Charm for the Bots in a Horse.
YOu must both say and do thus upon the diseased Horse three days together,
before the Sunrising: In Nomine Pa tris and fi lii and spiritus sancti;
Exorcizo te vermem per Deum Pa trem, and fi lium and spiritum sanctum: that is,
In the Name of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, I conjure thee O
Worm, by God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; that thou neither eat nor
drink the flesh, blood or bones of this Horse; and that thou hereby may be
made as patient as Job, and as good as Saint John Baprist, when he baptized
Christ in Jordan. In Nomine Pa tris and Filii and Spirituus Sancti. And then
say three Pater-nosters, and three Aves, in the right ear of the Horse, to the
glory of the Holy Trinity. Do minus Fili us Spiri tus Mari a.

There are also diverse Books imprinted, as it should appear, with the authority
of the Church of Rome, wherein are contained many medicinal Prayers, not only
against all diseases of Horses, but also for every impediment and fault in a
Horse: The Smiths will can them small thanks for this prayer.
insomuch as if a shoe fall off in the midst of his journey, there is a Prayer
to warrant your Horses hoof, so as it shall not break, how far soever he be
from the Smiths forge.

Item, The Duke Alba his Horse was consecrated, or canonized in the
Low Countries, at the solemn Mass; wherein the Popes-Bull, and also his Charm
was published (which I will hereafter recite) he in the mean time sitting as
Viceroy with his consecrated standart in his hand, till Mass was done.

A Charm against Vinegar.
O notable blasphemy!
THat Wine Wax not Eager write on the vessel, Gustate and videte, quoniam suavis
est Dominus.

CHAP. XV. The Enchanting Serpents and Snakes; Objections answered concerning
the same; fond reasons why Charms take effect therein. Mahomets Pigeon.
Miracles wrought by an Ass at Memphis in Egypt.
Popish Charms against Serpents. Of Miracle-workers, the taming of Snakes,
Bodin's lie of Snakes.

Concerning the charming of Serpents and Snakes, mine Adversaries (as I have
said) think they have great advantage by the words of David in Psalm. 58. and by
Jer. chap. 8. expounding the one Prophet by Virgil, the other by Ovid. For the
words of David are these, Psalm. 58.4, 5.
Their poison is like the poison of a Serpent, and like a deaf Adder, that
stops his Ear, and hears not the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so
cunningly. The words of Virgil are these, Frigidus in pratis cantando rumpitur
anguis. As if he might say, David thou lie; Virg. eclog. 8.
for the cold-natured Snake is by the Charms of the Inchanters broken all to
pieces in the field where he lies. Then comes Ovid, and he takes his Country
man's part, saying in the name and person of a Witch, Ovid. Metamorph. 7.
Vipereas rumpo verbis and carmine fauces; I with my words and Charms can break
in sunder the Vipers jaws. Marry Jeremy on the other side encountreth this
Poetical Witch, and he not only, defends, but expounds his fellow Prophets
words, and that not in his own Name, but in the Name of Almighty God, saying, I
will send Serpents and Cockatrices, Jer. 8.17.
among you which cannot be charmed.

Now let any indifferent man (Christian or Heathen) Judge whether the words and
minds of the Prophets do not directly oppugn these Poets words. (I will not say
minds) for that I am sure therein they did but jest and trifle, according to
the common fabling of lying Poets. And certainly, I can encounter them two with
other two Poets, namely Propertius and Horace, the one merrily deriding, the
other seriously impugning their, fantastical Poetries, concerning the power and
Omnipotency of Witches, For where Virgil, Ovid, etc. write that Witches with
their Charms fetch down the Moon and Stars from heaven, etc. Propertius
mocketh them in these words following: At vos deductae quibus est fallacia
Lunae,
Et labor in magicis sacra piare focis,
En agedum domina mentem convertite nostrae,
Et facite illa meo palleat ore magis,
Tunc ego crediderim vobis and sidera and amnos
Posse Circeis ducere carminibus.
Englished by Abraham Fleming: But you that have the subtle slight
Of fetching down the Moon from Skies;
And with enchanting fire bright
Attempt to purge your Sacrifice:
Lo now, go too, turn (if you can)
Our Madams mind and sturdy heart,
And make her face more pale and wan,
Than mine: which if by Magic Art
You do, then will I soon believe,
That by your witching Charms you can
From Skies aloft the Stars remeeve,
And Rivers turn from whence they ran.


And that you may see more certainly, that these Poets did but jest and deride
the credulous and timorous sort of people, I thought good to show you what Ovid
says against himself, and such as have written so incredibly and ridiculously
of Witches Omnipotency: Nec mediae magicis finduntur cantibus angues,
Nec redit in fontes unda supina suos.
Englished by Abraham Fleming: Snakes in the middle are not riven
With Charms Witches cunning,
Nor Waters to their Fountains driven
By force of backward running.


Card. lib. 15. de var. rer. cap. 80.
As for Horace his Verses I omit them, because I have cited them in another
place. And concerning this matter Cardanus says, that at every eclipse they
were wont to think, that Witches pulled down the Sun and Moon from Heaven. And
doubtless, from hence came the opinion of that matter, which spread so far, and
continued so long in the common peoples mouths that in the end learned men grew
to believe it, and to affirm it in writing.

An objection answered.
But here it will be objected, that because it is said (in the places by me
alleged) that Snakes or Vipers cannot be charmed; Ergo, other things may: To
answer this argument, I would ask the Witchmonger this question, to wit,
Whether it be expedient, that to satisfy his folly, the Holy Ghost must of
necessity make mention of every particular thing that he imagines may be
bewitched? I would also ask of him, what privilege a Snake has more then
other creatures, that he only may not, and all other creatures may be
bewitched; I hope they will not say, Dan. in dialog. cap. 3.
that either their faith or infidelity is the cause thereof; neither do I admit
the answer of such Divines as say that he cannot be bewitched, for that he
seduced Eve; by means whereof God himself cursed him; and thereby he is so
privileged, as that no Witches Charm can take hold of him. But more shall be
said hereof in the sequel.

Danaeus says, that Witches Charms take soonest hold upon Snakes and Adders;
because of their conference and familiarity with the Devil, whereby the rather
mankind through them was seduced. Let us seek then an answer for this cavil;
although in truth it needs not; for the phrase of speech is absolute, and
imports not a special quality proper to the nature of a Viper any more than
when I say, A Cony cannot fly, you should gather and conclude thereupon, that
I meant that all other Beasts could fly. But you shall understand, that the
cause why these Vipers can rather withstand the voice and practice of
Inchanters and Sorcerers, than other creatures, is, for that they being in body
and nature venomous, cannot so soon or properly receive their destruction by
venom, whereby the Witches in other creatures bring, their mischievous
practices more easily to pass, according to Virgil's saying; Virg. Geo. 4.
Corrupitque lacus, infecit pabula tabo. Englished by Abraham Fleming: She did
infect with Poison strong
Both Ponds and Paestures all along.


And thereupon the Prophet alludeth unto their corrupt and inflexible nature
with that comparison; and not (as Tremelius is fain to shift it) with stopping
one ear with his tale, and laying the other close to the ground, because he
would not hear the Charmers voice: For the Snake has neither such reason, nor
the words such effect: otherwise the Snake must know our thoughts. It is also
to be considered, how untame by nature these Vipers for the most part) are
insomuch as they be not by man's industry or cunning to be made familiar, or
trained to do any thing, whereby admiration may be procured: as Bomelio Feats
his Dog could do, or Mahomet's Pigeon, Feats his Dog, and Mahomets Pigeon.
which would resort unto him, being in the midst of his Camp, and pick a Pease
out of his ear; in such sort that many of the people thought that the
Holy Ghost came and told him a tale in his ear: the same Pigeon also brought
him a scroll, wherein was written Rex esto, and laid the same in his neck. And
because I have spoken of the docility of a Dog and a Pigeon, though I could
cite an infinite number of like tales, I will be bold to trouble you but with
one more.

At Memphis in Egypt, among other juggling knacks, which were there usually
showed, there was one that took such pains with an Ass, that he had taught him
all these qualities following. And for gain, he caused a Stage to be made, A
story declaring the great docility of an Ass.
and an Assembly of people to meet; which being done, in the manner of a Play,
he came in with his Ass, and said; The Sultane has great need of Asses to help
to carry stones and other stuff, toward his great building which he has in
hand. The Ass immediately fell down to the ground, and by all signs showed
himself to be sick, and at length to give up the ghost: so as the Juggler
begged of the Assembly money toward his loss. And having gotten all that he
could, he said; Now my Masters, you shall see mine Ass is yet alive, and does
but counterfeit, because he would have some money to buy him provender, knowing
that I was poor, and in some need of relief. Hereupon he would needs lay a
wager, that his Ass was alive, who to every man's seeming was stark dead. And
when one had laid money with him thereabout, he commanded the Ass to rise, but
he lay still as though he were dead: then did he beat him with a Cudgel, but
that would not serve the turn, until he addressed his speech to the Ass, saying
(as before) in open audience; The Sultan has commanded, that all the people
shall ride out to morrow, and see the triumph, and that the fair Ladies will
then ride upon the fairest Asses, and will give notable provender unto them,
and every Ass shall drink of the sweet water of Nilus: and then lo the Ass did
presently start up, and advance himself exceedingly. Lo (quoth his Master) now
I have won: but in troth the Major has borrowed mine Ass, for the use of the
old ill-favored Witch his wife: and thereupon immediately he hung down his
ears, and halted down right, as though he had been stark lame. Then said his
Master, I perceive you love young pretty wenches: at which words he looked up,
as it were with joyful cheer. And then his Master did bid him go choose one
that should ride upon him; and he ran to a very handsome woman, and touched her
with his head, etc. A Snake will never be brought to such familiarity, etc.
Bodin says, that this was a man in the likeness of an Ass, J. Bod. lib. de
demon. 2. c. 6.
but I may rather think that he is an Ass in the likeness or a man. Well, to
return to our Serpents, I will tell you a story concerning the charming of
them, and the event of the same.

In the City of Salisborough there was an Inchanter, that before all the people
took upon him to conjure all the Serpents and Snakes within one mile compass
into a great pit or dike, and there to kill them. When all the Serpents were
gathered together, as he stood upon the brink of the pit, there came at the
last a great and horrible Serpent, which would not be gotten down with all the
force of his Incantations: so as (all the rest being dead) he flew upon the
Inchanter, and clasped him in the midst, and drew him down into the said Dike,
and there killed him. You must think that this was a Devil in a Serpents
likeness, which for the love he bare to the poor Snakes, killed the Sorcerer;
to teach all other Witches to beware of the like wicked practice. And surely,
if this be not true, Mal. Malef. part. 2. qu. 2. c. 9. Johan. Bodinus.
there be a great number of lies contained in M. Mal. and J. Bodin. And if this
be well weighed, and conceived, it beats down to the ground all those
Witchmongers arguments, that contend to wring witching miracles out of this
place. For they disagree notably, some denying, and some affirming that
Serpents may be bewitched. Nevertheless because in every point you shall see
how Popery agrees with Paganism, I will recite certain Charms against Vipers,
allowed for the most part in and by the Church of Rome: as follows.

Exorcisms or Conjurations against Serpents.
I conjure thee O Serpent in this hour, by the five holy wounds of our Lord,
that thou remove not out of this place, but here stay, as certainly as God was
born of a pure Virgin. Otherwise I conjure thee Serpent, In Nomine Patris, and
Filii, and Spiritus sancti: I command thee Serpent by our Lady S. Mary, that
thou obey me, as wax obeys the fire, and As fire obeys water; that thou
neither hurt me, nor any other Christian, as certainly as God was born of an
immaculate Virgin, in which respect I take thee up, In Nomine Patris, and
Filii, and Spiritus Sancti: Ely lash eiter, ely lash eiter, ely lash eiter.
Otherwise, O Vermin, thou must come as God came unto the Jews. Otherwise, L.
Varius says, that Serpens quernis frondibus contracta, that a Serpent touched
with Oak-leaves dies, L Vair. lib. de fascinat. cap. 4.
and stays even in the beginning of his going, if a feather of the bird Ibis
be cast or thrown upon him: and that a Viper smitten or hot with a reed is
astonished, and touched with a beechen branch is presently numme and stiff.

Usurpers of Kindred with blessed Paul, and S. Katharine.
Here is to be remembered, that many use to boast that they are of S. Paul's race
and kindred, showing upon their bodies the prints of Serpents: which (as the
Papists affirm) was incident to all them of S. Paul's stock. Marry they say
herewithal, that all his kinsfolks can handle Serpents, or any poison without
danger. Others likewise have (as they brag) a Katharine-wheel upon their
bodies, and they say they are kin to S. Katharine, and that they can carry
burning-coals in their bare-hands, and dip their said hands in hot scalding
liquor, and also go into hot Ovens. J. Bodin. lib. de daem. 1. cap. 3.
Whereof though the last be but a bare jest, and to be done by any that will
prove (as a bad fellow in London had used to do, making no tarriance at all
therein:) yet there is a show made of the other, as though it were certain and
undoubted; by anointing the hands with the juice of Mallows, Mercury, Urine,
etc. which for a little time are defensatives against the scalding liquors, and
scorching fires.

But they that take upon them to work these mysteries and miracles, do indeed
(after rehearsal of these and such like words and Charms) take up even in their
bare hands, those Snakes and Vipers, and sometimes put them about their necks,
without receiving any hurt thereby, to the terror and astonishment of the
beholders, which naturally both fear and abhor all Serpents. But these
Charmers (upon my word) dare not trust to their Charms, but use such an
Enchantment, as every man may lawfully use, and the lawful use thereof may
bring to pass that they shall be in security, and take no harm, how much soever
they handle them: marry with a woollen rag they pull out their teeth
beforehand, as some men say; but as truth is, they weary them, and that is of
certainty. And surely this is a kind of Witchcraft, which I term private
confederacy. Bodin says, that all the Snakes in one Country were by Charms
and Verses driven into another Region: perhaps he means Ireland, where S.
Patrik is said to have done it with his holiness, etc.

James Sprenger and Henry Institor affirm, that Serpents and Snakes, and their
skins exceed all other creatures for Witchcraft: insomuch as Witches do use to
bury them under men's thresholds, either of the house or stalls, whereby
barrenness is procured both to woman beasts: yea and that the very earth and
ashes of them continue to have force of fascination. In respect whereof they
wish all men now and then to dig away the earth under their thresholds, and to
sprinkle holy water in the place, and also to hang boughs (hallowed on
Midsummer-day) at the stall door where the Cattle stand: and produce examples
thereupon, of Witches lies, or else their own, which I omit, because I see my
Book grows to be greater than I meant it should be.

CHAP. XVI.
Charms to carry Water in a Sieve; to know what is spoken of us behind our
backs for bleer eyes; to make seeds to grow well; of Images made of Wax; to be
rid of a Witch; to hang her up; notable authorities against waxen Images; a
Story bewraying the Knavery of waxen Images.

LEonardus Vairus says, that there was a Prayer extant, L. Vairus lib. fascin
1. cap. 5. Oration Tusca Vestalis.
whereby might be carried in a Sieve, Water, or other Liquor: I think it was
clam clay, which a crow taught a maid, that was promised a cake of so great
quantity, as might be kneaded of so much Flour, as she could wet with the
Water, that she brought in a Sieve, and by that means she clam'd it with Clay,
and brought in so much Water, as whereby she had a great Cake, and so beguiled
her Sisters, etc. And this Tale I heard among my Grannams Maids, whereby I can
decipher this Witchcraft. Item, by the tingling of the Ear, men heretofore
could tell what was spoken of them. If any see a Scorpion, Of the word (Bud)
and the Greec Letters P and A.
and say this word (Bud) he shall not be stung or bitten therewith. These two
Greek Letters p and A written in a Paper, and hung about ones neck, preserve
the party from Bleereyedness. Cummin or Hempseed sown with cursing and
opprobrious words grow the faster and the better. Berosus Anianus makes
Witchcraft of great Antiquity; for he says, that Cham, touching his Fathers
naked Member, uttered a Charm, whereby his Father became emasculated or
deprived of the Powers generative.

A Charm teaching how to hurt whom you list with Images of Wax, etc.
MAke an Image in his name, whom would hurt or kill, of new Virgin wax; under
the right Arm-poke whereof place a Swallows heart, and the liver under the
left; then hang about the neck thereof a new thread in a new Needle pricked into
the member which you would have hurt, with the rehearsal of certain words;
which for the avoiding of foolish superstition and credulity in this behalf is
to be omitted: And if they were inserted, I dare undertake they would do no
harm, were it not to make fools, and catch Gudgins. Otherwise, Sometimes these
Images are made of Brass, and then the hand is placed where the foot should be,
and the foot where the hand, and the face downward. Otherwise, For a greater
mischief, the like Image is made in the form of a man or woman, upon whose head
is written the certain Name of the party; and on his or her ribs these words,
Ailif, casyl, zaze, hit, mel meltat; then the same must be buried. Otherwise,
in the dominion of Mars, The Practiser of these Charms must have skill in the
Planetary Motions, or else he may go shoo the Goose
two Images must be prepared, one of wax, the other of the earth of a dead man;
each Image must have in his hand a Sword wherewith a man has been slain, and
he that must be slain, may have his head thrust through with a Foin. In both
must be written certain peculiar Characters, and then must they be hid in a
certain place. Otherwise, to obtain a Woman's Love, an Image must be made in the
hour of Venus, of Virgin-wax, in the name of the beloved, whereupon a Character
is written, and is warmed at a fire, and in doing thereof the name of some
Angel must be mentioned. To be utterly rid of the Witch, and to hang her up by
the hair, you must prepare an Image of the earth of a dead man to be baptized
in another man's name, whereon the name, with a Character, must be written: then
must it be perfumed with a rotten bone, and then these Psalms read backward;
Domine Dominus noster, Dominus illuminatio mea, Domine exaudi orationem meam,
Deus laudem meam ne tacueris; and then bury it, first in one place, and
afterward in another. Howbeit, it is written in the one and twentieth Article
of the Determination of Paris, that to affirm that Images of Brass, Lead, Gold,
of white or red Wax, or of any other Stuff, conjured, baptized, consecrated, or
rather execrated through these Magical Arts at certain days, have wonderful
virtues, or such as are avowed in their Books or Assertions, is error in faith,
Natural Philosophy and true Astronomy; yea it is concluded in the twenty second
Article of that Council, that it is as great an Error to believe those things,
as to do them.

But concerning these Images, it is certain that they are much feared among the
people, and much used among cousening Witches, as partly appears in this
discourse of mine elsewhere, and as partly you may see by the Contents of this
Story following. A proved Story concerning the Premises.
Not long sithence, a young Maiden (dwelling at New Romny here in Kent) being
the Daughter of one M. L. Stuppeny (late Jurat of the same Town, but dead
before the Execution hereof) and afterward the Wife of Thom. Eps (who is at
this instant Mayor of Romny, was visited with sickness, whose Mother and
Fatherinlaw being abused with credulity concerning Witches supernatural Power,
repaired to a famous Witch called Mother Baker, dwelling not far from thence at
a place called Stonestreet, who, according to Witches cousening Custom, asked
whether they mistrusted not some bad Neighbor, to whom they answered that
indeed they doubted a Woman near unto them (and yet the same was of the
honester and wiser sort of her Neighbors, reputed a good Creature.)
Nevertheless the Witch told them that there was great cause of their suspicion:
for the same, said she, is the very party that wrought the Maidens destruction,
by making a heart of wax, and pricking the same with pins and needles;
affirming also that the same Neighbor of hers had bestowed the same in some
secret corner of the House. This being believed, the House was searched by
credible Persons, but nothing could be found. The Witch or Wise woman being
certified hereof, continued her Assertion, and would needs go to the House
where she her self (as she affirmed) would certainly find it. When she came
thither, she used her Cunning, as it chanced, to her own confusion, or at
leastwise to her detection; for herein she did, as some of the wiser sort
mistrusted that she would do, laying down privily such an Image, as she had
before described, in a corner, which by others had been most diligently
searched and looked into, and by that means her Cousenage was notably bewrayed.
And I would wish that all Witchmongers might pay for their lewd repair to
Inchanters, and consultation with Witches, and such as have familiar Spirits,
as some of these did, and that by the Order of the High Commissioners, which
partly for respect of Neigbourhood, and partly for other Considerations, I
leave unspoken of.

CHAP. XVII.
Sundry sorts of Charms tending to diverse Purposes; and first, certain Charms
to make Taciturnity in Tortures.

This Charm seems to allude to Christ crucified between the two Thieves.
IMparibus meritis tria
Pendent Corpora ramis
Dismas and Gestas,
In medio est Divina Potestas,
Dismas damnatur,
Gestas ad astra levatur:
Englished by Abraham Fleming: Three Bodies on a bough do hang,
For merits of Inequality,
Dismas and Gestas, in the midst
The Power of the Divinity.
Dismas is damnd, But Gestas lifted
up above the Stars on high.


Psalm 45. Luke 4.
Also this, Eructavit cor meum verbum bonum, veritatem nunquam dicam Regi.
Otherwise, As the milk of our Lady was luscious to our Lord Jesus Christ; so
let this torture or rope be pleasant to mine arms and members. Otherwise, John
19.
Jesus autem transiens per medium illorum ibat. Otherwise, You shall not break
a bone of him.

Counter-charms against these and all other Witchcrafts, in the saying also
whereof Witches are vexed, etc.
ERuctavit cor meum verbuus bonum, dicam cuncta opera mea regi. Otherwise,
Psalm 45. Scripture properly applied.
Domine labia mea aperies, and os meum annuntiabit veritatem. Otherwise,
Contere brachia inqui rei, and lingua maligna sulvertatur.

A Charm for the chin Cough.
TAke three sips of a Chalice, when the Priest has said Mass, and swallow it
down with good Devotion. etc.

For corporal or spiritual Rest.
In nomine Patris, up and down,
Et Filii and Spiritus sancti, upon my Crown,
Crux Christi upon my Breast,
Sweet Lady send me eternal Rest.
Charms to find out a Thief.
THe means how to find out a Thief, is thus; Turn your face to the East, O most
wonderful virtue hidden in the letters of S. Helens holy Name!
and make a Cross upon Crystal with Oil Olive, and under the Cross write these
two words (Saint Helen.) Then a Child that is innocent, and a chaste Virgin
born in true Wedlock, and not base begotten, of the age of ten years, must take
the Crystal in his hand, and behind his back, kneeling on thy knees, thou must
devoutly and reverently say over this Prayer thrice; I beseech thee my Lady S.
Helen, Mother of King Constantine, which did find the Cross whereupon Christ
died: by that holy devotion, and invention of the Cross, and by the same Cross,
and by the joy which thou conceivedst at the finding thereof, and by the love
which thou bear to thy Son Constantine, and by the great goodness which thou
do always use, that thou show me in this Crystal, whatsoever I ask or
desire to know, Amen. And when the Child sees the Angel in the Crystal,
demand what you will, and the Angel will make answer thereunto. Memorandum,
that this be done just at the Sunrising, when the weather is fair and clear.

Cardanus derideth these and such like Fables, Card. lib. 16. de var. rer. cap.
93.
and sets down his judgment therein accordingly, in the sixteenth Book De
rerum var. These Conjurers and Coseners forsooth, will show you in a Glass the
Thief that has stolen any thing from you, and this is their order. They take a
Glass-vial full of holy Water, and set it upon a linen cloth, which has been
purified, not only by washing, but by sacrifice, etc. On the mouth of the Vial
or Urinal, two Olive-leaves must be laid across, with a little Conjuration said
over it, by a child; to wit thus, Angele bone, Angele candide, per tuam
sanctitatem, meamque virginitatem, ostende mihi furem: with three Pater
nosters, three Aves, and betwixt either of them a For if the Cross be
forgotten, all is not worth a Pudding.
Cross made with the nail of the Thumb upon the mouth of the Vial; and then
shall be seen Angels ascending and descending as it were Motes in the
Sunbeams. The Thief all this while shall suffer great torments, and his Face
shall be seen plainly, even as plainly I believe, as the Man in the Moon. For
in truth, there are toys artificially conveyed into glass, which will make the
water bubble, and devices to make Images appear in the bubbles, as also there
be Artificial Glasses, which will show unto you that shall look thereinto, many
Images of diverse Forms, and some so small and curious, as they shall in favor
resemble whomsoever you think upon. Look in John Bap. Neap. for the confection
of such glasses. The subtilties hereof are so detected, and the mysteries of
the glasses so common now, and their cosenage so well known, etc. that I need
not stand upon the particular confutation hereof. Cardanus in the place before
cited reports, how he tried with children these and diverse circumstances, the
whole illusion, and found it to be plain knavery and cosenage.

Another way to find out a Thief that has stolen any thing from you.
GO to the Seaside, and gather as many pebles as you suspect persons for that
matter; carry them home, and throw them into the fire, and bury them under the
threshold, where the parties are like to come over. There let them lie three
days, and then before sunrising take them away. Then set a Porrenger full of
water in a circle, wherein must be made crosses every way, as many as can stand
in it; upon the which must be written, Christ overcomes, Christ reigns,
Christ commands. The Porrenger also must be signed with a Cross, and a form
of Conjuration must be pronounced. Then each stone must be thrown into the
water, in the name of the suspected. And when you put in the stone of him that
is guilty, the stone will make the water boil, as though glowing iron were put
thereinto. Which is a mere knack of legierdemain, and to be accomplished diverse
ways.

To put out the Thiefs eye.
REad the seven Psalms with the Letany, and then must be said a horrible prayer
to Christ, and God the Father, with a curse against the Thief. Then in the
midst of the step of your foot, on the ground where you stand, make a circle
like an eye, and write thereabout certain barbarous names, and drive with a
Coopers Hammer or Adds into the midst thereof a brazen nail consecrated,
saying, Justus es Domine, and justa judicia tua. Then the Thief shall be
bewrayed by his crying out.

Another way to find out a Thief.
These be mere toys to mock Apes, and have in them no commendable device.
STick a pair of Sheers in the rind of a Sieve, and let two persons set the top
of each of their Forefingers upon the upper part of the Sheers, holding it with
the Sieve up from the ground steadily, and ask Peter and Paul whether A. B. or
C. has stolen the thing lost, and at the nomination of the guilty person, the
Sieve will turn round. This is a great practice in all Countries, and indeed a
very babble. For with the beating of the pulse some cause of that motion
arises, some other cause by the slight of the fingers, some other by the wind
gathered in the Sieve to be staid, etc. at the pleasure of the holders. Some
cause may be the imagination, which upon the conceit at the naming of the
party, alters the common course of the pulse, as may well be conceived by a
Ring held steadily by a thread betwixt the finger and the thumb, over or rather
in a goblet or glass; which within short space will strike against the side
thereof so many strokes as the holder thinks it a clock, and then will stay:
the which who so proves shall find true.

A Charm to find out or spoil a Thief.
OF this matter, concerning the apprehension of Thieves by words, I will cite
one Charm, called S. Adelberts curse; being both for length of words sufficient
to weary the Reader, and for substantial stuff comprehending all that
appertains unto blasphemous speech or cursing, allowed in the Church of Rome,
as an Excommunication and Enchantment.

Saint Adelberts Curse or Charm against Thieves.
BY the Authority of the Omnipotent Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and by
the holy Virgin Mary Mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the holy Angels and
Archangels, and S. Michael, and S. John Baptist, and in the behalf of S. Peter
the Apostle, and the residue of the Apostles, and of S. Stephen, and of all the
Martyrs, of S. Sylvester, and of S. Adelbert, and all the Confessors, nd S.
Alegand, and all the holy Virgins, and of all the Saints in Heaven and Earth,
unto whom there is given power to bind and loose: we do excommunicate, damn,
curse, and bind with the knots and bands of Excommunication, and we do
segregate from the bounds and lists of our holy Mother the Church, all those
Thieves, Sacrilegious persons, ravenous Catchers, Doers, Counselors,
Coadjutors, male or female, that have committed this theft or mischief, This is
not to do good to our Enemies, nor to pray for them that hurt and hate us; as
Christ exhorts.
or have usurped any part thereof to their own use. Let their share be with
Dathan and Abiran, whom the Earth swallowed up for their sins and pride, and
let them have part with Judas that betrayed Christ, Amen: and with Pontius
Pilat, and with them that said to the Lord, Depart from us, we will not
understand thy ways; let their Children be made Orphans. Cursed be they in the
Field, in the Grove, in the Woods, in their Houses, Barns, Chambers, and Beds;
and cursed be they in the Court, in the Way, in the Town, in the Castle, in the
Water, in the Church, in the Churchyard, in the Tribunal-place, in Battle, in
their Abode, in the Marketplace, in their Talk, in Silence, in Eating, in
Watching, in Sleeping, in Drinking, in Feeling, in Sitting, in Kneeling, in
Standing, in Lying, in Idleness, in all their Work, in their Body and Soul, in
their five Wits, and in every Place. Cursed be the fruit of their Wombs, and
cursed be the fruit of their Lands, and cursed be all that they have. Cursed be
their Heads, their Mouths, their Nostrils, their Noses, their Lips, their Jaws,
their Teeth, their Eyes and Eyelids, their Brains, the roof of their Mouths,
their Tongues, their Throats, their Breast, their Hearts, Bellies, their
Livers, all their Bowels, and their Stomach. Cursed be their Navels, their
Spleens, their Bladder. Cursed be their Thighs, their Legs, their Feet, their
Toes, their Necks, their Shoulders. Cursed be their Backs, cursed be their
Arms, cursed be their Elbows, cursed be their Hands, and their Fingers, cursed
be both the Nails of their hands and feet; cursed be their Ribs and their
Genitals, and their Knees, cursed be their Flesh, cursed be their Bones, cursed
be their Blood, cursed be the Skin of their Bodies, cursed be the Marrow in
their Bones, cursed be they from the Crown of the Head to the sole of the Foot:
and whatsoever is betwixt the same, be it accursed; that is to say, their five
Senses, to wit, their Seeing, their Hearing, their Smelling, their Tasting, and
their Feeling. Cursed be they in the holy Cross, in the Passion of Christ, with
his five Wounds, with the effusion of his Blood, and by the milk of the Virgin
Mary. I conjure thee Lucifer, with all thy Soldiers, by the Thus they make the
holy Trinity to bear a part in their Exorcism, or else it is no bargain.
Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, with the Humanity and Nativity of Christ,
with the Virtue of all Saints, that thou rest not day nor night, till thou
bring them to destruction, either by drowning or hanging, or that they be
devoured by wild Beasts, or burnt, or slain by their Enemies, or hated of all
men living. And as our Lord has given Authority to Peter the Apostle, and his
Successors, (whose place we occupy, and to us (though unworthy) That whatsoever
we bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven: and whatsoever we loose on Earth,
shall be loosed in Heaven; so we accordingly, if they will not amend, do shut
from them the Gates of Heaven, and deny unto them Christian Burial, so as they
shall be buried in Asses Leaze. Furthermore, cursed be the ground wherein they
are buried, let them be confounded in the last day of Judgment, let them have
no conversation among Christians, nor be houseled at the hour of Death, let
them be made as dust before the face of the wind: and as Lucifer was expelled
out of heaven, and Adam and Eve out of Paradise; so let them be expelled from
the daylight. Mat. 25.
Also let them be joined with those, to whom the Lord says at the Judgment, Go
ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, where the worm shall not die, nor the fire be quenched. And as the
candle, which is thrown out of my hand here, is put out; so let their works and
their soul be quenched in the stench of Hellfire, except they restore that
which they have stolen, by such a day: and let every one say, Amen. After this
must be sung That is, In life we are in death, etc.
In media vita in morte sumus, etc.

This terrible curse with Bell, Book, and Candle added thereunto, must needs
work wonders: howbeit among Thieves it is not much weighed, among wise and true
men it is not well liked, to them that are robbed it brings small relief: the
Priests stomach may well be eased, but the goods stolen will never the sooner be
restored. Hereby is bewrayed both the malice and folly of Popish Doctrine, whose
uncharitable impiety is so impudently published, and in such order uttered, as
every sentence (if opportunity served) might be proved both heretical and
diabolical. But I will answer this cruel curse with another curse far more mild
and civil, performed by as honest a man (I dare say) as he that made the other,
whereof mention was lately made.

So it was, that a certain Sir John, with some of his company, once went abroad
a jetting, and in a Moonlight Evening robbed a Millers Weir and stole all his
Eels. The poor Miller made his moan to Sir John himself, who willed him to be
quiet; for he would so curse the Thief, and all his Confederates, with Bell,
Book and Candle, that they should have small joy of their Fish. And therefore
the next Sunday, Sir John got him to the Pulpit, with his Surplice on his back,
and his Stole about his neck, and pronounced these words following in the
audience of the people. A curse for theft.
All you that have stolen the Millers Eeles,
Laudate Dominum de Coelis;
And all they have consented thereto,
Benedicamus Domino.
Lo (says he) there is sauce for your Eeles my Masters.

Another Enchantment.
CErtain Priests use the hundred and eighth Psalm as an Enchantment or Charm,
or at leastwise saying, that against whomsoever they pronounce it, they cannot
live one whole year at the uttermost.

CHAP. XVIII.
A Charm or Experiment to find out a Witch.

IN die dominico sotularia juvenum axungia seu pinguedine porei, ut moris est,
pro restauratione fieri perangunt: and when she is once come into the Church,
the Witch can never get out, until the searchers for her give her express leave
to depart.

But now it is necessary to show you how to prevent and cure all mischiefs
wrought by these Charms and Witchcrafts, according to the opinion of M, Mal.
and others. Preservatives from Witchcraft according to M. Mal. L. Vairus, and
others.
One principal way is to nail a Horse-shoe at the inside of the outmost
threshold of your House, and so you shall be sure no Witch shall have power to
enter thereinto. And if you mark it, you shall find that rule observed in many
Countrey-houses. Otherwise: Item the triumphant title to be written. crosswise,
in every corner of the house, thus: Jesus Nazarenus Rex Judaeorum Memorandum,
you may join herewithal, the Name of the Virgin Mary, or of the four
Evangelists, or Verbum caro factum est. Otherwise: Item in some Countries they
nail a Wolfs head on the door. Otherwise: Item they hang Scilla, (which is
either a Root, or rather in this place garlic) in the roof of the House, for
to keep away Witches and Spirits: and so they do Alicium also. Otherwise: Item
Perfume made of the gall of a black Dog, and his blood besmeared on the posts
and walls of the House, drives out of the doors both Devils and Witches.
Otherwise: The House where Herba betonica is sown, is free from all mischiefs:
Otherwise: It is not unknown that the Romish Church allowed and used the smoke
of Sulphur, to drive Spirits out of their houses; as they did Frankincense and
Water hallowed. Otherwise: Apuleius faith, that Mercury gave to Ulysses, when
he came near to the Inchantress Circe, an herb called Verbascum, which in
English is called Mullein, or Tapsus barbatus, or Longwoort; and that preserved
him from the Enchantments. Otherwise: Item Pliny and Homer both do say, that
the Herb called Moly is an excellent herb against Enchantments, and say all,
that thereby Ulysses escaped Circes her Sorceries and Enchantments. Otherwise
also diverse ways they went to work in this case, and some used this
Defensive, some that Preservative against Incantations.

And herein you shall see, not only how the Religion of Papists and Infidels
agree; but also how their Ceremonies and their Opinions are all one concerning
Witches and Spirits.

For thus writes Ovid touching that matter.

Terque senem flamma ter aqua, ter sulphuro lustrat: Ovid de Med.
Englished by Abraham Fleming: She purifies with fire thrice
Old hoary-headed Aeson,
With water thrice, and sulphur thrice,
As she thought meet in reason.


Again the same Ovid comes in as before: Advenient, quae lustret anus,
lectumque locumque,
Deferat and tremula sulphur and ova manu.


Englished by Abraham Fleming: Let some old Women hither come,
And purge both bed and place,
And bring in trembling hand new eggs
And sulphur in like case.


And Virgil also harpeth upon the like string: -- baccare frontem Virg. in
Bucelicis.

Cingite, ne vati noceat mala lingua futuro:


Englished by Abraham Fleming: Of berry-bearing baccar bowze
Awreath or Garland knit,
And round about his head and browze
See decently it sit;
That of an ill talking tongue
Our future Poet be not stung.


Furthermore, was it not in times of Tempests, the Papists use, or superstition
to ring their Bells against Devils; trusting rather to the conging of their
Bells, than to their own cry unto God with Fasting and Prayer, assigned by him
in all adversities and dangers: according to the order of the Thracian Priests,
which would roar and cry, with all the noise they could make, in those
tempests. Olaus Goth. lib. de gentib. septentrional. l. 3. cap. 8.
Olaus Gothus says, that his Countrymen would shoot in the Air, to assist
their Gods, whom they thought to be then together by the ears with others, and
had consecrated Arrows, called Sagittae Joviales, even as our Papists had. Also
in stead of Bells, they had great Hammers, called Mallei Joviales, to make a
noise in time of thunder. In some Countries they run out of the doors in time
of Tempest, blessing themselves with a Cheese, whereupon there was a Cross made
with a Ropes end upon Ascension day. Also three Hailstones to be thrown into
the fire in a Tempest, and thereupon to be said three Pater Nosters, and three
Aves, S. John's Gospel, and In fine fugiat Tempestas, is a present Remedy. Item,
to hang an egg laid on Ascension day in the roof of the House, preserves the
same from all hurts. A Witches Conjuration to make hail cease and be dissolved.
Item, I conjure you hail and wind by the five wounds of Christ, by the three
nails which pierced his hands and his feet, and by the four Evangelists,
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, that thou come down dissolved into water. Item,
it has been an usual matter, to carry out in tempests the Sacraments and
Relics, etc. Item, against storms, and many dumb Creatures, the Popish Church
uses Excommunication as a principal Charm. And now to be delivered from
Witches themselves, they hang in their Entries an herb called Pentaphyllon,
Cinquefoil, also an Olivebranch, also Frankincense, Myrrh, Valerian, Verven,
Palm, Antirchmon, etc. also Haythorn, otherwise White-thorn gathered on Mayday:
also the smoke of a Lappoints feathers drives Spirits away. There be
innumerable Popish Exorcisms and Conjurations for Herbs and other things, to be
thereby made wholesome both for the bodies and souls of Men and Beasts, and also
contagion of Weather. L. Vair. lib. de facin. 2 c. 11. Mal. Malef. par. 2.
quae. 1. cap. 15.

Note that you read never of any spirit that walked by day, quoth Nota.


Memorandum, that at the gathering of these Magical herbs, the Credo is
necessary to be said, as Vairus affirms; and also the Pater noster, for that
is not superstitious. Also Sprenger says, that to throw up a black Chicken in
the Air, will make all tempests to cease: so it be done with the hand of a
Witch. If a soul wander in the likeness of a man or woman by night, molesting
men, with bewailing their torments in Purgatory, by reason of Tithes forgotten,
etc. and neither Masses nor Conjurations can help; the Exorcist in his
Ceremonial Apparel must go to the Tomb of that body, and spurn thereat with his
foot, saying, Vade ad Gehennam, Get thee packing to Hell: and by and by the
soul goes thither, and there remains for ever. Otherwise, if there be no
Masses of purpose for this matter, to unbewitch the bewitched. Otherwise, You
must spet in the Piss-pot, where you have made water. Otherwise, Spet into the
shoe of your right foot, before you put it on: and that Vairus says is good
and wholesome to do, before you go into any dangerous place. Otherwise, that
neither Hunters nor their Dogs may be bewitched, they cleave an oaken branch,
and both they and their Dogs pass over it. Otherwise, Aug. de civit Dei, lib.
7. c. 12.
S. Augustine says, that to pacify the God Liber, whereby Women might have
fruit of the seeds they sow, and that their Gardens and Fields should not be
bewitched, some chief grave Matron used to put a Crown upon his genital Member,
and that must be publicly done.

To spoil a Thief, a Witch, or any other Enemy, and to be delivered from the
evil.
UPon the Sabbath day before Sunrising, cut a Hazel-wand, saying, I cut thee O
bough of this Summers growth, in the name of him whom I mean to beat or maim.
Then cover the Table, and say In nomine Patris and Filii and Spiritus sancti
ter. And striking thereon, say as follows (english he that can) Drech,
myroch, esenaroth betu baroch ass maaroth: and then say, Holy Trinity punish
him that has wrought this mischief, and take it away by thy great justice;
Eson elion emaris, ales, age; and strike the carpet with your wand.

A notable Charm or Medicine to pull out an Arrow-head, or any such thing that
sticks in the flesh or bones, and cannot otherwise be had out.
SAy three several times kneeling, Oremus, praeceptis salutaribus moniti, Pater
noster, Ave Maria. Then make a Cross, saying, The Hebrew Knight was canonized a
Saint, to wit, S. Longinus.
The Hebrew Knight struck our Lord Jesu Christ, and I beseech thee, O Lord Jesu
Christ by the same iron, spear, blood, and water, to pull out this iron: In
nomine Patris and. Filii and Spiritus sancti.

Charms against a quotidian Ague.
CUt an Apple in three pieces, and write upon the one, The Father is uncreated:
upon the other, The Father is incomprehensible: upon the third, The Father is
eternal: Otherwise, Write upon a Mass-cake cut in three pieces, O Ague to be
worshipped: on the second, O sickness to be ascribed to health and joys; on
the third, Pax max fax and let it be eaten fasting. Otherwise, Paint upon three
like pieces of a Mass-cake, Pater pax Adonai Filius vita Sabbath Spiritus
sanctus Tetragrammaton and eat it, as is aforesaid.

For all manner of Agues intermittent.
Join two little sticks together in the midst, being of one length, A crossed
appension with other appensions.
and hang it about your neck in the form of a Cross. Otherwise, For this
Disease, the Turks put within their Doublet a ball of wood, with another piece
of wood, and strike the same, speaking many frivolous words. Otherwise, Certain
Monks hanged scrolls about the necks of such as were sick, willing them to say
certain Prayers at each fit, and at the third fit to hope well; and made them
believe that thereby they should receive cure.

Periapts, Characters, etc. for Agues, and to cure all Diseases, and to deliver
from all evil.
THe first Chapter of St. John's Gospel in small letters consecrated at a Mass,
For body and soul.
and hanged about ones neck, is an incomparable Amulet or Tablet, which
delivers from all Witchcrafts and devilish Practices. But me thinks, if one
should hang a whole Testament, or rather a Bible, he might beguile the Devil
terribly. For indeed so would have S. Bernard have done, whom the Devil told,
that he could show him seven verses in the Psalter, which being daily repeated,
would of themselves bring any man to Heaven, and preserve him from hell. But
when St. Bernard desired the Devil to tell him which they were, he refused,
saying, he might then think him a fool so to prejudice himself. S. Bernard
overmatcheth the Devil for all his subtilty.
Well (quoth St. Bernard) I will do well enough for that, for I will daily say
over the whole Psalter. The Devil hearing him say so, told him which were the
verses, lest in reading over the whole Psalter daily, he should merit too much
for others. But if the hanging of St. John's Gospel about the neck be so
beneficial, how if one should eat up the same?

More Charms for Agues.
TAke the Party by the hand, and say, Aeque facilis sit tibi haec febris, atque
Mariae Virgini Christi partus. Otherwise, Wash with the Party, and privily say
this Psalm, Exaltabo te Deus meus, rex, etc. Otherwise, Wear about your neck a
piece of a nail taken from a Cross, and wrapped in wool. Otherwise drink wine,
wherein a Sword has been drowned that has cut off ones head. Otherwise, take
three consecrated Mass-cakes, and write upon the first, Qualis est Pater, talis
est vita: on the second, Qualis est Filius, talis est sanctus; on the third,
Qualis est Spiritus, Precious Restoratives.
tale est remedium. Then give them to the sick man, enjoining him to eat none
other thing that day wherein he eats any of them, nor yet drink; and let him
say fifteen Pater nosters, and as many Aves, in the honor and praise of the
Trinity. Otherwise, Lead the sick man on a Friday before Sunrising toward the
East, and let him hold up his hands toward the Sun, and say, This is the day
wherein the Lord God came to the Cross. But as the Cross shall never more come
to him; so let never the hot or cold fit of this Ague come any more unto this
man, In nomine Patris and Fi lii, and Spiritus sancti. Then say seven and
twenty Pater nosters, and as many Aves, and use this three days together.
Otherwise, This is too mystical to be englished, quoth Nota.
Fecana, cageti, daphnes, gebare, gedaco
Gebali stant, sed non stant phebas, hecus, and hedas.


Every one of these words must be written upon a piece of bread, and be given
in order one day after another to the sick body, and so must he be cured. This
says Nicholas Hemingius he chanced to read in the Schools in jest; so as one
noting the words, practiced the medicine in earnest; and was not only cured
himself, but also cured many others thereby. And therefore he concludes, that
this is a kind of miraculous cure, wrought by the illusion of the Devil:
whereas in truth, it will fall out most commonly, that a Tertian Ague will not
hold any man longer than so, though no medicine be given, or any words spoken.
Fernelius.
Otherwise, This word, Abra cadabra written on a paper, with a certain Figure
joined therewith, and hanged about ones neck, helps the Ague. Otherwise, let
the urine of the sick body made early in the morning be softly. heated nine
days together continually, until all be consumed into vapor. Otherwise, A
Cross made of two little twigs joined together, wherewith when the Party is
touched, he will be whole, specially if he hear it about his neck. Otherwise,
Take a like quantity of water out of three Ponds of equal bigness, and taste
thereof in a new earthen Vessel, and drink of it when the fit comes.

Notable follies of the Spaniards and Italians.
In the year of our Lord, 1568. the Spaniards and Italians received from the
Pope, this Incantation following; whereby they were promised both Remission of
Sins, and good success in their Wars in the Low Countries. Which whether it be
not as profane and impious, as any Witches Charm, I report me to the
indifferent Reader. Crucem pro nobis subiit and stans in illo sitiit Jesus
sacratis manibus, clavis ferreis, pedibus perfossis, Jesus, Jesus, Jesus:
Domine libera nos ab hoc malo, and ab hac peste: then three Pater nosters, and
three Ave Mary's, Also the same year their Ensigns were by the Authority
aforesaid conjured with certain Ceremonies, and consecrated against their
Enemies. And if you read the Histories of these Wars, you may see what victory
they gained hereby. Item, they baptized their chief Standard, and gave it to
name St. Margaret, who overthrew the Devil. And because you shall understand
the mystery hereof, I have the rather set it down elsewhere, being indeed
worth the reading.

For a bloody Flux, or rather an Issue of blood.
TAke a cup of cold water, and let fall thereinto three drops of the same
blood, He must answer by none other, for she perhaps has the curing thereof by
Patent.
and between each drop say a Pater noster, and an Ave, then drink to the
Patient, and say, who shall help you? The Patient must answer St. Mary. Then
say you, St. Mary stop the Issue of blood. Otherwise, Write upon the Patients
forehead with the same blood, Consummatum est. Otherwise, say to the Patient,
Sanguis mane in te, sicut fecit Christus in se; Sanguis mane in tua vena, sicut
Christus in suapoena; Sanguis mane fixus, sicut Christus quando fuit
crucifixus. Otherwise, as follows.

In the blood of Adam death was taken
In the blood of Christ it was all to shaken
And by the same blood I do thee charge,
That thou do run no longer at large.
Otherwise, Christ was born at Bethelem, and suffered at Jerusalem where his
blood was troubled. I command thee by the Virtue of God, and through the help
of all Saints, to stay even as Jordan did, when John baptized Christ Jesus; In
nomine Patris and Flii and Spiritus sancti. Otherwise, Put thy nameless singer
in the Wound, and make therewith three Crosses upon the Wound, and say five
Pater nosters, five Aves, and one Credo, in the honor of five Wounds.
Otherwise, Touch that part and say, De latere ejus exivit sanguis and aqua!
Otherwise, In Nomine Patris and Filii Spiritus sancti etc. Chimratchara,
sarite, confirma, consona, Imohalite, Otherwise, Sepa sepagoga sta sanguis in
Nomine Patris podendi and Filii podera and Spiritus sancti pandorica pax tecum,
Amen.

Cures commenced and finished by Witchcraft.
THere was a jolly fellow that took upon him to be a notable Surgeon, in the
Duchy of Mentz, 1567. to whom there resorted a Gentleman that had been vexed
with Sickness, named Elibert, having a Kerchief on his head, according to the
guise of sick folk. But the Surgeon made him pull off his Kerchief, and
willed him to drink with him freely. The sick man said he durst not; for he was
forbidden by Physicians so to do. Tush (said this Cunning man) they know not
your Disease, be ruled by me, and take in your drink lustily. For he thought
that when he was well tippled, he might the more easily beguile him in his
Bargain, and make his reward the greater, which he was io receive in part
aforehand. When they had well drunk, he called the sick man aside, and told him
the greatness and danger of his Disease, and how that it grew by means of
Witchcraft, and that it would be universally spread in his House, and among all
his Cattle, if it were not prevented: and impudently persuaded the sick man to
receive cure of him. And after Bargain made, See J. Wier. cap. 11. conf. The
Surgeon here most impudently sets his Knavery abroach.
he demanded of the sick man, whether he had not at any home, whom he might
assuredly trust? The sick man answered, that he had a Daughter and a Servant.
The Cousener asked how old his Daughter was? The Patient said twenty. Well
(said the Cousener) that is fit for our turn. Then he made the Mother and
Father to kneel on their knees to their Daughter, And to desire her in all
things to obey the Physician, and that she would do in every thing as he
command her; Otherwise her Father could not be restored to his health. In
which respect her Parents humbly besought her on their knees so to do. Then he
assigned her to bring him into his Lodging her Fathers hair, and her Mothers,
and of all those which he kept in his House, as well of men and women, as also
of his cattle. When she came therewith unto him, according to the match made,
and her Parents Commandment, he led her down into a low Parlour, where having
made a long speech, he opened a Book that lay on the board, and lays thereon
two Knives across, with much circumstance of words. A pretended Conjuration.
Then conjureth he, and makes strange Characters, and at length he makes a
circle on the ground, wherein he causes her to stick one of those conjured
Knives; and after many more strange words, he makes her stick the other Knife
beside it. Then fell down the maid in a a swoon for feat; so as he was fain to
frote her, and put a sop into her mouth, after the receipt whereof she was fore
troubled and amazed. Then he made her breasts to be uncovered, so as when they
were bare, he dallied with with them, diversely and long together. Then he made
her lie right upward, all uncovered, and bare below her paps. Wherein the Maid
being loath to obey him, resisted, and in shame forbad that villainy. Then said
the Knave; Your Fathers destruction is at hand; for except you will be ruled,
he and all his Family shall sustain greater grief and inconvenience, then is
yet happened unto him: And no Remedy, except you will seek his utter overthrow,
I must have carnal Copulation with you: and therewithal fell into her bosom,
and overthrew her and her Virginity. Ad vada tot vadit urna quot ipsa capit.
So did he the second day, and attempted the like on the third day: But he
failed then of his purpose, as the Wench confessed afterward. In the mean time
he ministered so cruel Medicines to the sick man, that through the Torments
thereof he feared present death, and was fain to keep his bed, whereas he
walked about before very well and lustily. The Patient in his Torments calls
unto him for Remedy, who being slack and negligent in that behalf, made room
for the Daughter to accompany her Father, who asked her what she thought of the
Cure, and what hope she had of his Recovery? Who with tears remained silent, as
being oppressed with grief; till at the last in abundance of sorrow she uttered
the whole matter to her Father. This does Johannes Wierus report, saying, that
it came unto him by the lamentable relation of the Father himself. And this is
here at this time for none other purpose rehearsed, but that men may hereby
learn to take heed of such consening Merchants, and know what they be that take
upon them to be cunning in Witchcraft, lest they be bewitched; As Master
Elibert and his Daughter were.

Another Witchcraft or Knavery practiced by the same Surgeon.
Three morsels; the first charmed with Christ's Birth, the second with his
Passion, the third with his Resurrection.
THis Surgeon ministered to a Nobleman, that lay sick of an Ague, offering
unto him three pieces of a Root to be eaten at three morsels, saying to the
first, I would Christ had not been born; unto the second, I would he had not
suffered; unto the third, I would he had not risen ag^^^ And then putting them
about the sick man's neck, said, Be of good cheer; And if he lost them,
whosoever took them up, should therewithal take away his Ague. Otherwise,
Jesus Christ which was born, driver thee from this infirmity Jesus Christ which
died deliver thee from this infirmity Jesus Christ which rose again deliver
thee from this infirmity. Then daily must be said five Pater nosters and five
Aves.

Another Experiment for one bewitched.
A Cosening Physician, and a foolish Patient.
ANother such cousening Physician persuaded one which had a Timpany that it was
one old Viper, and two young maintained in his belly by Witchcraft. But being
watched, so as he could not convey Vipers into his ordure or excrements, after
his purgations, at length he told the party, that he should suffer the pains of
Childbirth, if it were not prevented; and therefore he must put his hand into
his Breech, and take out those worms there. But the Mother of the sick party,
having warning hereof, said she could do that her self. So the Cousener was
prevented, and the Party died only of a Timpany, and the Knave ran out of the
Country.

Otherwise.
Joh. Bodin.
MOnsieur Bodin tells of a Witch, who undertaking to cure a Woman bewitched,
caused a Mass to be sung at Midnight in our Ladies Chapel. And when she had
overlain the sick party, and breathed certain words upon her, Kacozelia.
she was healed. Wherein Bodin says, she followed the example of Elisha the
Prophet, who raised the Shunamits Son. And this Story must needs be true; for
Goodman Hardivin Blesensis his Host at the Sign of the Lion told him the Story.

A Knack to know whether you be Bewitched or no, etc.
IT is also expedient to learn how to know whether a sick man be bewitched or
no; this is the practice thereof. Mal. malef. p. 1. quaest 17.

Barth Spin. in novo Mal. Malef.


You must hold molten Lead over the sick body, and pour it into a Poringer full
of water; and then if there appear upon the Lead any Image, you may know the
party is bewitched.

CHAP. XIX.
That one Witchcraft may lawfully meet with another.

SCotus, Hostiensis, Gofridus, and all the old Canonists agree, that it is
lawful to take away Witchcraft by Witchcraft, Et vana vanis contundere. Scotus
in 4. distinct 34 de Impetio.
And Scotus says, It were folly to forbear to encounter Witchcraft by
Witchcraft, for (says he) there can be none inconvenience therein, because the
overthrower of Witchcraft assenteth not to the works of the Devil. And
therefore he says further, that it is meritorious so to extinguish and
overthrow the Devils works. As though he should say, It makes no matter,
though S. Paul say, Non facies malum ut inde veniat bonum, Thou shall not do
evil, that good may come thereof. Lombertus says, Did. 4. Gofrid. in summa
sua.
that Witchcraft may be taken away by that means whereby it was brought. But
Gofridus inveyeth sore against the oppugners thereof. Pope Nicholas the fifth
gave indulgence and leave to Bishop Miraties (who was so bewitched in his
privities, that he could not use the gift of Venery) to seek remedy at Witches
hands. And this was the clause of his dispensation, Ut ex duolus malis fugiatur
majus, that of two evils, the greater should be avoided. And so a Witch, by
taking his doublet cured him, and killed the other Witch; as the story says,
which is to be seen in M. Mal. and diverse other Writers.

CHAP. XX.
Who are Privileged from Witches; what bodies are aptest to be bewitched, or
to be Witches; why women are rather Witches than men, and what they are.

NOw if you will know who and what persons are privileged from Witches, you
must understand, Mal. Malef. part. 2. quaest 1. cap. 1.
that they be even such as cannot be bewitched. In the number of whom first be
the Inquisitors, and such as exercise public justice upon them. Howbeit,
Whereof look more in a little Book set forth in print.
a Justice in Essex, whom for diverse respects I have left unnamed, not long
since thought he was bewitched, in the very instant whiles he examined the
Witch, so as his leg was broken thereby, etc. which either was false, or else
this rule untrue, or both rather injurious unto Gods Providence. Secondly, such
as observe duly the Rites and Ceremonies of the holy Church, and worship them
with reverence, through the sprinkling of holy Water, and receiving consecrated
Salt, by the lawful use of Candles hallowed on Candlemas-day, and green leaves
consecrated on Palm Sunday (which things they say the Church uses for the
qualifying of the Devils power) are preserved from Witchcraft. Thirdly, some
are preserved by their good Angels, which attend and wait upon them.

But I may not omit here the reasons which they bring to prove what bodies. are
the more apt and effectual to execute the art of fascination. And that is first
they say, the force of celestial bodies, which indifferently communicated their
virtues unto Men, Beasts, Trees, Stones, etc. But this gift and natural
influence of fascination may be increased in man, L. Vair. lib. de fascin. 1.
c. 12.
according to his affections and perturbations, as through anger, fear, love,
hate, etc. For by hate (says Varius) enters a fiery inflammation into the
eye of man, which being violently sent out by beams and streams, etc. infect
and bewitch those bodies against whom they are opposed. And therefore he says
(in the favor of women) that is the cause that women are oftener found to be
Witches than men. For (says he) they have an unbridled force of fury and
concupiscence naturally, that by no means it is possible for them to temper or
moderate the same. So as upon every trifling occasion, they (like brute beast)
fix their furious eyes upon the party whom they bewitch. Much like the
Eye-biting Witches, of whom we have elsewhere spoken.
Hereby it comes to pass, that whereas women having a mavelous sickle
nature, what grief soever happens unto them, immediately all peaceableness of
mind departs; and they are so troubled with evil humors, that outgo their
venomous exhalation, ingendered through their ill-favored diet; and increased
by means of their pernicious excrements which they expel. Women are also (says
he) monthly filled full of superfluous humors, and with them the melancholic
blood boileth; whereof spring vapors, and are carried up, and conveyed through
the nostrils and mouth, etc. to the bewitching of whatsoever it meets: For
they belch up a certain breath, wherewith they bewitch whomsoever they list.
Who are most likely to bewitch and to be bewitched.
And of all other women, lean, hollow-eyed, old, beetle-browed women (says he)
are the most infectious. Marry he says, that hot, subtle, and thin bodies are
most subject to be bewitched, if they be moist, and all they generally, whose
veins, pipes, and passages of their bodies are open. And finally he says, that
all beautiful things whatsoever, are soon subject to be bewitched; as namely
goodly young men, fair women, such as are naturally born to be rich, goodly
Beasts, fair Horses, rank Corn, beautiful Trees, etc. Yea a friend of his told
him, that he saw one with his eye break a precious stone in pieces. And all
this he tells as soberly, as though it were true. And if it were true, honest
women may be Witches, in despite of all Inquisitors: neither can any avoid
being a Witch, except she lock herself up in a chamber.

CHAP. XXI.
What Miracles Witchmongers report to have been done by Witches words, etc.
Contradictions of Witchmongers among themselves; how Beasts are cured hereby;
of bewitched Butter; a Charm against Witches, and a counter-Charm, the effect
of Charms and words proved by L. Varius to be wonderful.

IF I should go about to recite all Charms, I should take an infinite work in
hand: For the Witching Writers hold opinion, that any thing almost may be
thereby brought to pass; and that whether the words of the Charm be
understandable or not, it skilleth not: so the Charmer have a steady intention
to bring his desire about. And then what is it that cannot be done by words?
For L. Varius says, L. Vair. lib. de fascin l. 1. c. 5.
that old women have infeebled and killed Children with words, and have made
women with child miscarry; they have made men pine away to death; they have
killed Horses, deprived Sheep of their Milk; According to Ovid's saying of
Proteus and Medea; which he indeed alleges therefore, Nunc aqua, nunc ales,
modo bos, modo cervus abibat.
transformed Men into Beasts, flown in the air, tamed and stayed wild Beasts,
driven all noisome Cattle and Vermin from Corn, Vines and Herbs, stayed
Serpents, etc. and all with words. Insomuch as he says, that with certain
words spoken in a Bulls ear by a Witch, the Bull has fallen down to the ground
as dead. Yea some by virtue of words have gone upon a sharp sword, and walked
upon hot glowing coals, without hurt; with words (says he) very heavy weights
and burdens have been lifted up; and with words wild Horses and wild Bulls
have been tamed, and also mad Dogs; with words they have killed Worms and other
Vermin, and stayed all manner of Bleeding and Fluxes: with words all the
diseases in man's body are healed, and wounds cured; Arrows are with wonderful
strangeness and cunning plucked out of men's bones. Yea (says he) there be many
that can heal all bitings of Dogs, or stingings of Serpents, or any other
poison: and all with nothing but words spoken. And that which is most strange,
he says, that they can remedy any stranger, and him that is absent, with that
very Sword wherewith they are wounded. Yea and that which is beyond all
admiration, if they stroke the Sword upwards with their fingers, the party
shall feel no pain: whereas if they draw their finger downwards thereupon, the
party wounded shall feel intolerable pain, with a number of other cures, done
altogether by the virtue and force of words uttered and spoken.

Where, by the way, I may not omit this special note given by M. Mal. to wit,
M. Mal par. 2. quaest. 2. cap. 7. Nider in praeceptorio, praecep. 1. c. 11.
Nider in fornicario. Mal. malef. page 2. cap. 8.
that holy Water may not be sprinkled upon bewitched Beasts, but must be poured
into their mouths. And yet he and also Nider say, that it is lawful to bless
and sanctify beasts as well as men; both by Charms written, and also by holy
words spoken: For (says Nider) if your Cow be bewitched, three Crosses, three
Pater-nosters, and three Aves will certainly cure her; and likewise all other
Ceremonies Ecclesiastical. And this is a sure Maxim, that they which are
delivered from Witchcraft by shrift, are ever after in the night much molested
(I believe by their ghostly Fathers.) Also they lose their Money out of their
Purses and Caskets, as M. Mal. says he knows by experience. A good device to
starve up poor women. Mal. Malef. part. 2. quaest. 2. cap. 7.
Also one general Rule is given by M. Mal. to all Butter-wives, and dairy
Maids, that they neither give nor lend any Butter, Milk, or Cheese, to any
Witches, which always use to beg thereof, when they mean to work mischief to
their Kine or whitemeats. Whereas indeed there are in Milk three substances
commixed; to wit, Butter, Cheese and Whey; if the same be kept too long, or in
an evil place, or be sluttishly used, so as it be stale and sower, which
happens sometimes in the Winter, but oftener in the Summer; when it is over
the fire, the Cheese and Butter runs together, and congealeth, so as it will
rope like Birdlime, that you may wind it about a stick, and in short space it
will be so dry, as you may beat it to powder. Which alteration being strange,
is wondered at and imputed to Witches. And herehence sometimes proceeds the
cause why Butter comes not, which when the country people see that it comes
not, then get they out of the suspected Witches house a little Butter, whereof
must be made three Balls, in the Name of the holy Trinity; and so if they be
put into the Chern, the Butter will presently come, and the Witchcraft will
cease; Sic ars deluditur art. But if you put a little Sugar or Soap into the
Chern, among the Cream, the Butter will never come, which is plain Witchcraft,
if it be closely, cleanly, and privily handled. There be twenty several ways to
make your Butter come, which for brevity I omit; as to bind your Chern with a
Rope, to thrust thereinto a red hot Spit, etc. but your best remedy and surest
way is, to look well to your Dairy-maid or Wife, that she neither eat up the
Cream, nor sell away your Butter.

A Charm to find her that bewitched your Kine.
PUt a pair of Breeches upon the Cows head, and beat her out of the pasture
with a good Cudgel upon a friday, and she will run right to the Witches door,
and strike thereat with her horns.

Another, for all that have bewitched any kind of Cattle.
WHen any of your Cattle are killed with Witchcraft, A ridiculous Charm.
haste you to the place where the carcass lies, and trail the bowels of the
beast unto your house, and draw them not in at the door, but under the
threshold of the house into the Kitchen; and there make a fire, and set over
the same a grediron, and thereupon lay the inwards or the bowels, and as they
wax hot, so shall the Witches entrails be molested with extreme heat and pain.
But then must you make fast your doors, left the Witch come and fetch away a
cole of your fire: for then cease her torments. And we have known says M.
Mal. when the Witch could not come in, that the whole house has been so
darkened, and the air round about the lame so troubled, with such horrible noise
and Earthquakes, that except the door had been opened, we had thought the
house would have fallen on our heads. Thomas Aquinas, a principal treater
herein, allows Conjurations against the changlings, and in diverse other
cases: whereof I will say more in the word Jidoni.

A special Charm to preserve all Cattle from Witchcraft.
In any case observe the Festival time, or else you mar all.
AT Easter you must take certain drops that lie uppermost of the holy Paschal
Candle, and make a little Wax-candle thereof: and upon some Sunday morning
rathe, light it, and hold it, so as it may drop upon and between the horns and
ears of the Beast, saying, In Nomine Patris, and Filii, and duplex ss. and burn
the Beast a little between the horns on the ears with the same Wax, and that
which is left thereof, stick it in cross-wise about the stable or stall, or
upon the threshold, or over the door, where the Cattle use to go in and out,
and for all that year your Cattle shall never be bewitched. Otherwise, Jacobus
de Chusa Carthusiannus shows how bread, water and salt is conjured, and
says, that if either man or beast receive holy bread, and holy water nine days
together, with three Pater-nosters, and three Aves, in the honor of the
Trinity, and of S. Hubert, it preserves that man or beast from all diseases,
and defends them against all assaults of Witchcraft, of Satan, or of a mad
Dog, etc.

Lo this is their stuff, maintained to be at the least effectual, if not
wholesome, by all Papists and Witchmongers, and specially of the last and
proudest writers. But to prove these things to be effectual, God knows their
seasons are base and absurd. For they write so, as they take the matter in
question as granted, and by that means go away therewith. L. Vair. lib. de
fascin. 1. c. 1.
For L. Vairus says in the beginning of his Book, that there is no doubt of
this supernatural matter, because a number of Writers agree herein, and a
number of stories confirm it, and many Poets handle the same argument, and in
the twelve Tables there is a law against it, and because the consent of the
common people is fully with it, and because immoderate praise is to be approved
a kind of Witchcraft, and because old women have such Charms and superstitious
means as preserve themselves from it, and because they are mocked that take
away the credit of such miracles, and because Solomon says, Fascinatio
malignitatis obscurat bona, and because the Apostle says, O insensati Galatae,
Sapi. 4. Gal. 3. Psalm. 119.
quis vos fascinavit? And because it is written, Qui timent te, videbunt me.
And finally he says, lest you should seem to distrust and detract any thing
from the credit of so many grave men, from Histories, and common opinion of all
men, he means in no wise to prove that there is miraculous working by
Witchcraft and fascination; and proceeds so, according to his promise.

CHAP. XXII.
Lawful Charms, or rather medicinable Cures for diseased Cattle. The charm of
Charms, and the power thereof.

Direct and lawful-means of curing Cattle, etc.
BUt if you desire to learn true and lawful Charms, to cure diseased Cattle,
even such as seem to have extraordinary sickness, or to be bewitched, or (as
they say) strangely taken; look in B. Googe his third Book treating of Cattle,
and happily you shall find some good medicine or cure for them: or if you list
to see more ancient stuff, read Vegetius his four Books thereupon: or, if you
be unlearned, seek some cunning Bullock-leech. If all this will not serve, then
set Jobs Patience before your eyes. And never think that a poor old woman can
alter supernaturally the notable course which God has appointed among his
creatures. If it had heen Gods pleasure to have permitted such a course, he
would no doubt have both given notice in his word, that he had given such power
unto them, and also would have taught remedies to have prevented them.

Furthermore, if you will know assured means, and infallible Charms, yielding
indeed undoubted remedies, and preventing all manner of Witchcrafts, and also
the assaults of wicked Spirits; then despise first all cosening knavery of
Priests, Witches, and coseners; and with true faith read the sixth chapter of
St. Paul to the Ephesians, and follow his counsel, which is ministered unto you
in the words following, deserving worthily to be called, by the name ensuing.

The Charm of Charms.
FInally my Brethren, be strong the Lord, and in the power of his might. A
Charm of Charms taken out of the sixth chapter of St. Paul to the Ephesians.
Put on the whole armor of God, that you may stand against the assaults of the
Devil: For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against Principalities
and Powers, and against worldly Governors the Princes of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickednesses, which are in the high places. For this
cause take unto you the whole armor of God, that you may be able to resist in
the evil day; and having finished all things, stand fast. Stand therefore,
having your loins girded about with verity, and having on the brestplate of
righteousness, etc. as follows in that Chapter, verses 15, 16, 17, 18. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 1 Pet. 5. Verse. 8. Ephesians. 1. and elsewhere in the holy Scripture.

Otherwise.
IF you be unlearned, and want the comfort of friends, repair to some learned,
godly, and discreet Preacher. If otherwise need require, go to a learned
Physician, who by learning and experience knows and can discern the
difference, signs, and causes of such diseases, as faithless men and unskilful
Physicians impute to Witchcraft.

CHAP. XXIII.
A Confutation of the force and virtue falsely ascribed to Charms and Amulets,
by the Authorities of ancient Writers, both Divines and Physicians.

MY meaning is not, that these words, in the bare letter, can do any thing
toward your ease or comfort in this behalf; or that it were wholesome for your
body or soul to wear them about your neck: for then would I wish you to wear
the whole Bible, which must needs be more effectual than any one parcel
thereof. But I find not that the Apostles or any of them in the Primitive
Church, either carried St. John's Gospel, or any Agnus Die about them, to the
end they might be preserved from bugs; neither that they looked into the four
corners of the house, or else on the roof, or under the threshold, to find
matter of Witchcraft, and so to burn it, to be freed from the same, Mal. malef.
part. 2. quest. 2. cap. 6.
according to the Popish rules. Neither did they by such and such Verses or
Prayers made unto Saints, at such or such hours, seek to obtain grace: neither
spoke they of any old Women that used such Trades. Neither did Christ at any
time use or command holy Water, or Crosses, etc. to be used as terrors against
the Devil, who was not afraid to assault himself, when he was on Earth. And
therefore a very vain thing it is to think that he fears these trifles, or
any external matter. Let us then cast away these profane and old Wives Fables.
For (as Origin says) Incatationes sunt Demonum irrisiones, idololatriae fex, 1 Timothy 4.7. Origin. lib. 3. in Job.

J. Chrysostom. in Matthew.


animarum infatuatio, etc. Incantations are the Devils sport, the dregs of
Idolatry, the besotting of souls, etc.

Chrysostom says, there be some that carry about their necks a piece of a
Gospel. But Mark that here was no Latin Service.
is it not daily read (says he) and heard of all men? But if they be never the
better for it, being put into their ears, hour shall they be saved, by carrying
it about their necks? And further he says; Where is the virtue of the Gospel?
In the figure of the letter, or in the understanding of the sense? If in the
figure, thou do well to wear it about thy neck; but if in the understanding,
Idem. Ibid. August. 26. quast. ultim.
then thou should lay it up in thine heart. Augustine says, Let the faithful
Ministers admonish and tell their people, that these Magical, Arts and
Incantations do bring no remedy to the Infirmities either of Men or Cattle, etc.

The Heathen Philosophers shall at the last day confound the infidelity and
barbarous foolishness of our Christian or rather Antichristian or profane
Witchmongers. For as Aristrtle says, that Incantamenta sunt muliercularum
figmenta: Enchantments are women's figments. So does Socrates (who was said to
be cunning herein) affirm, that Incantationes sunt verba animas decipientia
humanas, Incantations are words deceiving humane souls. Others say, Inscitia
pallium sunt carmina, maleficium, and Incantatio. The cloak of Ignorance are
Charms, Galen. in lib. de comitiali morbe.
Witchery, and Incantation. Galen also says, that such as impute the
Falling-evil, and such like diseases to divine matter, and not rather to
natural causes, Hippocrat. lib. de morbo sacro.
are Witches, Conjurers, etc. Hippocrates calls them arrogant; and in another
place affirming, that in his time there were many deceivers and coseners, that
would undertake to cure the Falling-evil, etc. by the power and help of Devils,
by burying some Lots or Enchantments in the ground, or casting them into the
Sea, concludes thus in their credit, that they are all Knaves and Coseners,
for God is our only defender and deliverer. O notable sentence of a Heathen
Philosopher!

BOOK XIII.
CHAP. I.
The signification of the Hebrew word Hartumim, where it is found written in
the Scriptures, and how it is diversely translated: whereby the Objection
Pharaohs Magicians is afterward answered in this Book; also of Natural Magic
not evil in it self.

HArtumim is no natural Hebrew word, but is borrowed of some other Nation:
howbeit, it is used of the Hebrews in these places; to wit, Genesis 4.1.8.24.
Exodus 7.13, 24. and 8.7.18. and 9.11. Dan. 1.20. and 2.2. Hieronymus in Genesis
41.8. and 24. In Exodus 7.13. In Dan. 1.20.
Hierome sometimes translateth it Conjectores, sometimes Malefici, sometimes
Arioli: which we for the most part translate by this word Witches. But the
right signification hereof may be conceived, in that the Inchanters of Pharaoh,
being Magicians of Egypt, were called Hartumim. And yet in Exodus they are
named in some Latin Translations Venefici. Rabbi Levi says, it betokens
such as do strange and wonderful things, naturally, artificially, and
deceitfully. Rabbi Isaac Natar affirms, that such were so termed, as amongst
the Gentiles professed singular wisdom. Aben Ezra expounds it, to signify
such as know the secrets of Nature, and the quality of Stones and Herbs, etc.
which is attained unto by Art, and specially by Natural Magic. But we either
for want of speech, or knowledge, call them all by the name and term of Witches.

Certainly, God endueth bodies with wonderful graces, the perfect knowledge
whereof man has not reached unto: and on the one side, there is amongst them
such mutual love, society, and consent; and on the otherside, such natural
discord, and secret enmity, that therein many things are wrought to the
astonishment of man's capacity. But when deceit and Diabolical words are coupled
therewith, then extends it to Witchcraft and Conjuration, as whereunto those
Natural effects are falsely imputed. The Authors intention touching the matter
hereafter to be discoursed upon.
So as here I shall have some occasion to say somewhat of Natural Magic;
because under it lies hidden the venom of this word Hartumim. This Art is
said by some to be the profoundness, and the very absolute perfection of
natural Philosophy, and showing forth the active part thereof, and through the
aid of natural virtues, by the convenient applying of them, works are
published, exceeding all capacity and admiration; and yet not so much by Art as
by Nature. This Art of it self is not evil; for it consists in searching
forth the nature, causes and effects of things. As far as I can conceive, it
has been more corrupted and profaned by us Christians, than either by Jews or
Gentiles.

CHAP. II.
How the Philosophsrs in times past traveled for the knowledge of Natural
Magic; of Solomon's knowledge therein; Who is to be called a Natural Magician,
a distinction thereof, and why it is condemned for Witchcraft.

MAny Philosophers, as namely Plato, Pythagoras, Empedocles, Democritus, etc.
traveled over all the world to find out and learn the knowledge of this Art:
and at their return they preached and taught, professed and published it. Yea,
it should appear by the Magicians that came to adore Christ, that the knowledge
and reputation thereof was greater than we conceive or make account of. But of
all other, Solomon was the greatest Traveller in this Art, as may appear
throughout the Book of Ecclesiastes; and specially in the Book of Wisdom, where
he says Sap. 7.17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
God has given me the true Science of things, so as I know how the world was
made, and the power of the Elements, the beginning and the end, and the midst
of times, how the times alter, and the change of seasons, the course of the
year, and the situation of the Stars, the nature of living things and the
furiousness of Beasts, the power of the wind, and the imaginations of men, the
diversities of Plants, and the virtues of Roots, and all things both secret and
known, etc. Finally, he was so cunning in this Art, See Jidoni.
that he is said to have been a Conjurer or a Witch, and is so reputed in the
Romish Church at this day. Whereby you may see, how Fools and Papists are
inclined to credit false accusations in matters of Witchcraft and Conjuration.
The less knowledge we have in this Art, the more we have it in contempt: in
which respect Plato says truly to Dionysius, They make Philosophy a mockery,
Eccles. 7.25.
that deliver it to profane and rude people. Certainly the Witchcraft,
Conjuration, and Enchantment that is imputed to Solomon, is gathered out of
these his words following; I applied my mind to knowledge, and to search and
seek out Science, wisdom and understanding, to know the foolishness of the
ungodly, and the error of doting fools. In this Art of Natural Magic (without
great heed be taken) a student shall soon be abused: For many (writing by
report, without experience) mistake their Authors, and set down one thing for
another. Then the conclusion being found false, the experiment grows into
contempt, and in the end seems ridiculous, though never so true. Pliny and
Albert being curious Writers herein, are often deceived; insomuch as Pliny is
called a noble liar, and Albert a rustical liar; the one lying by hearsay, the
other by authority.

A Magician described and the Art distinguished.
A Magician is indeed that which the Latins call a wise man, as Numa Pompilius
was among the Romans; the Greeks, a Philosoplier, as Socrates was among them:
the Egyptians a Priest, as Hermes was; the Cabalists called them Prophets. But
although these distinguished this Art, accounting the one part thereof
infamous, as being too much given unto wicked, vain, and impious curiosity, as
unto movings, numbers, figures, sounds, voices, tunes, lights, affections of
the minds, and words; and the other parts commendable, as teaching many good
and necessary things, as Times and Seasons to sow, plant, till, cut, etc. and
diverse other things, which I will make manifest unto you hereafter; yet we
generally condemn the whole Art without distinction, as a part of Witchcraft;
having learned to hate it, before we know it; affirming all to be Witchcraft,
which our gross heads are not able to conceive, and yet can think that an old
doting woman sees through it, etc. Wherein we consider not how God bestows
his gifts, and has established an order in his works, graffing in them sundry
virtues to the comfort of his several creatures; and specially to the use and
behoof of man: neither do we therein weigh that Art is servant unto Nature, and
waits upon her as her handmaiden.

CHAP. III.
What Secrets do lie hidden, and what is taught in Natural Magic; how Gods
glory is magnified therein, and that it is nothing but the Work of Nature.

IN this Art of Natural Magic, Read Pliny in natural. hist. Cardan de rerum
variet.
God Almighty has hidden many secret mysteries; as wherein a man may learn the
properties, qualities, and knowledge of all Nature. For it, teaches to
accomplish matters in such for and opportunity, as the common people thinks
the same to be miraculous; and to be compassed none other way but only by
Witchcraft. And yet in truth, Albertus de occulta rerum proprietate.
Natural Magic is nothing else but the work of Nature: For in tillage, as
Nature produces Corn and Herbs; so Art being Natures minister, prepares it.
Barthol. Neap. in natural. magia, and many others.
Wherein Times and Seasons are greatly to be respected: for Annus, non arvus
producit aristas.

But as many necessary and sober things are herein taught; so does it partly (I
say) consist in such experiments and conclusions as are but toys, but
nevertheless lie hid in Nature, and being unknown, do seem miraculous,
specially when they are intermedled and corrupted with cunning illusion, or
Legierdemain, from whence is derived the estimation of Witchcraft. But being
learned and known, they are contemned, and appear ridiculous; for that only is
wonderful to the beholder, whereof he can conceive no cause nor reason,
according to the saying of Ephesius, Miraculum solvitur unde videtur esse
miraculum. And therefore a man shall take great pains herein, and bestow great
cost to learn that which is of no value and a mere juggling knack. Whereupon it
is said that a man may not learn Philosophy to be rich; but must get riches to
learn Philosophy; for to sluggards, niggards, and dizzards, the secrets of
Nature are never opened. And doutless a man may gather out of this Art, that
which being published, Natural magic has a double end, which proves the
excellency of the same.
shall set forth the glory of God, and be many ways beneficial to the
Commonwealth: the first is done by the manifestation of his works; the second,
by skilfully applying them to our use and service.

CHAP. IV.
What strange things are brought to pass by Natural Magic.

THE daily use and practice of medicine takes away all admiration of the
wonderful effects of the same. Many other things of less weight, being more
secret and rare, seem more miraculous: As for example, (if it be true, that I.
Bap. Neap. and many other Writers do constantly affirm) Tie a wild Bull to a
Fig Tree, and he will be presently tame; or hang an old Cock thereupon, and he
will immediately be tender; as also the feathers of an Eagle consume all other
feathers, if they be intermedled together. Wherein it may not be denied, but
Nature shows herself a proper Work-woman. But it seems impossible, that a
little fish being but half a foot long, Pompanatius lib. de incant. cap. 3.

J. Wierius de lamiis. Jasp. Peucer. H. Cardan. etc.


called Remora or Remiligo, or of some Echenis, stays a mighty Ship with all
her load and tackling, and being also undersail. And yet it is affirmed by so
many and so grave Authors, that I dare not deny it; specially, because I see as
strange effects of Nature otherwise: as the property of the Loadstone, whick is
so beneficial to the Mariner; and of Rheubarb, which only medleth with Choler,
and purges neither phlegm nor melancholy, and is as beneficial to the
Physician, as the other to the Mariner.

CHAP. V.
The incredible operation of Waters, both standing and running; of Wels, Lakes,
Rivers, and of their wonderful Effects.

THe operation of Waters, and their sundry virtues are also incredible. I mean
not of waters compounded and distilled; for it were endless to treat of their
forces, specially concerning medicines. But we have here even in England
natural Springs, Wels, and Waters, both standing and running, of excellent
virtues, even such as except we had seen, and had experiment of, Of late
experience near Coventry, etc.
we would not believe to be in rerum natura. And to let the Physical nature of
them pass, (for the which we cannot be so thanful to God, as they are wholesome
for our bodies) is it not miraculous, that wood is by the quality of diverse
waters here in England transubstantiated into a stone? The which virtue is also
found to be in a lake beside the City Masaca in Cappadocia; there is a River
called Scarmandrus, Aristot. in lib. de hist. animalium.
that makes yellow sheep. Yea, there be many waters, as in Pontus and
Thessalia, and in the land of Assyrides, in a River of Thracia (as Aristotle
says) that if a white Sheep being with Lamb drink thereof, the Lamb will be
black. Strabo writes of the River called Crantes, in the borders of Italy,
running toward Tarentum, where men's hair is made white and yellow being washed
therein. Plin. de lanicii color.
Pliny does write that of what color the veins are under the Rams tongue, of
the same color or colors will the Lambs be. There is a Lake in a field called
Cornetus, in the bottom manifestly appears to the Eye, the Carcases of
Snakes, Ewts, and other Serpents; whereas if you put in your hand, to pull them
out, you shall find nothing there. There droppeth water out of a Rock in
Arcadia, the which neither a silver nor a brazen boll can contain, but it
leapeth out, and sprinkleth away; and yet will remain without motion in the
hoof of a mule. Such conclusions (I warrant you) were not unknown to Jannes and
Jambres.

CHAP. VI.
The Virtues and Qualities of sundry precious Stones; of cousening Lapidaries,
etc.

THe excellent virtues and qualities in Stones, found, conceived and tried by
this Art, is wonderful. Howbeit many things most false and fabulous are added
unto their true effects; wherewith I thought good in part to try the Readers
patience and cunning withal. An Aggat (they say) has virtue against the
bitings of Scorpions or Serpents. It is written (but I will not stand to it)
that it makes a man eloquent, and procures the favor of Princes; yea that
the fume thereof does turn away Tempests. Alectorius is a Stone about the
bigness of a Bean, as clear as the Crystal taken out of a Cocks belly which
has been gelt or made a Capon four years. Ludovicus Coelius Rhod. lib. antiq.
lect. 11. cap. 70.

Barthol. Anglicus. lib. 16.


If it be held in ones mouth, it asswageth thirst; it makes the husband to
love the wife, and the bearer invincible: for hereby Milo was said to overcome
his enemies. A Craw-pock delivers from prison. Chelidonius is a stone taken
out of a Swallow, which cures melancholy: howbeit, some Authors say, it is the
herb whereby the Swallows recover the sight of their young, even if their eyes
be picked out with an Instrument. Geranites is taken out of a Crane, and
Draconites out of a Dragon. But it is to be noted, that such stone must be
taken out of the bellies of the Serpents, Beasts, or Birds, (wherein they are)
whiles they live: otherwise, they vanish away with the life, and so they retain
the virtues of those Stars under which they are. Amethysus makes a drunken man
sober, and refreshes the wit. The Avicenna cano. 2. tract. 2. cap. 124.
Serapio agg. cap. 100

Dioscor. lib 5. cap. 93.


Coral preserves such as bear it from fascination or bewitching, and in this
respect they are hanged about childrens necks. But from whence that
superstition is derived, and who invented the lie, I know not: but I see how
ready the people are to give credit thereunto by the multitude of Corrals that
were employed. I find in good Authors, that while it remains in the Sea, it
is an herb, and when it is brought thence, into the air, it hardens, and
becomes a stone. Heliotropius stancheth blood, drives away poisons,
preserves health; yea, and some write, that it provokes rain, and darkneth
the Sun, suffering not him that bears it to be abused, Hyacinthus does all
that the other does, and also preserves from Lightning. Oinothera hanged about
the neck, collar, or yoke of any creature, tameth it presently. A Topase
heals the lunatike person of his Lunacy. Aitites if it be shaken, sounds as
if there were a little stone in the belly thereof: it is good for the
Falling Sickness, and to prevent untimely birth. Amethysus aforesaid resists
drunkenness, so as the bears shall be able to drink freely, and recover
themselves soon being drunk as Apes: the same makes a man wise, Chalcedonius
makes the bearer lucky in Law, quickens the power of the body, and is of
force also against the illusions of the Devil, and fantastical cogitations
arising of melancholy. Corneolus mitigateth the heat of the mind, and
qualifieth malice; it stancheth Bloody-fluxes, specially of women that are
troubled with their flowers. Heliotropius aforesaid darkeneth the Sun, Plin.
lib. 37. cap. 10.

Albert. lib. 2. cap. 7.

Solin. cap. 32.


raises showers, stancheth blood, procures good fame, keeps the bearer in
health, and suffers him not to be deceived. If this were true, one of them
would be dearer then a thousand Diamonds. Hyacinthus delivers one from the
danger of Lightening, drives away poison and pestilent infection, and has
many other virtues. Iris helps a woman to speedy deliverance, and makes
Rain-bows to appear. A Sapphire preserves the members, and makes them lively,
and helps Agues and Gowts, and suffers not the bearer to be afraid, it has
virtue against venom, and stays bleeding at the nose being often put thereto.
A Rabbi Moses aphor. part. 22. Isidor. lib. 14. cap. 3. Savanorola.
Smaragd is good for the eyesight, and suffers not carnal copulation, it
makes one rich and eloquent. A Topase increases riches, heals the lunatique
passion, and stancheth blood. Mephis (as Aaron and Hermes report out of
Albertus Magnus) being broken into powder, and drunk with water, makes
insensibility of torture. Hereby you may understand, that as God has bestowed
upon these stones, and such other like bodies, most excellent and wonderful
virtues: so according to the abundance of humane superstitions and follies,
many ascribe unto them either more virtues, or other than they have; other
boast that they are able to add new qualities unto them. And herein consists
a part of Witchcraft and common cousenage used sometimes of the Lapidaries for
gains; sometimes of others for cousening purposes. Some part of the vanity
hereof I will here describe, because the place serves well therefore. And it
is not to be forgotten or omitted, that Pharaohs Magicians were like enough to
be cunning therein.

Nevertheless, I will first give you the opinion of one, who professed himself
a very skilful and well experimented Lapidary, as appears by a Book of his
own penning, published under this title of Dactylotheca, and (as I think) to be
had among the Booksellers. And thus follows his assertion: Evax rex Arabum
fertur scripsisse Neroni, Marbodeus Gallus in suae dactylotheca, page 56.

(Qui post Augustum regnavit in orb secundus)
Quot species lapidis, quae nomina, quive colores,
Quaeque sit his regio, vel quanta potentia cuique.
Ocultas etenim lapidum cognoscere vires,
Quorum causa latens effectus dat manifestos,
Egregium quiddam volumus rarumque videri.
Silicet hinc solers medicorum cura juvatur,
Auxilio lapidum morbos expellere docta.
Nec minus inde dari cunctarum commodarerum
Autores perbibent, quibus haec perspecta feruntur.
Nec dubium cuiquam debet falsumque videri,
Quin sua sit gemmis divinitus insita virtus.
Englished by Abraham Fleming: Evax an old Arabian King
is named to have writ
A Treatise, and on Nero's grace
to have bestowed it,
(Who in the World did second reign
after Augustus time)
Of precious Stones the sundry sorts,
their names; and in what clime
And Country they were to be found,
their colors and their hue,
Their privy power and secret force,
Vis gemmarum and lapillorum preciosorum negatur, quia occulta est,
rarisfimeque sub sensum cadit.
the which knowledge true
To understand their hidden cause
most plain effects declare:
And this will we a noble thing
have counted be and rare,
The skilful care of leeches learned
is aided in this cases
And hereby helped and are taught
with aid of stones to chase
Away from men such sicknesses
as have them in a place.
No less precise commodities
of all things else thereby.
Are ministered and given to men,
if Authors do not lie,
To whom these things are said to be
most manifestly known.
It shall no false or doubtful case
appear to any one,
But that by heavenly influence
each precious Pearl and Stone,
Has in his substance fixed force
and virtue largely sown.


Whereby it is to be concluded, that Stones have in them certain proper
virtues, which are given them of a special influence of the Planets, and a due
proportion of the Elements, their substance being a very fine and pure
compound, consisting of well tempered matter wherein is no, gross mixture, as
appears by plain proof of India and Aethiopia, where the Sun being orient and
meridional, does more effectually show his operation, procuring more precious
Stones there to be ingendered, than in the Countries that are Occident and
Septentrional. Unto this opinion do diverse ancients accord; Many more authors
may be named of no less antiquity and leatning.
namely, Alexander Peripateticus, Hermes, Evax, Bocchos, Zoroastes, Isaac
Judaeus, Zacharias Babylonicus, and many more beside.

CHAP. VII.
Whence the precious Stones receive their Operations; how curious Magicians use
them, and of their Seals.

CUrious Magicians affirm, that these Stones receive their virtues altogether
of the Planets and heavenly bodies, and have not only the very operation of the
Planets, but sometimes the very Images and impressions of the Stars naturally
ingraffed in them, and otherwise ought always to have graven upon them, the
similitudes of such Monsters, Beasts, and, other devices, as they imagine to be
both internally in operation, and externally in view, expressed in the Planets;
As for example, upon the Achaete are graven Serpents or venomous Beasts; Plin.
lib. 37. cap. 10.

Albert. minor. lib. 2. cap. 1. Solin. cap. 11.


and sometimes a man riding on a Serpent: which they know to be Aesculapius,
which is the Celestial Serpent, whereby are cured (they say) Poisons and
stingings of Serpents and Scorpions. These grow in the River of Achates, where
the greatest Scorpions are engendered, and their noisomeness is thereby
qualified, Diurius in scrin. cap. de complexionibus and complexatis.
and by the force of the Scorpions, the Stones virtue is quickened and
increased. Also, if they would induce love for the accomplishment of Venery,
they inscribe and express in the Stones, amiable embraceings and lovely
countenances and gestures, words and kissings in apt figures. For the desires
of the mind are consonant with the nature of the Stones, which must also be set
in Rings, and upon Foils of such metals as have affinity with those Stones,
through the operations of the Planets whereunto they are addicted, whereby they
may gather the greater force of their working.

As for example, They make the Images of Saturn in Lead, of Sol in Gold, Geor.
Pictorius. Villang. doct. medici in scholiis super Marbod. dactyl.
of Luna in Silver. Marry there is no small regard to be had for the certain
and due times to be observed in the graving of them: for so are they made with
more life, and the influences and configurations of the Planets are made
thereby the more to abound in them. As if you will procure love, you must work
in apt, proper, and friendly Aspects, as in the hour of Venus, etc. to make
debate, the direct contrary order is to be taken. If you determine to make the
Image of Venus, you must expect to be under Aquarius or Capricornus: for
Saturn, Taurus, and Libra must be taken heed of. Many other observations there
be, as to avoid, the unfortunate seat and place of the Planets, when you would
bring a happy thing to pass, and specially that it be not done in the end,
declination, or heel (as they term it) of the course thereof: for then the
Planet mourns and is dull.

Such Signs as ascend in the day, must be taken in the day; if in the night
they increase, then must you go to work by night, etc. For in Aries, Leo, and
Sagittary is a certain Triplicity, wherein the Sun has dominion by day,
Jupiter by night, and in the twilight the cold Star of Saturn. But because
there shall be no excuse wanting for the faults espied herein, they say that
the virtues of all Stones decay through tract of time, so as such things are
not now to be looked for in all respect as are written. Howbeit Jannes and
Jambres were living in that time, and in no inconvenient place; and therefore
not unlike to have that help toward the abusing of Pharaoh. Cardane says, H.
Card. lib. de subtle. 10.
that although men attribute no small force unto such seals; as to the seal of
the Sun, Authorities, Honors, and Favors of Princes; of Jupiter, Riches and
Friends; of Venus, Pleasures; of Mars, Boldness; of Mercury, Diligence; of
Saturn, Patience and enduring of Labor; of Luna, Favor of people: I am not
ignorant (says he) that Stones do good, and yet I know the seals or figures do
none at all. H. Card. lib. de var. rer. 16. cap. 90.
And when Cardane had showed fully that Art, and the folly thereof, and the
manner of those terrible, prodigious, and deceitful figures of the Planets with
their Characters, etc. he says that those were deceitful inventions devised by
Coseners, and had no virtue indeed nor truth in them. But because we spoke
somewhat of Signets and Seals, I will show you what I read reported by
Vincentius in suo speculo, where making mention of the Jasper-stone, whose
nature and property Marbodeus Gallus describes in the Verses following;
Jaspidis esse december species septemque feruntur; Marbodeus in sua dactylotheca,
page 41, 52.

Hic and multorum cognoscitur esse colorum,
Et multis nasci perhibetur partibus orbis,
Optimus in viridi translucentique celore,
Et qui plus soleat virtutis habere probatur,
Cast gestatus febrem fugat, arcet hydropem,
Adpositusque juvat mulierem parturientem,
Et tutamentum portanti creditur esse.
Nam consecratus gratum facit atque potentem,
Et, sicut perhibent, phantasmata noxia pellit,
Cujus in argento vis fortior esse putatur.
Englished by Abraham Fleming: Seven kinds and ten of Jasper-stones
reported are to be;
Of many colors this is known
which noted it by me,
And said in many places of
the world for to be seen,
Where it is bred; but yet the best
is through shining green,
And that which proved is to have Memoramdum, the Authors meaning is, that this
Stone be set in silver, and worn on the finger for a ring: as you shall see
afterward.

in it more virtue plaste;
For being born about of such
as are of living chaste,
It drives away their Ague fits,
the Dropsy thirsting dry,
And put upon a woman weak
in travel which does lie,
It helps, assists, and comforts her
in pangs when she does cry.
Again, it is believed to be
a safeguard frank and free,
To such as wear and bear the same;
and if it hallowed be,
It makes the parties gracious,
and mighty too that have it;
And noisome fancies (at they write
that meant not to deprave it)
It does displace out of the mind:
The force thereof is stronger,
In Silver if the same be set,
and will endure the longer.


Vincent. lib. 7. cap. 77. Dioscor. lib. 5. cap. 100.

Aristot. in Lapidario.


But (as I said) Vincentius making mention of the Jasper-stone, touching which
(by the way of a Parenthesis) I have inferred Marbodeus his Verses, he says
that some Jasper-stones are found having in them the lively image of a natural
man, with a shield at his neck, and a spear in his hand, and under his feet a
Serpent; which Stones so marked and signed, he prefers before all the rest,
because they are Antidotaries or Remedies notably resisting poison. Other some
also are found figured and marked with the form of a man bearing on his neck a
bundle of herbs and flowers, with the estimation and value of them noted, that
they have in them a faculty or power restrictive, and will in an instant or
moment of time stanch blood. Such a kind of Stone (as it is reported) Galen
wore on his finger. Othersome are marked with a Cross, as the same Author
writes, and these be right excellent against inundations or overflowings of
waters. I could hold you long occupied in declarations like unto these, wherein
I lay before you what other men have published and set forth to the world,
choosing rather to be an Academical discourser, than an universal determiner:
but I am desirous of brevity.

CHAP. VIII.
The Sympathy and Antipathy of Natural and Elementary Bodies declared by diverse
Examples of Beasts, Birds, Plants, etc.

Agreement and disagreement in sufferance.
IF I should write of the strange effects of Sympathia and Antipathia, I should
take great pains to make you wonder, and yet you would scarce believe me. And
if I should publish such conclusions as are common and known, you would not
regard them. And yet Empedocles thought all things were wrought hereby. It is
almost incredible, that the grunting or the wheeking of a little Pig, or the
sight of a simple Sheep should terrify a mighty Elephant; and yet by that
means the Romans did put to flight Pyrrhus and all his Host. A man would
hardly believe, that his Cocks comb or his crowing should abash a puissant
Lion; but the experience hereof has satisfied the whole world. Who would think
that a Serpent should abandon the shadow of an Ash? etc. But it seems not
strange, because it is common, that some man otherwise hardy and stout enough,
should not dare to abide or endure the sight of a Cat. Or that a draught of
drink should so overthrow a man, that never a part or member of his body should
be able to perform his duty and office; and should also so corrupt and alter
his senses, understanding, memory, and judgment, that he should in every
thing, saving in shape, become a very Beast. And herein the Poets experiment of
Liquor is verified, in these words following. -- sunt qui non corpora tantum,
Verum animas etiam valiant mutare liquores.
Englished by Abrabam Fleming: Some Waters have so powerful been,
As could not only bodies change,
But even the very minds of men,
Their operation is so strange.


The friendly society betwixt a Fox and a Serpent is almost incredible: Read a
little tract of Erasmus entitled De amicitia, where enough is said touching
this point.
how loving the Lizzard is to a man, we may read though we cannot see. Yet some
affirm that our Newt is not only like to the Lizzard in shape, but also in
condition. From the which affection toward a man, a spaniel does not much
differ, whereof I could cite incredible Stories. The Amity betwixt a Castrel
and a Pigeon is much noted among Writers; and specially how the Castrel
defends her from her enemy the Sparrow-hawk; whereof they say the Dove is not
ignorant. Besides, the wonderful operation and virtue of herbs, which to repeat
were infinite; and therefore I will only refer you to Matthoelus his Herbal, or
to Dodonaeus. There is among them such natural accord and discord, as some
prosper much the better for the others company, and some wither away being
planted near unto the other. The Lilly and the Rose rejoice in each others
neighborhood. The Flag and the Fernbush abhor each other so much, that the
one can hardly live besides the other. The Cucumber loves water, and hates
oil to the death. And because you shall not say that herbs have no virtue, for
that in this place I cite none, I am content to discover two or three small
qualities and virtues, which are affirmed to be in herbs; marry as simple as
they be, Jannes and Jambres might have done much with them, if they had had
them. If you prick out a young Swallows eyes, the old Swallow restores again
their sight, with the application (they say) of a little Celandine. Zanthus in
hist. prima.

Jub. lib. 25. cap. 2.


Zanthus the Author of Histories reports, that a young Dragon being dead was
revived by her Dath, with an herb called called Balim. And Juba says, that a
man in Arabiae being dead was revived by the virtue of another herb.

CHAP. IX.
The former Matter proved by many Examples of the living and the dead.

AND as we see in Stones, Herbs, etc. strange operation and natural love and
dissension; so do we read, that in the Body of a Man, there be as strange
Properties and Virtues natural. I have heard by credible report, and I have
read many grave Authors constantly affirm, That the wound of a man murdered
renews bleeding, at the presence of a dear friend, This common experience can
justify.
or of a mortal Enemy. Diverse also write, that if one pass by a murdered body
(though unknown) he shall be stricken with fear, and feel in himself some
alteration by nature. Also that a woman above the age of fifty years, being
bound hand and foot, her clothes being upon her, and laid down softly into the
water sinketh, not in a long time; some say not at all. By which experiment
they were wont to try Witches, J. Wierus.
as well as by Ferrum candens; which was, to hold hot iron in their hands, and
by not burning to be tried. Howbeit, Plutarch says, Plutarch in vita Pyrrhi.
that Pyrrhus his great Toe had in it such natural, or rather divine virtue,
that no fire could burn it.

And Alberius says, and many other also repeat the same Story, saying, Albert.
lib. de mor. aximal. cap. 3.
that there were two such children born in Germany, as if that one of them had
been carried by any house, all the doors right against one of his sides would
fly open: and that virtue which the one had in the left side, the other Brother
had in the right side. He says further, that many saw it, and that it could be
referred to nothing, but to the propriety of their bodies. Pompanatius writes,
Pomp an. lib. de incant. cap. 4.
that the Kings of France do cure the disease called now the Kingsevil, or
Queensevil; which has been always thought, and to this day is supposed to be,
a miraculous and a peculiar gift, ard a special grace given to the Kings and
Queens of England. Which some refer to the propriety of their persons, some to
the peculiar gift of God, and some to the efficacy of words. But if the French
King use it no worse then our Princess does, God will not be offended thereat:
for her Majesty only uses godly and divine Prayer, with some Alms, and
refers the cure to God and to the Physician. Plutarch writes, Plutar. in
vita Catonis.
that there be certain men called Psilli, which with their mouths heal the
bitings of Serpents. And J. Bap. Neap. faith, that an Olive being planted by
the hand of a Virgin, prospers; which if a Harlot do, it withers away. Also
if a Serpent or Viper lie in a hole, it may easily be pulled out with the left
hand, where as with the right hand it cannot be removed. Although this
Experiment, and such like are like enough to be false, yet are they not
altogether so impious as the miracles said to be done by Characters, Charms,
etc. For many strange properties remain in sundry parts of a living Creature,
which is not universally dispersed, and indifferently spread through the whole
body: as the eye smells not, the nose sees not, the ear tastes not, etc.

CHAP. X.
The bewitching Venom, contained in the body of an Harlot, how her Eye, her
Tongue, her Beauty and Behavior, bewitcheth some men: of Bones and Horns
yielding great virtue.

The venom or poison of an Harlot.
THE Virtue contained within the body of an Harlot, or rather the venom
proceeding out of the same, may be beheld with great admiration. For her eye
infecteth, enticeth, and (if I may so say) bewitcheth them many times, which
think themselves well armed against such manner of people. Her tongue, her
gesture, her behavior, her beauty, and other allurements poison and intoxicate
the mind: yea, her company induces impudency, corrupts virginity,
confounds and consumes the bodies, goods, and the very souls of men. And
finally her body destroys and rotteth the very flesh and bones of man's body.
And this is common that we wonder not at all thereat; nay we have not the
course of the Sun, the Moon, or the Stars in so great admiration, as the Globe,
counterfeiting their order: which is in respect but a Babble made by an
Artificer. So as (I think) if Christ himself had continued long in the
execution of miracles, and had left that power permanent and common in the
Church; they would have grown into contempt, and not have been esteemed, Matthew.
13. Mark 6. Luke 4. John 4.
according to his own saying, A Prophet is not regarded in his own Country, I
might recite infinite properties, wherewith God has endued the body of man,
worthy of admiration, and fit for this place. As touching other living
creatures, God has likewise (for his Glory, and our behoof) bestowed most
excellent and miraculous gifts and virtues upon their bodies and members,
Wonderful natural effects in bone of fishes, beasts, etc.
and that in several and wonderful wise. We see that a bone taken out of a
Carps head, stancheth blood, and so does none other part besides of that Fish.
The bone also in a Hares foot mitigateth the Cramp, as none other bone nor part
else of the Hare does. How precious is the bone growing out of the forehead of
a Unicorn! if the horn, which we see, grow there, which is doubted: and of how
small account are the residue of all his bones! At the excellency whereof, as
also at the noble and innumerable venues of Herbs we muse not at all; because
it has pleased God to make them, common unto us. Which perchance might in some
part assist Jannes and Jambres, toward the hardening of Pharaohs heart. But of
such secret and strange operations read Albert. De mineral. cap. 1.11, 17. Also
Marsilius Ficinus, cap. 1. lib. 4. Cardan, de rerum varietate. J. Bap. Neap, de
Magia Naturali. Peucer, Wier Pompanatius, Fernelius, and others.

CHAP. XI.
Two notorious Wonders, and yet not marvelled at.

I Thought good here to insert two most miraculous matters; of the one I am
Testis oculatus, an Eyewitness; of the other I am so credibly and certainly
informed, that I dare, and do believe it to be very true. When Mr. T. Randolph
returned out of Russia, after his Embassage dispatched, a Gentleman of his
Train brought home a monument of great account, in nature and in property very
wonderful. And because I am loath to be long in the description of
Circumstances, I will first describe the thing it self, which was a piece of
earth of a good quantity, and most excellently proportioned in Nature, having
these qualities and virtues following. If one had taken a piece of perfect
Steel, Strange properties in a plece of earth.
forked and sharpened at the end, and heated red hot, offering therewith to have
touched it, it would have fled with great celerity: and on the other side, it
would have pursued gold, either in Coin or Bulloin, with as great violence and
speed as it shunned the other. No Bird in the Air durst approach near it; no
Beast of the Field but feared it, and naturally fled from the sight thereof. It
would be here to day, and to morrow twenty miles of, and the next day after in
in the very place it was the first day, and that without the help of any other
Creature.

Johannes Fernelius writes of a strange Stone lately brought out of India,
Strange properties in a stone: the like qualities in other stones.
which has in it such a mavelous brightness, purity and shining, that
therewith the Air round about is so lightened and cleared, that one may see to
read thereby in the darkness of night. It will not be contained in a close
Room, but requires an open and free place. It would not willingly rest or stay
here below on the Earth, but always labors to ascend up into the Air. If
one press it down with his hand, it resists, and strikes very sharply. It is
beautiful to behold, without either spot or blemish, and yet very unpleasant to
taste or feel. If any part thereof be taken away, it is never a whit
diminished, the form thereof being inconstant, and at every moment mutable.
These two things last rehearsed are strange, and so long wondered at, as the
mystery and morality thereof remains undiscovered: but when I have disclosed
the matter, and told you that by the lump of Earth a Man is meant, and some of
his qualities described; and that that which was contained in the far fetched
Stone, was fire, or rather flame: the doubt is resolved, and the miracle ended.
And yet (I confess) there is in these two creatures contained more miraculous
matter, then in all the Loadstones and Diamonds in the world. And hereby is to
be noted, that even a part of this Art, which is called natural or witching
Magic, consists as well in the deceit of words, as in the sleight of hand;
wherein plain lying is avoided with a figurative speech, in the which either
the words themselves, or their interpretation have a double or doubtful
meaning, according to that which has been said before in the Title Being in
the 7. Book of this Discovery: Where discourse is made of Oracles, etc.
Ob or Pytho: and shall be more at large hereafter in this Treatise manifested.

CHAP. XII.
Of Illusions, Confederacies, and Leqierdemain, and how they may be well or ill
used.

MAny Writers have been abused, as well by untrue reports, as by illusion, and
practices of confederacy and Legierdemain, etc. sometimes imputing unto words
that which rests in the nature of the thing; and sometimes to the nature of
the thing, that which proceeds of fraud and deception of sight. But when
these experiments grow to superstition or impiety, they are either to be
forsaken as vain, or denied as false. Howbeit, if these things be done for
mirth, and recreation, and not to the hurt of our Neighbor, nor to the abusing
or profaning of Gods Name, in mine opinion they are neither impious nor
altogether unlawful: though herein or hereby a natural thing be made to seem
supernatural. Look hereafter in this Book for diverse conceits of juggling set
forth at large.
Such are the miracles wrought by Juglers, consisting in fine and nimble
conveyance, called Legierdemain; as when they seem to cast away, or to deliver
to another that which they retain still in their own hands; or convey
otherwise, or seem to eat a Knife, or some such other thing, when indeed they
bestow the same secretly into their bosoms or laps. Another point of Juggling
is, when they thrust a Knife through the brains and head of a Chicken or
Pullet, and seem to cure the same with words; which would live and do well,
though never a word were spoken. Some of these Toys consist in Arithmetical
devices, partly in Experiments of Natural Magic, and partly in private, as
also in public Confederacy.

CHAP. XIII.
Of private Confederacy, and of Brandons Pigeon.

PRivate Confederacy I mean, when (one by a special plot laid by himself,
without any compact made with others) persuades the beholders, that he will
suddenly and in their presence do some miraculous Feat, which he has already
accomplished privily. As for example, he will show you a Card, or any other
like thing: and will say further unto you; Behold and see what a mark it has,
and then burns it; and nevertheless fetches anther like Card so marked out
of some bodies pocket, or out of some corner where he himself before had placed
it; to the wonder and astonishment of simple beholders, which, conceive not
that kind of illusiion, but expect miracles and strange works.

Example of a ridiculous wonder.
What wondering and admiration was there at Brandon the Jugler, who painted on
the wall the picture of a Dove, and seeing a Pigeon sitting on the top of a
House, said to the King, Lo now your Grace shall see what, a Jugler can do, if
he be his Crafts-master; and then pricked the picture with a Knife so hard and
so often, and with so effectual words, as the Pigeon fell down from the top of
the House stark dead. I need not write any further circumstance to show how the
matter was taken, what wondering was thereat, how he was prohibited to use that
Feat any further, lest he should employ it in any other kind of murder; as
though he, whose picture soever he had pricked, must needs have died, and so
the life of all men be in the hands of a Jugler: as is now supposed to be in
the hands and wills of Witches. This I have proved upon crows and pies.
This Story is, until the day of the writing hereof, in fresh remembrance, and
of the most part believed as Canonical, as are all the Fables of Witches: but
when you are taught the feat or slight (the Secrecy and Sorcery of the matter
being bewrayed and discovered) you will think it a mockery and simple illusion.
This might be done by a confederate, who standing at some window in a
Church-Steeple, or other fit place, and holding the Pigeon by the leg in a
string, after a sign given by his fellow, pulls down the Pigeon, and so the
wonder is wrought.
To interpret unto you the Revelation of this Mystery; so it is, that the poor
Pigeon was before in the hands of the Jugler, into whom he had thrust a dram of
Nux vomica, or some other such poison, which to the nature of the Bird was so
extreme a venom, as after the receipt thereof it could not live above the space
of half an hour, and being let loose after the medicine ministered, she always
resorted to the top of the next House: which she will the rather do, if there
be any Pigeons already sitting there, and (as it is already said) after a short
space falls down, either stark dead, or greatly astonished. But in the mean
time the Jugler used words of Art, partly to protract the time, and partly to
gain credit and admiration of the beholder. If this or the like Feat should be
done by to old Woman, every body would cry out for fire and faggot to burn the
Witch.

CHAP. XIV.
Of public Confederacy, and whereof it consists.

Public Confederacy is, when there is beforehand a Compact made betwixt diverse
persons; the one to be Principal, the rest to be Assistants in working of
miracles, or rather in cosening and abusing the beholders. As when I tell you
in the presence of a multitude what you have thought or done, or shall do or
think, when you and I were thereupon agreed before. And if this be cunningly
and closely handled, it will induce great admiration to the Beholders;
specially when they are before amazed and abused by some experiments of Natural
Magic, Arithmetical Conclusions, of Legierdemain. Such were, for the most
part, the Conclusions and Devices of Feats: wherein doubt you not, but Jannes
and Jambres were expert, active, and ready.

CHAP. XV.
How Men have been abused with words of Equivocation, with sundry Examples
thereof.

SOme have taught, and others have written certain experiments; in the
expressing whereof they have used such words of Equivocation, as whereby many
have been overtaken and abused through rash credulity: so as sometimes (I say)
they have reported, taught, and written that which their capacity took hold
upon, contrary to the truth and sincere meaning of the Author. A Jest among
Watermen touching Stone-Church in Kent, as light at midnight as at midday.
It is a common jest among the Watermen of the Thames, to show the Parish
Church of Stone to the Passengers, calling the same by the name of the Lanthorn
of Kent; affirming, and that not untruly, that the said Church is as light
(meaning in weight and not in brightness) at midnight, as at noonday. Whereupon
some credulous person is made believe, and will not stick to affirm and swear,
that in the same Church is such continual light, that any man may see to read
there at all times of the Night without a Candle.

An excellent Philosopher, whom (for reverence unto his Fame and Learning) I
will forbear to name, was overtaken by his Hostess at Dover; who merrily told
him, that if he could retain and keep in his mouth certain pibbles (lying at
the shore side) he should not perbreak until he came to Calice, how rough and
rempestuous so ever the Seas were. Which when he had tried, and being not
forced by sickness to vomit, nor to lose his stones, as by vomiting he must
needs do, he thought her Hostess had discovered unto him an excellent secret,
nothing doubting of her amphibological speech: and therefore thought it a
worthy note to be recorded among miraculous and medicinable stones; and
inserted it accordingly into his Book, among other Experiments collected with
great industry, learning, travel, and judgment. All these Toys help a subtle
Cosener to gain credit with the multitude. Yea, to further estimation, many
will whisper Prophecies of their own invention into the ears of such as are not
of quickest capacity; as to tell what Weather, etc. shall follow. A slender
shift to save the credit of their cunning.
Which if it fall out true, then boast they and triumph, as though they had
gotten some notable conquest; if not, they deny the matter, forget it, excuse
it, or shift it off; as that they told another the contrary in earnest, and
spoke that but in jest. All these helps might Pharaohs Jugglers have to
maintain their Cosenages and Illusions, toward the hardening of Pharaohs heart.

Hereunto belong all manner of Charms, Periapts, Amulets, Characters, and such
other Superstitions, both popish and profane: whereby (if that were true,
which either, Papists, Conjurors, or Witches undertake to do) we might daily
see the very miracles wrought indeed, which Pharaoh's Magicians seemed to
perform. Howbeit, because by all those Devices or Cosenages there cannot be
made so much as a nit, so Jannes and Jambres could have no help that way, I
will speak thereof in place more convenient.

CHAP. XVI.
How some are abused with Natural Magic, and sundry Examples thereof when
Illusion is added thereunto; of Jacobs pied Sheep, and of a Black-Moor.

BUt as these notable and wonderful Experiments and Conclusions that are found
out in Nature it self (through wisdom, learning and industry) do greatly oppose
and astonish the capacity of man: so (I say) when deceit and illusion is
annexed thereunto, then is the Wit, the Faith, and Constancy of Man searched
and tried. The inconvenience of holding opinion, that whatsoever passes our
Capacity, is divine, supernatural, etc.
For if we shall yield that to be divine, supernatural, and miraculous, which
we cannot comprehend; a Witch, a Papist, a Conjuror, a Cosener, and a Jugler
may make us believe they are Gods: or else with more impiety we shall ascribe
such power and omnipotency unto them, or unto the Devil, as only and properly
appertained to God. As for example; By Confederacy or Cosenage (as before I
have said) I may seem to manifest the secret thoughts of the heart, which (as
we learn in Gods Book) none, knows or searches, but God himself alone. And
therefore, whosoever believes that I can do as I may seem to do, makes a God
of me, and is an Idolater. In which respect, whenever we hear Papist, Witch,
Conjuror, or Cosener, take upon him more than lies in humane power to perform,
we may know and boldly, say it is a knack of Knavery; and no miracle at all.
And further we may know, that when we understand it, it will not be worth the
knowing. And at the discovery of these miraculous Toys, we shall leave to
wonder at them, and begin to wonder at our selves, that could be so abused with
Bables. Howbeit, such things as God has laid up secretly in Nature, are to be
weighed with, great admiration, and to be searched out with such industry as
may become a Christian man: I mean, so as neither God, nor our Neighbor he
offended thereby, which respect doubtless Jannes and Jambres never had. We
find in the Scriptures diverse natural and secret Experiments practiced; as
namely that of Jacob, for pied sheep; which are confirmed by profane Authors,
and not only verified in Lambs and Sheep, but in Horses, Peacocks, Conies, etc.
We read also of a Woman that brought forth a young Black-Moor, J. Bap Neapol.
in natural. mag.
by means of an old Black-Moor was in her house at the time of her conception,
whom she beheld in fantasy, as is supposed: howbeit a jealous Husband will not
be satisfied with such fantastical imaginations: For in truth a Black-Moor
never fails to beget black Children, of what color sover the other be; Et
sic contra.

CHAP. XVII.
The Opinion of Witchmongers, that Devils can create Bodies; and of Pharaohs
Magicians.

M. Malef. p. 1. q. 10.
IT is affirmed by James Sprenger and Henry Institor, in M. Mal. who cite
Albert. in lib. de animalib. for their purpose, that Devils and Witches also
can truly make living creatures as well as God; though not at an instant, yet
very suddenly. Howbeit, all such who are rightly informed in Gods Word, shall
manifestly perceive and confess the contrary, John 1.3. Colos. 1.16.
as has been by Scriptures already proved, and may be confirmed by places
infinite. And therefore Jannes and Jambres, though Satan and also Belzebuh had
assisted them, could never have made the Serpent or Frogs of nothing, nor yet
have changed the waters with words, Nevertheless all the learned Expositors of
that place affirm, that they made a show of Creation, etc. exhibiting by
cunning a resemblance of some of those Miracles, which God wrought by the hands
of Moses. Yea S. Augustine and many other hold, that they made by Art (and that
truly) the Serpents, etc. But that they may by Art aprroach somewhat nearer to
those actions then has been yet declared, shall and may appear by these and
many other Conclusions, if they be true.

CHAP. XVIII.
How to produce or make Monsters by Art Magic, and why Pharaohs Magicians
could not make Lice.

STrato, Democritus Empedocles, and of late, Natural conclusions.
Jo. Bap. Neap. teach by what means Monsters may be produced, both from Beast
and also from Fowl. Aristotle himself teaches to make a Chicken have four
legs, and as many wings, only by a double yolked Egg; whereby also a Serpent
may be made to have many legs. Or any thing that produces Eggs, may likewise be
made double, or membred dismembered; and the viler creature the sooner brought
to monstrous deformity, which in more noble creatures is more hardly brought to
pass. To produce any fowl out of an Egg, without the natural help of the Hen.
There are also pretty experiments of an Egg, to produce any fowl, without the
natural help of the Hen, the which is brought to pass, if the Egg be laid in
the powder of the Hens dung, dried and mingled with some of the Hens feathers,
and stirred every fourth hour. You may also produce (as they say) the most
venomous, noisome, and dangerous Serpent, called a Cockatrice, by melting a
little Arsenick, and the poison of Serpents, or some other strong venom, and
drowning an Egg therein, which there must remain certain days; and if the Egg
be set upright, the operation will be the better, This may also be done, if the
Egg be laid in dung, which of all other things gives the most singular and
natural heat; and as J. Bap. Neap. says, is The Mother of marvels.
Mirabilium rerum parens; who also writes, that Crines faeminae menstruosae,
the hairs of a Menstruous woman, are turned into Serpents within short space;
and he further says, that Basil being beaten, and set out in a moist place,
betwixt a couple of Tiles, does engender Scorpions. The ashes of a Duck being
put between two dishes, and set in a moist place, does engender a huge Toad,
Quod etiam efficit sanguis menstruosus, which also does menstruous Blood. Many
Writers conclude, that there be two manner of Toads, Two kind of Toads, natural
and temporal.
the one bred by natural course and order of Generation, the other growing of
themselves, which are called temporary, being only ingendered of showers and
dust; and (as J. Bap. Neap. says) they are easy to be made. Plutarch and
Heraclides do say, that they have seen these to descend in rain, so as they
have lain and crawled on the tops of houses, etc. Also Aelianus does say that
he saw Frogs and Toads, whereof the heads and shoulders were alive, and became
flesh; the hinder parts being but earth, and so crawled on two feet, the other
being not yet fashioned or fully framed. And Macrobius reports, that in
Egypt, mice grow of earth and showers; as also Frogs, Toads, and Serpents in
other places. They say that Damnatus Hispanus could make them when and as many
as he listed. Maggots engendered of the inwards of a Beast are good for angling.
He is no good Angler, that knows not how soon the entrails of a Beast, when
they are buried, will engender Maggots (which in a civiler term are called
Gentles) a good bait for small fishes. Whosoever knows the order of
preserving of Silkworms, may perceive a like Conclusion; because in the Winter
that is a dead seed, which in the Summer is a lively creature. Such and greater
experiments might be known to Jannes and Jambres, and serve well to their
purpose, especially with such excuses, delays, and cunning, as they could join
therewithal. But to proceed, and come a little nearer to their feats, and to
show you a knack beyond their cunning; I can assure you that of the fat of a
man a woman, lice are in very short space engendered; and yet I say, Pharaohs
Magicians could not make them, with all the cunning they had. Whereby you may
perceive, that God indeed performed the other actions, to indurate Pharaoh,
though he thought his Magicians did with no less dexterity than Moses work
miracles and wonders. Giles Alley. See the poor man's Library.
But some of the Interpreters of that place excuse their ignorance in that
matter, thus, The Devil (say they) can make no creature under the quantity of a
Barly-corn, and Lice being so little cannot therefore be created by them. As
though he that can make the greater, could not make the less. A very gross
absurdity. And as though that he which has power over great, had not the like
over small.

CHAP. XIX.
That great Matters may be wrought by this Art, when Princes esteem and
maintain it: of diverse wonderful Experiments, and of strange Conclusions in
Glasses of the Art perspective, etc.

HOwbeit, these are but trifles in respect of other experiments to this effect,
specially when great Princes maintain and give countenance to students in those
magical Arts, which in these Countries and in this Age is rather prohibited
than allowed, by reason of the abuse commonly coupled therewith; which in truth
is it that moves admiration and estimation of miraculous workings. As for
example, if I affirm, that with certain Charms and Popish Prayers I can set an
Horse or an Asses head upon a man's shoulders, I shall not be believed;
Wonderful experiments.
or if I do it, I shall be thought a Witch. And yet if J. Bap. Neap.
experiments be true, it is no difficult matter to make it seem so; and the
Charm of a Witch or a Papist joined with the experiment, will also make the
wonder seem to proceed thereof. The words used in such case are uncertain, and
to be recited at the pleasure of the Witch or Cosener. To set an horses or an
asses head on a man's neck and shoulders.
But the conclusion of this, cut off the head of a Horse or an Ass (before they
be dead, otherwise the virtue or strength thereof will be the less effectual)
and make an earthen vessel of fit capacity to contain the same, and let it be
filled with the oil and fat thereof, cover it close, and dawb it over with
lome; let it boil over a soft fire three days continually, that the flesh
boiled may run into oil, so as the bare bones may be seen, beat the hair into
powder, and mingle the same with the oil; and anoint the heads of the standers
by, and they shall seem to have Horses or Asses heads. If Beasts heads be
anointed with the like oil made of a man's head, they shall seem to have men's
faces, as diverse Authors soberly affirm. If a Lamp be anointed herewith, every
thing shall seem most monstrous. It is also written, that if that which is
called Sperma in any beast be burned, and any bodies face therewithal anointed
he shall seem to have the like face as the Beast had. But if you beat Arsenick
very fine, and boil it with a little sulphur in a covered pot, and kindle it
with a new candle, the standers by will seem to be headless. Aqua composita and
salt being fired in the night, and all other lights extinguished, make the
standers by seem as dead. All these things might be very well perceived and
known, and also practiced by Jannes and Jambres. Strange things to be done by
perspective glasses.
But the wondrous devices, and miraculous sights, and conceits, made and
contained in glass, do far exceed all other; whereto the Art perspective is
very necessary. For it shows the illusions of them, whose experiments be seen
in diverse sorts of Glasses; as in the hollow, the plain, the embossed, the
columnary, the pyramidate or piked, the turbinal, the bounched, the round, the
cornered, the inversed, the eversed, the massy, the regular, the irregular,
the colored and clear Glasses; for you may have Glasses so made, as what image
or favor soever you print in your imagination, you shall think you see the
same therein. Others are so framed, as therein one may see what others do in
places far distant; others, whereby you shall see men hanging in the Air;
others, whereby you may perceive men flying in the Air; others, wherein you may
see one coming, and another going; others, where one Image shall seem to be one
hundred, etc. There be Glasses also wherein one man may see another man's image,
and not his own, others, to make many similitudes; others, to make none at all.
Others, contrary to the use of all Glasses make the right side turn to the
right, and the left side to the left; others, that burn before and behind;
others, that represent not the Images received within them, Concerning these
glasses remember that the eyesight is deceived; for Non est in speculo res
quae speculatur in illo.
but cast them far off in the Air, appearing like aerie Images, and by the
collection of the Sunbeams, with great force set fire (very far off) on every
thing that may be burned. There be clear Glasses, that make great things seem
little; things far off to be at hand; and that which is near to be far off;
such things as are over us, to seem under us; and those that are under us, to
be above us. There are some Glasses also, that represent things in diverse
colors, and them most gorgeous, specially any white thing. Finally, the thing
most worthy of admiration concerning these Glasses, is, that the lesser Glass
does lessen their shape; but how big soever it be, it makes the shape no
bigger then it is. And therefore Augustine thinks some hidden mystery to be
therein. Vitellius, and J. Bap. Neap. write largely hereof. These I have for
the most part seen, and have the receipt how to make them; which if desire of
brevity had not forbidden me, I would here have set down. But I think not but
Pharaohs Magicians had better experience then I for those and such like
devices. And as ( Pompanatius says) it is most true, that some for these feats
have been accounted Saints, Rash opinion can never judge soundly.
some other Witches. And therefore I say, that the Pope makes rich Witches
Saints; and burns the poor Witches.

CHAP. XX.
A Comparison betwixt Pharoahs Magicians and our Witches, and how their Cunning
consisted in juggling Knacks.

THus you see that it has pleased God to show unto men that seek for
knowledge, such cunning in finding out, compounding, and framing of strange and
secret things, as thereby he seems to have bestowed upon man, some part of
his Divinity. Howbeit, God (of nothing, with his Word) has created all things,
and does at his will, beyond the power and also the reach of man, accomplish
whatsoever he lists. An apish imitation in Jannes and Jambres of working
wonders.
And such miracles in times past he wrought by the hands of his Prophets, as
here he did by Moses in the presence of Pharaoh, which Jannes and Jambres
apishly followed. But to affirm that they by themselves, or by all the Devils
in Hell, could do indeed as Moses did by the power of the Holy Ghost, is worse
then infidelity. If any object and say, that our Witches can do such feats with
Words and Charms, as Pharaohs Magicians did by their Art, I deny it; and all
the world will never be able to show it. That which they did was openly done,
as our Witches and Conjurers never do any thing; so as these cannot do as they
did. Jo. Calvin. lib. institut. 1. cap. 8. Cle. recog. 3.
And yet (as Calvin says of them) they were but Juglers. Neither could they
do, as many suppose. For as Clemens says, These Magicians did rather seem to
do these wonders, than work them indeed. And if they made but prestigious shows
of things, I say it was more than our Witches can do. Erast. in disputat. de
lamiis.
For Witchcrafts (as Erastus himself confesses in drift of argument) are but
old wives Fables. If the Magicians Serpent had been a very Serpent, it must
needs have been transformed out of the Rod. And therein had been a double work
of God, to wit, the qualifying and extinguishment of one substance, and the
creation of another. Actions unpossible to Devils: Ergo to Witches, Conjurers,
etc.
Which are actions beyond the Devils power, for he can neither make a body to
be no body, nor yet no body to be a body; as to make something nothing, and
nothing something; and contrary things, one; nay, they cannot make one hair
either white or black. If Pharaohs Magicians had made very Frogs upon a sudden,
why could they not drive them away again? If they could not hurt the Frogs, why
should we think that they could make them? Or that our Witches, which cannot do
so much as counterfeit them, can kill cattle and other creatures with words or
wishes? And therefore I say with Jamblicus, Jamb. de mysterius.
Quae fascinati imaginamur, praeter imaginamenta nullam habent actionis and
essentiae veritatem; Such things as we being bewitched do imagine, have no
truth at all either of action or essence, beside the bare imagination.

CHAP. XXI.
That the Serpents and Frogs mere truly presented, and the Water poisoned
indeed by Jannes and Jambres; of false Prophets and of their miracles; of
Balams Ass.

Pharaohs Magicians were not Masters of their own actions.
TRuly I think there were no inconvenience granted, though I should admit that
the Serpents and Frogs were truly presented, and the Water truly poisoned by
Jannes and Jambres; not that they could execute such Miracles of themselves, or
by their Familiars or Devils: but that God, by the hands of those counterfeit
Coseners, contrary to their own expectations, overtook them, and compelled them
in their ridiculous wickedness to be instruments of his will and vengeance,
upon their Master Pharaoh; so as by their hands God showed some Miracles, which
he himself wrought, as appears in Exodus, Exodus 10.
For God did put the Spirit of Truth into Baalams mouth, who was hired to curse
his People. And although he were a corrupt and false Prophet, and went about a
mischievous enterprise; God uses the wicked as instruments to execute his
counsels and judgments.
yet God made him an instrument (against his will) to the confusion of the
wicked. Which if it pleased God to to do here, as a special work, whereby to
show his Omnipotency, to the confirmation of his peoples Faith, in the doctrine
of their Messiah delivered unto them by the Prophet Moses, then was it
miraculous and extraordinary, and not to be looked for now. And (as some
suppose) there were then a consort or crew of false Prophets, which could also
foretell things to come, and work miracles. I answer, it was extraordinary and
miraculous, and that it pleased God so to try his people; but he works not so
in these days; for the working of miracle is ceased. The contrary effects that
the miracle of Egyptian Magicians wrought in the heart of Pharaoh.
Likewise in this case it might well stand with Gods glory, to use the hands of
Pharaohs Magicians, toward the hardening of their Masters heart; and to make
their illusions and ridiculous conceits to become effectual. For God had
promised and determined to harden the heart of Pharaoh, As for the miracles
which Moses did, they mollified it so, as he always relented upon the sight of
the same. For unto the greatness of his miracles were added such modesty and
patience, as might have moved even a heart of steel or flint. But Pharaohs
frowardness always grew upon the Magicians actions: the like example, or the
resemblance whereof, we find not again in the Scriptures. And though there were
such people in those days suffered and used by God, for the accomplishment of
his Will and secret Purpose: yet it follows not, that now, when Gods Will is
wholly revealed to us in his Word, and his Son exhibited (for whom, or rather
for the manifestation of whose coming, all those things were suffered or
wrought) such things and such people should yet continue. So as I conclude, the
cause being taken away, the thing proceeding thence remains not. And to
assign our Witches and Conjurers their room, is to mock and contemn Gods
wonderful Works; and to oppose against them Cosenages, juggling knacks and
things of naught. And therefore, as they must confess, that none in these days
can do as Moses did; so it may be answered, that none in these days can do as
Jannes and Jambres did: who, if they had been false Prophets, as they were
Juglers, had yet been more privileged to exceed our old Women or Conjurers, in
the accomplishing of miracles, or in prophesying, etc. For who may be compared
with Balaam? Nay, I dare say, that Balaams Ass wrought a greater miracle, and
more supernatural, then either the Pope or all the Conjurers and Witches in the
world can do at this day.

To conclude, it is to be avouched (and there be proofs manifest enough) that
our Juglers approach much nearer to resemble Pharaohs Magicians, then either
Witches or Conjurers, That the Art of Juggling is more, or at least no less
strange in working miracles than conjuring, Witchcraft, etc.
and make a more lively show of working Miracles than any Inchanters can do:
for these practice to show that in action, which Witches do in words and terms.
But that you may think I have reason for the maintenance of mine opinion in
this behalf, I will surcease by multitude of words to amplify this place,
referring you to the tract following of the art of juggling, where you shall
read strange practices and cunning conveyances; which because they cannot so
conveniently be described by phrase of speech, as that they should presently
sink into the capacity of you that would be practitioners of the same, have
caused them to be set forth in form and figure, that your understanding might
be somewhat helped by instrumental Demonstrations. And when you have perused
that whole discovery of Juggling, compare the wonders thereof with the wonders
imputed to Conjurers and Witches, (not omitting Pharaohs Sorcerers at any hand
in this comparison) and I believe you will be resolved, that the miracles done
in Pharaohs sight by them, and the miracles ascribed unto Witches, Conjurers,
etc. may be well taken for false miracles, mere delusions, etc. and for such
actions as are commonly practiced by cunning Jugglers; be it either by
legierdemain, confederacy, or otherwise.

CHAP. XXII.
The Art of Juggling discovered, and in what points it does principally consist.

NOw because such occasion is ministered, and the matter so pertinent to my
purpose, and also the life of Wicthcraft and cosenage so manifestly delivered
in the Art of Juggling; I thought good to discover it, together with the rest
of the other deceitful Arts; In what respects juggling is tolerable and also
commendable.
being sorry that it falls out to my lot, to lay open the secrets of this
mystery, to the hinderance of such poor men as live thereby: whose doings
herein are not only tolerable, but greatly commendable, so they abuse not the
Name of God, nor make the people attribute unto them his power; but always
acknowledge wherein the Art consists, so as thereby the other unlawful and
impious Arts may be by them the rather detected and bewrayed.

The true Art therefore of Juggling consists in legierdemain; to wit, the
nimble conveyance of the hand, which is especially performed three ways. The
three principal points wherein legierdemain or nimbleness of hand does consist.
The first and principal consists in hiding and conveying of Balls, the
second in the alteration of Money, the third in the shuffling of the Cards. He
that is expert in these may show much pleasure, and many feats, and has more
cunning than all other Witches or Magicians. All other parts of this Art are
taught when they are discovered; but this part cannot be taught by any
description or instruction, without exercise and expense of time. And forasmuch
as I profess rather to discover than teach these mysteries, it shall suffice to
signify unto you, that the endeavor and drift of Jugglers is only to abuse
men's eyes and judgments. Now therefore my meaning is, in words as plain as I
can, to rip up certain proper tricks of that Art; whereof some are pleasant and
delectable, other some dreadful and desperate, and all but mere delusions, or
counterfeit actions, as you shall soon see by due observation of every knack by
me hereafter deciphered.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Ball, and the manner of Legierdemain therewith, also notable feats with
one or diverse Bals.

Great variety of play with the Balls, etc.
COncerning the Ball, the plays and devices thereof are infinite, in so much as
if you can by use handle them well, you may show therewith a hundredth feats.
But whether you seem to throw the Ball into your left hand, or into your mouth,
or into a Pot, or up into the air, etc. it is to be kept still in your right
hand. If you practice first with a leaden bullet, you shall the sooner and
better do it with Balls of Cork. The first place at your first learning, where
you are to bestow a great Ball, is in the palm of your hand, with your
Ring-finger; but a small Ball is to be placed with your thumb, betwixt your
Ring-finger, and middle-finger, then are you to practice to do it betwixt the
other fingers, then betwixt the forefinger and the thumb, with the forefinger
and middle-finger jointly, and therein is the greatest and strangest cunning
showed. Lastly, These feats are nimbly, cleanly and swiftly to be conveyed; so
as the eyes of the beholders may not discern or perceive the drift.
the same Ball is to be practiced in the palm of the hand, and by use you shall
not only seem to put any one Ball from you, and yet retain it in your hand; but
you shall keep four or five as cleanly as one. This being attained unto, you
shall work wonderful feats; as for example.

Lay three or four Balls before you, and as many small Candlesticks, Bols,
Saltseller covers, which is the best. Then first seem to put one Ball into your
left hand, and therewithal seem to hold same fast: then take one of the
Candlesticks, or any other thing (having a hollow foot, and not being too
great) and seem to put the Ball which is thought to be in your left hand,
underneath the same, and so under the other Candlesticks seem to bestow the
other Balls: and all this while the beholders will suppose each Ball to be
under each Candlestick: this done, some charm or form of words is commonly
used. Then take up one Candlestick with one hand, and blow, saying, Lo, you see
that is gone: and so likewise look under each Candlestick with like grace and
words, and the beholders will wonder where they are become. Memorandum that the
Juggler must set a good grace on the matter: for that is very requisite.
But if you in lifting up the Candlesticks with your right hand, leave all
those three or four Balls under one of them (as by use you may easily do,
having turned them all down with your hand, and holding them fast with your
little and Ring-finger) and take the Candlestick with your other fingers, and
cast the Balls up into the hollowness thereof (for so they will not roll so
soon away) the stander by will be much astonished. But it will seem wonderful
strange, if also in showing how there remains nothing under another of those
Candlesticks, taken up with your left hand, you leave behind you a great Ball,
or any other thing, the miracle will be the greater. For first they think you
have pulled away all the Bals by miracle; then, that you have brought them all
together again by like means, and they neither think nor look that any other
thing remains behind under any of them. And therefore, after many other feats
done, return to your Candlesticks, remembering where you left the great Ball,
and in no wise touch the same; but having another like Ball about you, seem to
bestow the same in manner and form aforesaid, under a Candlestick which
stands furthest off from that where the Ball lies. And when you shall with
words or Charms seem to convey the same Ball from under the same Candlestick,
and afterward bring it under the Candlestick which you touched not, it will (I
say) seem wonderful strange.

To make a little Ball swell in your hand till it he very great.
TAke a very great Ball in your left hand, or three indifferent big Balls, and
showing one or three little Balls, seem to put them into your said left hand,
concealing (as you may well do) the other Balls which were therein before: then
use words, and make them seem to swell, and open your hand, etc. This play is
to be varied a hundredth ways: for as you find them all under one Candlestick,
so may you go to a stander by, and take off his Hat or Cap, and show the Balls
to be there, conveying them thereinto, as you turn the bottom upward.

To consume (or rather to convey) one or many Bals into nothing.
IF you take one Ball, or more, and seem to put it into your other hand, and
whilst you use charming words, you convey them out of your right hand into
your lap, it will seem strange: For when you open your left hand, immediately,
the shatpest lookers on will say it is in your other hand, which also then you
may open; and when they see nothing there, they are greatly overtaken.

How to rap a wag on the Knuckles.
BUt I will leave to speak any more of the Ball, for herein I might hold you
all day, and yet shall I not be able to teach you to use it, nor scarcely to
understand what I mean or write concerning it: but certainly many are persuaded
that it is a Spirit or a Fly, etc. Memorandum, that always the right hand be
kept open and straight, only keep the palm from view, and therefore you may end
with this miracle. Lay one Ball upon your shoulder, another on your arm, and
the third on the Table: which because it is round, This feat tends chiefly to
the moving of laughter and mirth.
and will not easily lie upon the point of your Knife, you must bid a stander
by lay it thereon, that you mean to throw all those three Balls into your mouth
at once: and holding a Knife as a Pen in your hand, when he is laying it upon
the point of your Knife, you may easily with have rap him on the fingers, for
the other matter will be hard to do.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Conveyance of Money.

THe conveying of Money is not much inferior to the Ball, The money must not be
of too small nor of too large a circumference for hindering of the conveyance.
but much easier to do. The principal place to keep a piece of Money is the
palm of your hand, the best piece to keep is a Testor; but with exercise all
will be alike, except the Money be very small, and then it is to be kept
betwixt the fingers, almost at the fingers end, whereas the Ball is to be kept
below near to the palm.

To Convey Money out of one of your hands into the other by Legierdemain.
FIrst you must hold open your right hand, and lay therein a Testor, or some
big piece of Money: then lay thereupon the top of your long left finger, and
use words, and upon the sudden slip your right hand from your finger wherewith
you held down the Testor, and bending your hand a very little, you shall retain
the Testor still therein, and suddenly (I say) drawing your right hand through
your left, you shall seem to have left the Testor there, This is pretty if it
be cunningly handled; for both the ear and the eye is deceived by this device.
specially when you shut in due time your left hand. Which that it may more
plainly appear to be truly done, you may take a Knife, and seem to knock
against it, so as it shall make a great sound, but instead of knocking the
piece in the left hand (where none is) you shall hold the point of the Knife
fast with the left hand, and knock against the Testor held in the other hand,
and it will be thought to hit against the Money in the left hand. Then use
words, and open your hand, and when nothing is seen, it will be wondered at how
the Testor was removed.

To convert or transubstantiate Money into Counters, or Counters into Money.
ANother way to deceive the lookers on, is to do as before, with a Testor; and
keeping a Counter in the palm of the left hand secretly to seem to put the
Testor thereinto; which being retained still in the right hand, when the left
hand is opened, the Testor will seem to be transubstantiated into a Counter.

To put one Testor into one hand, and another into another hand, and with words
to bring them together.
Variety of tricks may be showed in juggling with Money.
HE that has once attained to the facility of retaining one piece of Money in
in his right hand, may show a hundred pleasant conceits by that means, and may
reserve two or three as well as one. And lo then may you seem to put one piece
into your left hand, and retaining it still in your right hand, you may
together therewith take up another like piece, and so with words seem to bring
both pieces together.

To put one Testor into a strangers hand, and another into your own, and to
convey both into the strangers hand with words.
ALso you may take two Testors evenly set together, and put the same in stead
of one Testor, into a strangers hand, and then making as though you did put one
Testor into your left hand, with words you shall make it seem that you convey
the Testor in your hand, into the strangers hand: for when you open your said
left hand, there shall be nothing seen; and he opening his hand shall find two,
where he thought was but one. By this device (I say) a hundred conceits may be
showed.

How to do the same or the like feat otherwise.
You must take heed that you be close and fly: or else you discredit the Art.
TO keep a Testor, etc. betwixt your finger, serves specially for this and such
like purposes. Hold out your hand, and cause one to lay a Testor upon the palm
thereof, then shake the same up almost to your fingers ends, and putting your
thumb upon it; you shall easily, with a little practice, convey the edge bewixt
the middle and forefinger, whilst you proffer to put it into your other hand
(provided always that the edge appear not through the fingers on the backside)
which being done, take another Testor (which you may cause a stander by to lay
down) and put them both together, either closely in stead of one into a
strangers hand, or keep them still in your own: and (after words spoken) open
your hands, and there being nothing in one, and both pieces in the other, the
beholders will wonder how they came together.

To throw a piece of Money away, and to find it again where you list.
Use and exercise makes men ready and practive.
YOu may, with the middle or Ring-finger of the right hand, convey a Testor into
the palm of the same hand, and seeming to call it away, keep it still: which
with confederacy will seem strange; to wit, when you find it again, where
another has bestowed the very like piece. But these things without exercise
cannot be done, and therefore I will proceed to show things to be brought to
pass by money, with less difficulty, and yet as strange as the rest: which
being unknown are marvellously commended, but being known are derided, and
nothing at all regarded.

With words to make a Groat or a Testor to leap out of a Pot, or to run along
upon a Table.
YOu shall see a Juggler take a Groat or a Testor, and throw it into a Pot,
This feat is the stranger, if it be done by night; a Candle placed between the
lookers on and the Juggler: for by that means their eyesight is hindered from
discerning the conceit.
or lay it in the midst of a Table, and with enchanting words cause the same to
leap out of the Pot, or run toward him, or from him-ward along the Table.
Which will seem miraculous, until you know it is done with a long black hair of
a woman's head, fastened to the brim of a Groat, by means of a little hole driven
through the same with a Spanish-Needle. In like sort you may use a Knife, or
any other small thing: but if you would have it go from you, you must have a
confederate, by which means all Juggling is graced and amended.

To make a Groat or a Testor to sink through a Table, and to vanish out of a
Handkercher very strangely.
A Juggler also sometimes will borrow a Groat or a Testor, etc. and mark it
before you, and seem to put the same into the midst of a Handkercher, and wind
it so, as you may the better see and feel it. Then will he take you the
Handkercher, and bid you feel whether the Groat be there or nay; and he will
also require you to put the same under a Candlestick, or some such thing. Then
will he send for a Basin, and holding the same under the board right against
the Candlestick, will use certain words of Enchantments; and in short space you
shall hear the Groat fall into the Basin. This done, one takes off the
Candlestick, A discovery of this juggling knack.
and the Juggler takes the Handkercher by a Tassel, and shakes it, but the
Money is gone: which seems as strange as any feat whatsoever, but being
known, the miracle is turned to a babble: For it is nothing else but to sow a
Groat into the corner of a Handkercher, finely covered with a piece of Linen,
little bigger then your Groat: which corner you must convey instead of the
Groat delivered to you, into the middle of your Handkercher; leaving the other
either in your hand or lap, which afterward you must seem to pull through the
Board, letting it fall into a Basin, etc.

A notable trick to transform a Counter to a Groat.
TAke a Groat, or some less piece of Money, and grind it very thin on the one
side; and take two Counters, and grind them, the one no the one side, the other
on the other side: Glue the smooth side of the Groat to the smooth side of one
of the Counters, joining them so close together as may be, specially at the
edges, which may be so filed, as they shall seem to be but one piece; to wit,
one side a Counter, and the other side a Groat, then take a very little green
Wax (for that is softest and therefore best) and lay it so upon the smooth side
of the other Counter, as it does not much discolor the Groat: The Juggler must
have none of his trinkets wanting: besides that, it behooveth him to be
mindful, lest he mistake his tricks.
and so will that Counter with the Groat cleave together, as though they were
glewed; and being filed even with the Groat and the other Counter, it will seem
so like a perfect entire Counter, that though a stranger handle it, he shall
not bewrey it; then having a little touched your forefinger, and the thumb of
your right hand with soft Wax; take therewith this counterfeit Counter and lay
it down openly upon the palm of your left hand, in such sort as an Auditor
lays down his Counters, wringing the same hard, so as you may leave the
glewed Counter with the Groat apparently in the palm of your left hand; and the
smooth side of the waxed Counter will stick fast upon your thumb, by reason of
the Wax wherewith, it is smeared, and so may you hide at your pleasure.
Provided always that you lay the waxed side downward, and the glewed side
upward: then close your hand, and in or after the closing thereof turn the
place, and so instead of a Counter (which they supposed to be in your hand) you
shall seem to have a Groat, to the astonishment of the beholders, if it be well
handled.

CHAP. XXV.
An excellent feat, to make a Two-peny piece lie plain in the Palm of your
Hand, and to be passed from thence when you list.

PUt a little red Wax (not too thin) upon the nail of your longest finger, then
let a stranger put a Tow-peny piece into the palm of your hand, and shut your
fist suddenly, and convey the Two-peny piece upon the Wax, which with use you
may so accomplish, as no man shall perceive it. Then and in the mean time use
A^, Ailis, easyl, zaze, hit mel meltat: Saturnus, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus,
Mercury, Luna, or such like.
words of course, and suddenly open your hand, holding the tips of your fingers
rather lower than higher than the palm of your hand, and the beholders will
wonder where it is become. Then shut your hand suddenly again, and lay a wager
whether it be there or no; and you may either leave it there, or take it away
with you at your pleasure. This (if it be well handled) has more admiration
than any other feat of the hand. Memorandum this may be best handled, by
putting the Wax upon the Two-peny piece, but then must you lay it in your hand
your self.

To convey a Testor out of ones Hand that holds it fast.
STick a little Wax upon your thumb, and take a stander by by the finger,
showing him the Testor, and telling him you will put the same into his hand:
then wring it down hard with you waxed thumb, and using many words, look him in
the face, and as soon as you perceive him to look in your face, or from your
hand, suddenly take away your thumb, and close his hand, and so will it seem to
him that the Testor remains, even as if you wring a Testor upon ones
forehead, it will seem to stick, when it is taken away, especially if it be
wet. Then cause him to hold his hand still, and with speed put it into another
man's hand (or into your own) two Testors instead of one, and use words of
course, whereby you shall make not only the beholders, but the holders believe,
when they open their hands, that by Enchantment you have brought both together.

To throw a piece of Money into a deep Pond, and to fetch it again from whence
you list.
In these knacks of confederacy Feats had the name, whilst he lived.
THere be a mavelous number of feats to be done with Money; but if you will
work by private confederacy, as to mark a shilling, or any other thing, and
throw the same into a River or deep Pond, and having hid a shilling before with
like marks in some other secret place; bid some go presently and fetch it,
making them believe that it is the very same which you threw into the River:
the beholders will marvail much at it. And of such feats there may be done a
mavelous number; but many more by public confederacy, whereby one may tell
another how much Money he has in his Purse, and a hundredth like toys; and all
with Money.

To convey one Shilling being in one hand into another, holding your hands
abroad like a Rood.
A knack more merry than mavelous.
EVermore it is necessary to mingle some merry toys among your grave miracles,
as in this case of Money, to take a Shilling in each hand, and holding your
arms abroad, to lay a wager that you would put them both into one hand, without
b^inging them any whit nearer together. The wager being made, hold your arms
abroad like a Hood, and turning about with your body, lay the Shilling out of
one of your hands upon the Table, and turning to the otherside take it up with
the other hand: and so you shall win your wages.

How to Rap a Wag on the Knuckles.
DEliver one piece of Money with the left hand to one, Another to the same
purpose read in page 228.
and to a second person another, and offer him that you would rap on the
fingers the third; for he (though he be ungratious and subtle) seeing the other
receive Money, will not lightly refuse it, and when he offers to take it, you
may rap him on the fingers with a Knife, or somewhat else held in the right
hand, saying that you knew by your familiar, that he meant to have kept it from
you.

CHAP. XXVI.
To Transform any one small thing into any other form by folding of Paper.

TAke a sheet of Paper, or a Handkercher, and fold or double the same, so as
one side be a little longer then another: then put a counter between the two
sides or leaves of the Paper or Handkercher, up to the middle of the top of the
fold, holding the same so as it be not perceived, and lay a groat on the
outside thereof, right against the Counter, and fold it down to the end of the
longer side: and when you unfold it again, the Groat will be where the Counter
was, and the Counter where the Groat was: so as some will suppose that you have
transubstantiated the Money into a Counter, and with this many feats may be
done.

The like or rather stranger than it may be done, with two Papers three inches
square a piece, divided by two folds into three equal parts at either side, so
as each folded Paper remain one inch square: then glue the backsides of the two
Papers together as they are folded, and not as they are open, and so shall both
Papers seem to be but one; and which side soever you open, it shall appear to
be the same, if you hide handsomely the bottom, as you may well do with your
middle finger, so as if you have a Groat in the one, and a Counter in the
other, you (having showed but one) may be turning the Paper seem to
transubstantiate it. This may be best performed; by putting it under a
Candlestick, or a Hat, etc. and with words, Such as you shall find in page 227.
and 330. in the marginal notes, or some strange terms of your own devising.
seem to do the feat.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of Cards, with good Cautions how to avoid Cosenage therein: special Rules to
convey and handle the Cards, and the manner and order how to accomplish all
difficult and strange things wrought with Cards.

HAving now bestowed some waste money among you, Of Dice play and the like
unthrifty games, mark these two old verses:

Ludens taxillis been respice quid fit in illis; Mors tua, sors tua, res tua,
spes tua pendet in illis: and remember them.


I will set you to Cards; by which kind of Witchcraft a great number of people
have juggled away not only their Money, but also their Lands, their health,
their time, and their honesty. I dare not (as I could) show the lewd juggling
that Cheaters practice, lest it minister some offense to the well disposed, to
the simple hurt and losses, and to the wicked occasion of evil doing. But I
would wish all Gamesters to beware, not only with what Card and Dice they play,
but especially with whom and where they exercise gaming. And to let Dice pass
(as whereby a man may be inevitably cosened) one that is skilful to make and
use Bumcards, may undo a hundred wealthy men that are given to gaming: but if
he have a confederate present, either of the players or standers by, the
mischief cannot be avoided. If you play among strangers, beware of him that
seems simple or drunken; for under their habit the most special coseners are
presented, and while you think by their simplicity and imperfections to beguile
them (and thereof perchance are persuaded by their confederates, your very
friends as you think) you your self will be most of all overtaken. Beware also
of the bettors by, and lookers on, and namely of them that bet on your side:
for whilst they look on your game without suspicion, they discover it by signs
to your Adversaries, with whom they bet, and yet are their confederates.

But in showing feats, and juggling with Cards the principal point consists
in shuffling them nimbly, and always keeping one certain Card either in the
bottom, or in some known place of the stock, four or five Cards from it. Hereby
you shall seem to work wonders; for it will be easy for you to see or spy one
Card, which though you be perceived to do, it will not be suspected, if you
shuffle them well afterward. Note.
And this note I must give you, that in reserving the bottom Card, you must
always (whilst you shuffle) keep him a little before or a little behind all
the Cards lying underneath him, bestowing him (I say) either a little beyond
his fellows before, right over the forefinger, or else behind the rest, so as
the little finger of the left hand may meet with it: which is the easier, the
readyer, and the better way. In the beginning of your shuffling, shuffle as
thick as you can, and in the end throw upon the stock the nether Card (with so
many more at the least as you would have preserved for any purpose) a little
before or behind the rest. Provided always, that your forefinger, if the pack
be laid before, or the little finger, if the pack lie behind, creep up to meet
with the bottom Card, and not lie betwixt the Cards: and when you feel it, you
may there hold it, until you have shuffled over the Cards again, still leaving
your kept Card below. Being perfect herein, you may do almost what you list
with the Cards. By this means what pack soever you make, though it consist of
eight, twelve, or twenty Cards, you may keep them still together unsevered next
to the nether Card, and yet shuffle them often to satisfy the curious
beholders. As for example, and for brevity sake, to show you diverse feats under
one.

How to deliver out four Aces, and to convert them into four Knaves.
MAke a Pack of these eight Cards; to wit, four Knaves and four Aces: and
although, all the eight Cards must lie immediately together, yet must each
Knave and Ace be evenly severed, and the same eight Cards must lie also in the
lowest place of the bunch. You must be well advised in the shuffling of the
bunch, lest you overshoot your self.
Then shuffle them so, as always at the second shuffling, or at leastwise at
the end of your shuffling the said pack, and of the pack one Ace may lie
neathermost, or so as you may know where he goes and lies: and always (I
say) let your foresaid pack with three or four Card more lie unseparable
together immediately upon and with that Ace. Then using some speech or other
device, and putting your hands with the Cards to the edge of the Table to hide
the action, let out privily a piece of the second Card which is one of the
Knaves, holding forth the stock in both your hands, and showing to the standers
by the nether Card (which is the Ace or kept Card) covering also the head or
piece of the Knave (which is the next Card) with your four fingers, draw out
the same Knave, laying it down on the Table: then shuffle again, keeping your
pack whole, and so have you two Aces lying together in the bottom. And
therefore, to reform that disordered Card, as also for a grace and countenance
to that action, take of the uppermost Card of the bunch, and thrust it into the
midst of the Cards; and then take away the neathermost Card, which is one of
your said Aces, and bestow him likewise. Then may you begin as before, showing
another Ace, and instead thereof lay down another Knave: and so forth, until
instead of four Aces you have laid down four Knaves. The beholders all this
while thinking that there lie four Aces on the Table, are greatly abused, and
will marvel at the transformation.

How to tell one what Card he sees in the bottom, when the same Card is
suffled into the stock.
WHen you have seen a Card privily, or as though you marked it not, lay the
same undermost, and shuffle the Cards as before you are taught, till your Card
lie again below in the bottom. Then show the same to the beholders, willing
them to remember it; then shuffle the Cards, or let any other shuffle them; for
you know the Card already, and therefore may at any time tell them what Card
they saw: which For that will draw the action into the greater admiration.
nevertheless would be done with great circumstance and show of difficulty.

Another way to do the same, having your self indeed never seen the Card.
IF you can see no Card, or be suspected to have seen that which you mean to
show, then let a stander by first shuffle, and afterward take you the Cards
into your hands, and (having showed and not seen the bottom Card) shuffle again
and keep the same Card as before you are taught; and either make shift then to
see it when their suspicion is past, which may be done by letting some Cards
fall, or else lay down all the Cards in heaps, remembering where you laid your
bottom Card. Then spy how many Cards lie in some one heap, and lay the heap
where your bottom Card is upon that heap, and all the other heaps upon the
same: and so, if there were five Cards in the heap whereon you laid your Card,
then the same must be the sixth Card, which now you may throw out, or look upon
without suspicion; and tell them the Card they saw.

To tell one without confederacy what Card he thinks.
LAy three Cards on a Table, a little way distant, The eye bewrays the
thought.
and bid a stander by be true and not waver, but think on one of the three; and
by his eye you shall assuredly perceive which he both sees and thinks. And
you shall do the like, if you cast down a whole pair of Cards with the faces
upwards, whereof there will be few or none plainly perceived, and they also
coat Cards. But as you cast them down suddenly, so must you take them up
presently, marking both his eye and the Card whereon he looks.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How to tell what Card any man thinks, how to convey the same into a Kernel
of a Nut or Cheristone, etc. and the same again into ones Pocket, how to make
one draw the same, or any Card you list, and all under one device.

TAke a Nut, or a Cheristone, Tricks with Cards, etc. which must be done with
confederacy.
and burn a hole through the side of the top of the shell, and also through the
kernel (if you will) with a hot Bodkin, or bore it with an Awl, and with the
eye of an Needle pull out some of the Kernel, so as the same may be as wide as
the hole of the shell. Then write the number or name of the Card in a piece of
fine Paper one inch or half an inch in length, and half so much in breadth, and
roll it up hard; then put it into a Nut, or Cheristone, and close the whole
with a little red Wax, and rub the same with a little dust, and it will not be
perceived, if the Nut or Cheristone be brown or old. Then let your confederate
think that Card which you have in your Nut, etc. and either convey the same Nut
or Cheristone into some bodies Pocket, or lay it in some strange place: then
make one draw the same out of the stock held in your hand, which by use you may
well do. But say not; I will make you perforce draw such a Card: but require
some stander by to draw a Card, saying that it skils not what Card he draw. And
if your hand serve you to use the Cards well, you shall prefer unto him, and
he shall receive (even though he snatch at another) the very Card which you
kept, and your confederate thought, and it is written in the Nut, and hidden in
the pocket, etc. You must (while you hold the stock in your hands, toffing the
Cards to and fro) remember always to keep your Card in your eyes, and not to
lose the sight thereof. Which feat, till you be perfect in, you may have the
same privily marked; and when you perceive his hand ready to draw, put it a
little out toward his hand, nimbly turning over the cards, as though you
numbered them, holding the same more loose and open than the rest, in no wise
suffering him to draw any other; which if he should do, you must let three or
four fall, that you may begin again. A merry conceit, the like whereof you
shall find in page 228. and 232.
This will seem most strange, if your said Paper be enclosed in a Button, and
by confederacy sowed upon the doublet or coat of any body. This trick they
commonly end with a Nut full of Ink, in which case some wag or unhappy Boy is
to be required to think a Card, and having so done, let the Nut be delivered
him to crack, which he will not refuse to do, if he have seen the other feat
played before.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of Fast or Loose; how to knit a hard Knot upon a Handkercher, and to undo the
same with words.

THe Egyptians juggling Witchcraft or Sortilegie stands much in Fast or
Loose, whereof though I have written somewhat generally already, yet having
such opportunity, I will here show some of their particular feats; not treating
of their common tricks which is so tedious, nor of their fortune-telling which
is so impious; and yet both of them mere cosenage. Fast and loose with a
Handkercher.
Make one plain loose knot, with the two corner ends of a Handkercher, and
seeming to draw the same very hard, hold fast the body of the said Handkercher
(near to the knot) with your hand, pulling the contrary end with the left hand,
which is the corner of that which you hold. Then close up handsomely the knot,
which will be yet somewhat loose, and pull the Handkercher so with your right
hand, as the left hand end may be near to the knot: then will it seem a true
and a firm knot. And to make it appear more assuredly to be so indeed, lest a
stranger pull at the end which you hold in your left hand, whilst you hold
fast the other in your right hand: and then holding the knot with your
forefinger and thumb, and the nether part of your Handkercher with your other
fingers, as you hold a bridle; when you would with one hand slip up the knot
and lengthen your reins. This done, turn your Handkercher over the knot with
the left hand, in doing whereof you must suddenly slip out the end or corner,
putting up the knot of your Handkercher with your forefinger and thumb, as you
would put up the foresaid knot of your bridle. Then deliver the same (covered
and wrapped in the midst of your Handkercher) to one, to hold fast, and so after
some words used, and wagers laid, take the Handkercher, and shake it, and it
will be loose.

A notable Feat of Fast and Loose; namely, to pull three Bead stones from off a
Cord, while you hold fast the ends thereef, without removing of your hand.
Fast or loose with Whipcords and Beads.
TAke two little Whipcords of two-foot long a plece, double them equally so as
there my appear four ends. Then take three great Bead-stones, the hole of one
of them being bigger than the rest; and put one Bead-stone upon the eye or bowt
of the one Cord, and another on the other Cord. Then take the Stone with the
greatest hole, and let both the bowts be hidden therein: which may be the
better done, if you put the eye of the one into the eye or bowt of the other.
Then pull the middle Bead upon the same, This conveyance must be closely done;
Ergo it must be no bunglers work.
being doubled over his fellow, and so will the Beads seem to be put over the
two Cords without partition: For holding fast in each hand the two ends of the
two Cords, you may toss them as you list, and make it seem manifest to the
beholders, which may not see how you have done it, that the Bead-stones are put
upon the two Cords without any fraud. Then must you seem to add more effectual
binding of those Bead-stones to the string, and make one half of a knot with
one of the ends of each side; which is for no other purpose, but that when the
Bead-stones be taken away, the Cords may be seen in the case which the
beholders suppose them to be in before: For when you have made your half knot
(which in any wise you may not double to make a perfect knot) you must deliver
into the hands of some standers by those two Cords; namely, two ends evenly set
in one hand, and two in the other, and then with a wager, etc. begin to pull
off your Bead-stones, etc. which if you handle nimbly, and in the end cause him
to pull his two ends, the two Cords will show to be placed plainly, and the
Bead-stones to have come through the Cords. But these things are so hard and
long to be described, that I will leave them, whereas I could show great
variety.

CHAP. XXX.
Juggling Knacks by confederacy, and how to know whether one cast Cross or Pile
by the ringing.

LAy a wager with your confederate (who must seem simple, or obstinately
opposed against you) that standing behind a door, you will (by the sound or
ringing of the money) tell him whether he cast Cross or pile: so as when you
are gone, and he has filliped the Money before the witnesses who are to be
cosened, he must say, What is it if be Cross; or What if, if it be Pile: What
is it? What is it? Signs of confederacy.
or some other such sign, as as you are agreed upon, and so you need not fail
to guess rightly. By this means (if you have any invention) you may seem to do
a hundredth miracles, and to discover the secrets of a man's thoughts, or words
spoken a far off.

To make a shoal of Goslings draw a Timber-log.
TO make a shoal of Goslings, or (as they say) a gaggle of Geese to seem to
draw a Timber-log, is done by that very means that is used, when a Cat does
draw a Fool through a Pond or River: but handled somewhat further off from the
beholders.

To make a Pot or any such thing standing fast on the Cupboard, to fall down
thencs by virtue of words.
LEt a Cupboard be so placed, as your Confederate may hold a black Thread
without in the Court, behind some window of that room; and at a certain loud
word spoken by you, he may pull the same Thread, Eleazer's feat of confederacy.
being wound about the Pot, etc. And this was the feat of Eleazer, which
Josephus reports to be such a miracle.

To make one dance naked.
MAke a poor Boy confederate with you, so as after Charms, etc. spoken by you,
he uncloth himself, and stand naked, seeming (whilst he undresseth him) to
shake, stamp, and cry, still hastening to be uncloathed, till he be stark naked;
or if you can procure none to go so far, let him only begin to stamp and shake,
etc. and to uncloath him, and then you may (for the reverence of the company)
seem to release him.

To transform or alter the Color of ones Cap or Hat.
TAke a confederates Hat, and use certain As, Droch myroch, and senaroth betu
baroch, assinaaroth, rounsee, farounsey, hey pass, pass, etc. or such like
strange words.
words over it, and deliver it to him again, and let him seem to be wroth, and
cast it back to you again, affirming that his was a good new black Hat, but
this is an old blew Hat, etc. and then you may seem to counter-charm it, and
re-deliver it, to his satisfaction.

How to tell where a stolen Horse is become.
BY means of confederacy, Steven Tailor, Pope and Tailor confederates.
and one Pope abused diverse country people. For Stephen Tailor would hide away
his neighbors Horses, etc. and send them to Pope (whom he before had told
where they were) promising to send the parties unto him, whom he described and
made known by diverse signs: so as this Pope would tell them at their first
entrance unto the door. Wherefore they came, and would say that their Horses
were stolen, but the thief should be forced to bring back the Horses, etc. and
leave them within one mile South and by West, etc. of his house, even as the
plot was laid, and the pack made before by Stephen and him. This Pope is said
of some to be a Witch, of others he is accounted a Conjurer; but commonly
called a wise man, which is all one with Soothsayer or Witch.

CHAP. XXXI.
Boxes to alter one Grain into another, or to consume the Grain or Corn to
nothing.

THere be diverse Juggling Boxes with false bottoms, wherein many false feats
are wrought. First they have a Box covered or rather footed alike at each end,
the bottom of the one end being no deeper than as it may contain one lane of
Corn or Pepper glewed thereupon. Note the manner of this conveyance.
Then use they to put into the hollow end thereof some other kind of grain,
ground or unground; then do they cover it, and put it under a Hat or
Candlestick: and either in putting it thereinto, or pulling it thence, they
turn the Box, and open the contrary end, wherein is showed a contrary grain: or
else they show the glewed end first (which end they suddenly thrust into a Boll
or Bag or such grain as is glewed already thereupon) and secondly the empty Box.

How to convey (with words or Charm) the Corn contained in one Box into
another.
THere is another Box fashioned like a Bell, whereinto they do put so much, and
such Corn or Spice as the aforesaid hollow Box can contain. Then they stop or
cover the same with a piece of Leather, as broad as a Testor, which being
thrust up hard toward the middle part or waste of the said Bell will stick
fast, and bear up the Corn. And if the edge of the leather be wet, it will hold
the better. Then take they the other Box dipped (as is aforesaid) in Corn, and
set down the same upon the Table, the empty end upward, saying that they will
convey the grain therein into the other Box or Bell: which being set down
somewhat hard upon the Table, You must take heed that when the Corn comes out,
it cover and hide the leather, etc.
the Leather and the Corn therein will fall down, so as the said Bell being
taken up from the Table, you shall see the Corn lying thereon, and the stopple
will be hidden therewith, and covered; and when you uncover the other Box,
nothing shall remain therein. But presently the Corn must be swept down with
one hand into the other, or into your lap or hat. Many feats may be done with
this Box, as to put therein a Toad, affirming the same to have been so turned
from Corn, etc. and then many beholders will suppose the same to be the
Jugglers Devil, whereby his feats and miracles are wrought. But in truth, there
is more cunning Witchcraft used in transferring of Corn after this sort, than
is in the transferring of one man's Corn in the Grass into another man's field:
which the law of the twelve Tables does so forcibly condemn; for the one is a
cosening slight, the other is a false lie.

Of another Box to convert Wheat into Flower with words, etc.
THere is another Box usual among Jugglers, with a bottom in the middle
thereof, made for the like purposes. One other also like a Tun, wherein is
showed great variety of stuff, as well of liquors as Spices, and all by means
of another little Tun within the same, wherein and whereon Liquor and Spices
are showed. But this would ask too long a time of description.

Of divert petty Juggling Knacks.
THere are many other beggarly feats able to beguile the simple, These are such
sleights that even a bungler may do them; and yet pretty, etc.
as to make an Oat stir by spitting thereon, as though it came to pass by
words. Item to deliver Meal, Pepper, Ginger, or any Powder out of the mouth
after the eating of Bread, etc. which is done by retaining any of those things
stuffed in a little Paper or Bladder conveyed into your mouth, and grinding the
same with your Teeth. Item, a rish through a piece of a Trencher, having three
holes, and at the one side the Rish appearing out in the second, at the other
side in the third hole, by reason of a hollow place made betwixt them both, so
as the slight consists in turning the piece of Trencher.

CHAP. XXXII.
To burn a Thread, and to make it whole again with the Ashes thereof.

IT is not one of the worst feats to burn a Thread handsomely, and to make it
whole again; the order whereof is this. Take two Threads, or small Laces, Mark
the manner of this conceit and device.
of one foot in length a piece: roll up one of them round, which will be then
of the quanity of a Pease, bestow the same between your left forefinger and
your thumb. Then take the other Thread, and hold it forth at length, That is,
neatly and daintily.
betwixt the forefinger and thumb of each hand, holding all your fingers
daintily, as young Gentlewomen are taught to take up a morsel of meat. Then let
one cut asunder the same Thread in the middle. When that is done, put the tops
of your two thumbs together, and so shall you with less suspicion receive the
piece of Thread which you hold in your right hand into your left, without
opening of your left finger and thumb; then holding these two pieces as you did
the same before it was cut, let those two be cut also asunder in the midst, and
they conveyed again as before, until they be cut very short, and then roll all
those ends together, and keep that Ball of small Threads before the other in
your left hand, A Throd cut in many pieces and burned to ashes made whole again.
and with a Knife thrust out the same with a Candle, where you may hold it
until the said Ball of short Threads be burnt to ashes. Then pull back the Knife
with your right hand, and leave the ashes with the other Ball betwixt the
forefinger and thumb of your left hand, and with the two thumbs and two
fore-fingers together seem to take pains to frot and rub the ashes, until your
Thread be renewed, and draw out that Thread at length which you kept all this
while betwixt your left finger and thumb. This is not inferior to any Jugglers
feat if it be well handled; for if you have Legierdemain to bestow the same
Ball of Thread, and to change it from place to place betwixt your other fingers
(as may easily be done) then will it seem very strange.

To cut a Lace asunder in the midst, and to make it whole again.
BY a device not much unlike to this, you may seem to cut asunder any Lace that
hangs about ones neck, or any Point, Girdle, or Garter, etc. and with
Witchcraft or Conjuration to make it whole and closed together again. For the
accomplishment whereof, provide (if you can) a piece of the Lace, etc. which
you mean to cut, or at the least a pattern like the same, one inch and a half
long, The means discovered.
(and keeping it double privily in your left hand, betwixt some of your fingers
near to the tips thereof) take the other Lace which you mean to cut, still
hanging about ones neck, and draw down your said left hand to the bought
thereof; and putting your own piece a little before the other (the end or
rather middle whereof you must hide betwixt your forefinger and thumb) making
the eye or bought, which shall be seen, of your own pattern, let some stander
by cut the same asunder, and it will be surely thought that the other Lace is
cut; which with words and frotting, etc. you shall seem to renew and make whole
again. This, if it be well handled, will seem miraculous.

How to pull Laces innumerable out of your mouth, of what color or length you
list, and never any thing seen to be therein.
A common juggling knack of flat cosenage played among the simple, etc.
AS for pulling Laces out of the mouth, it is somewhat a stale jest, whereby
Jugglers gain money among Maids, selling Lace by the yard, putting into their
mouths one round bottom as fast as they pull out another, and at the just end
of every yard they tie a knot, so as the same rests upon their teeth; then
cut they off the same, and so the beholders are double and treble deceived,
seeing as much Lace as will be contained in a Hat, and the same of what color
you list to name, to be drawn by so even yards out of his mouth, and yet the
Juggler to talk as though there were nothing at all in his mouth.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How to make a Book, wherein you shall show every leaf therein to be white,
black, blew red, yellow, green, etc.

THere are a thousand jugglings, which I am loath to spend time to describe,
whereof some be common, and some rare, and yet nothing else but deceit,
Juggling a kind of Witchcraft.
cosenage, or confederacy: whereby you may plainly see the Art to be a kind of
Witchcraft. I will end therefore with one devide, which is not common, but was
specially used by Claruis, whom though I never saw to exercise the feat, The
invention of Claruis.
yet am I sure I conceive aright of that invention. He had (they say) a Book,
whereof he would make you think first, that every leaf was clean white Paper;
then by virtue of words he would show you every leaf to be painted with Birds,
then with Beasts, then with Serpents, then with Angels, etc. the device thereof
is this. This knack is sooner learned by demonstrative means, than taught by
words of instruction.
Make a Book seven inches long, and five inches broad, or according to that
proportion; and let there be 49. leaves; to wit, seven times seven contained
therein, so as you may out upon the edge of each leaf six notches, each notch
in depth half a quarter of an inch, and one inch distant. Paint every
fourteenth and fifteenth page (which is the end of every sixth leaf, and the
beginning of every seventh) with like color or one kind of picture. Cut off
with a pair of sheers every notch of the first leaf, leaving only one inch of
Paper in the uppermost place uncut, which will remain almost half a quarter of
an inch higher than any part of that leaf. Leave another like inch in the
second place of the second leaf, clipping away one inch of Paper in the highest
place immediately above it, and all the notches below the same, and so orderly
to the third, fourth, etc. so as there shall rest upon each leaf one only inch
of paper above the rest. One high uncut inch of Paper must answer to the first,
directly, in every seventh leaf of the Book; so as when you have cut the first
seven leaves, in such sort as I first described, you are to begin in the self
same order at the eight leaf, descending in such wise in the cutting of seven
other leaves, and so again at the fifteenth, to 21, etc. until you have passed
through every leaf, all the thickness of your Book.

Now you shall understand, that after the first seven leaves, every seventh
leaf in the Book is to be painted, saving one seven leaves, which must remain
white. Howbeit, you must observe, that at each Bumleaf or high inch of Paper,
seven leaves distant, opposite one directly and lineally against the other,
through the thickness of the Book, the same page with the page precedent so to
be painted with the like color or picture, and so must you pass through the
Book with seven several sorts of colors or pictures; so as, when you shall
rest your thumb upon any of those Bumleaves, or high inches, and open the Book,
you shall see in each page one color or picture throughout the Book; This will
seem rare to the beholders.
in another row, another color, etc. To make that matter more plain unto you,
let this be description hereof. Hold the Book with your left hand, and (betwixt
your forefinger and thumb of your right hand) slip over the Book in what place
you list, and your thumb will always rest at the seventh leaf; to wit, at the
Bumleaf or high inch of Paper from whence when your Book is strained, it will
fall or slip to the next, etc. Which when you hold fast, and open the Book, the
beholders seeing each leaf to have one color or picture with so many
varieties, all passing continually and directly through the whole Book, will
suppose that with words you can discolor the leaves at your pleasure. Where
such Books may be gotten.
But because perhaps you will hardly conceive hereof by this description, you
shall (if you be disposed) see or buy for a small value the like Book, at the
Shop of W. Brom in Pauls-Churchyard, for your further instruction. * There are
certain feats of activity, which beautify this Art exceedingly: howbeit even
in these, some are true, and some are counterfeit, to wit, some done by
practice, and some by confederacy. * There are likewise diverse feats,
Arithmetical and Geometrical: for them read Gemma Phrysius, and Record, etc.
which being exercised by Jugglers, add credit to their Art. * There are also
(besides them which I have set down in this title of Hartumim) sundry strange
experiments reported by Pliny, Albert, Joh. Bap. Port. Neap. and Thomas Lupton,
whereof some are true, and some false, which being known to Jannes and Jambres,
or else to our Jugglers, their occupation is the more magnified, and they
thereby more reverenced. See more hereof in the 11. Book of this discovery, in
the title Nahas, cap. 10.
Here is place to discover the particular knaveries of casting of lots, and
drawing of cuts (as they term it) whereby many cosenages are wrought: so as I
dare not teach the sundry devices thereof, lest the ungodly make a practice of
it in the Commonwealth, where many things are decided by those means, which
being honestly meant may be lawfully used. But I have said already somewhat
hereof in general, and therefore also the rather have suppressed the
particularities, which (in truth) are mere juggling knacks: whereof I could
discover a great number.

Chap. XXXIV.
Desperate or dangerous Juggling-knacks, wherein the simple are made to think,
that a silly Juggler with words can hurt and help, kill and revive any creature
at his pleasure: and first to kill any kind of Pullen, and to give it life
again.

TAke a Hen, a Chick, or a Capon, and thrust a Nail or a fine sharp pointed
Knife through the midst of the head thereof, the edge toward the bill, so as
it may seem impossible for her to escape death: The natural cause why a Hen
thrust thorough the head with a Bodkin does live notwithstanding.
then use words, and pulling out the Knife, lay Oats before her, etc. and she
will eat and live, being nothing at all grieved or hurt with the wound; because
the Brain lies so far behind in the head as it is not touched, though you
thrust your Knife between the comb and it, and after you have done this, you
may convert your speech and actions to the grievous wounding and present
recovering of your own self.

To Eat a Knife, and to fetch it out of any other place.
TAke a Knife, and contain the same within your two hands, so as no part be
seen there of but a little of the point, which you must so bite at the first,
as noise may be made therewith. Then seem to put a great part thereof into your
mouth, and letting your hand slip down, there will appear to have been more in
your mouth then is possible to be contained therein. Then send for drink, It
must be cleanly conveyed in any case.
or use some other delay, until you have let the said Knife slip into your lap,
holding both your fists close together as before, and then raise them so from
the edge of the Table where you sit (for from thence the Knife may most privily
slip down into your lap) and instead of biting the Knife, knable a little upon
your nail, and then seem to thrust the Knife into your mouth, opening the hand
next unto it, and thrust up the other, so as it may appear to the standers by,
that you have delivered your hands thereof, and trust it into your mouth; then
call for drink, after countenance made of pricking and danger, etc. Lastly, put
your hand into your lap, and taking that Knife in your hand, you may seem to
bring it out from behind you, or from whence you list. * But if you have
another like Knife and a Confederate, you may do twenty notable wonders hereby;
as to send a stander by into some Garden or Orchard, describing to him some
tree or herb, under which it sticks; or else some strangers sheath or pocket,
etc.

To thrust a Bodkin into your Head without hurt.
The manner and means of this action.
TAke a Bodkin so made, as the haft being hollow, the blade thereof may slip
thereinto as soon as you hold the point upward; and set the same to your
forehead, and seem to thrust it into your head, and so (with a little sponge in
your hand) you may bring out blood or wine, making the beholders think the
blood or the wine (whereof you may say you have drunk very much) runs out of
your forehead. Then, after countenance of pain and grief, pull away your hand
suddenly, holding the point downward; and it will fall so out, as it will seem
never to have been thrust into the haft; but immediately thrust that Bodkin
into your lap or pocket, and pull out another plain Bodkin like the same,
saving in that conceit.

To thrust a Bodkin through your Tongue, and a Knife through your Arm; a
pitiful sight, without hurt or danger.
A form or pattern of this Bodkin and Knife you shall shall see described if
you turn over a few leaves forward.
MAke a Bodkin, the blade thereof being sundred in the middle, so as the one
part be not near to the other almost by three quarters of an inch, each part
being kept asunder with one small bought or crooked piece of Iron of the
fashion described hereafter in place convenient. Then thrust your tongue
betwixt the foresaid space; to wit, into the bought left in the Bodkin blade,
thrusting the said bought behind your teeth, and biting the same: and then it
shall seem to stick so fast in and through your tongue, that one can hardly
pull it out.* Also the very like may be done with a Knife so made, and put upon
your Arm; and the wound will appear the more terrible, if a little blood be
poured thereupon.

To thrust a piece of Lead into one Eye, and to drive it about (with a stick)
between the skin and flesh of the forehead, until it be brought to the other
Eye, and there thrust out.
PUt a piece of Lead into one of the nether lids of your Eye, as big as a tag
of a point, but not so long (which you may do without danger) and with a little
juggling stick (one end thereof being hollow) seem to thrust the like piece of
Lead under the other Eyelid; but convey the same indeed into the hollowness of
the stick; the stopple or peg thereof may be privily kept in your hand until
this feat be done. Then seem to drive the said piece of Lead, with the hollow
end of the said stick, from the same eye: and so with the end of the said
stick, being brought along upon your forehead to the other eye, you may thrust
out the piece of Lead, which before you had put thereinto, to the admiration of
the beholders: * Some eat the Lead, and then shove it out of the eye: and some
put put it into both, but the first is best.

To cut half your Nose asunder, and to heal it again presently without any
Salve.
This is easily done; howbeit being cleanly handled it will deceive the sight
of the beholders.
TAke a Knife having a round hollow gap in the middle, and lay it upon your
Nose, and so shall you seem to have cut your Nose half asunder. Provided
always, that in all these you have another like Knife without a gap, to be
showed upon the pulling out of the same, and words of Enchantment to speak,
blood also to bewray the wound and nimble conveyance.

To put a Ring through your Cheek.
THere is another old knack, which seems dangerous to the Cheek: for the
accomplishing whereof you must have two Rings of like color and quantity: the
one filed asunder, so as you may thrust it upon your Cheek; the other must be
whole and conveyed upon a stick, holding your hand thereupon in the middle of
the stick, delivering each end of the same stick to be holden fast by a stander
by. Then conveying the same cleanly into your hand, or (for lack of good
conveyance) into your lap or pocket, pull away your hand from the stick: and in
pulling it away, whirle about the Ring, and so will it be thought that you have
put thereon the Ring which was in your Cheek.

To cut off ones Head, and to lay it in a Platter, etc, which the Jugglers call
the decollation of John Baptist.
TO show a most notable execution by this Art, you must cause a board, a cloth,
This was done by one Kings-field of London, at a Bartholomewtide, An. 1582. in
the sight of diverse that came to view this spectacle.
and a platter to be purposely made, and in each of them holes fit for a bodies
neck. The board must be made of two planks, the longer and broader the better:
there must be left within half a yard of the end of each plank half a hole; so
as both the planks being thrust together, there may remain two holes, like to
the holes in a pair of Stocks; there must be made likewise a hole in the
Tablecloth or Carpet. A Platter also must be set directly over or upon one of
them, having a hole in the middle thereof, of the like quantity, and also a
piece cut out of the same, so big as his neck, through which his head may be
conveyed into the midst of the platter; and then sitting or kneeling under the
board, let the head only remain upon the board in the same. Then (to make the
sight more dreadful) put a little Brimstone into a Chasing-dish of coals,
setting it before the head of the boy, who must gasp two or three times, so as
the smoke enter a little into his nostrils and mouth (which is hot unwholesome)
and the head presently will appear stark dead, if the boy set his countenance
accordingly; and if a little blood be sprinkled on his face, the sight will be
the stranger.

This is commonly practiced with a boy instructed for that purpose, who being
familiar and conversant with the company, may be known as well by his face, as
by his Apparel. In the other end of the Table, where the like hole is made,
another boy of the bigness of the known boy must be placed, having upon him his
usual Apparel; he must lean or lie upon the board, and must put his head under
the board through the said hole, so as his body shall seem to lie on the one
end of the board, and his head shall lie in a platter on the other end.
Necessary observations to astonish the beholders.
There are other things which might be performed in this action, the more to
astonish the beholders, which because they offer long descriptions, I omit; as
to put about his neck a little dough kneaded with Bullocks blood, which being
cold will appear like dead flesh; and being pricked with a sharp round hollow
quill, will bleed, and seem very strange, etc. * Many rules are to be observed
herein, as to have the Table-cloth so long and wide as it may almost touch the
ground. * Not to suffer the company to stay too long in the place, etc.

To thrust a Dagger or Bodkin into your Guts very strangely, and to recover
immediately.
ANother miracle may be showed touching counterfeit executions; namely, that
with a Bodkin or Dagger you shall seem to kill your self, or at the least make
an unrecoverable wound in your Belly: as (in truth) not long since a Juggler
caused himself to be killed at a Tavern in Cheapside, from whence he presently
went into Pauls-Churchyard and dyed. Which misfortune fell upon him through his
own folly, as being then drunken, and having forgotten his Plate, which he
should have had for his defense. The device is this. Of a Juggler that failing
in the feats of his Art, lost his life.
You must prepare a Paste-boord to be made according to the fashion of your
belly and breast: the same must by a Painter be colored cunningly, not only
like to your flesh, but with paps, navil, hair, etc. so as the same (being
handsomely trussed unto you) may show to be your natural belly. Then next to
your true belly you may put a linen cloth, and thereupon a double plate (which
the Juggler that killed himself forgot, or wilfully omitted) over and upon the
which you may place the false belly. Provided always, that betwixt the plate
and the false belly you place a gut or bladder of blood, which blood must be of
a Calf or of a Sheep; but in no wise of an Ox or a Cow, for that will be too
thick. Then thrust, But herein see you be circumspect.
or cause to be thrust into your breast a round Bodkin, or the point of a
Dagger, so far as it may pierce through your gut or bladder: which being pulled
out again, the said blood will spin or spirt out a good distance from you,
especially if you strain your body to swell, and thrust therewith against the
plate. You must ever remember to use (with words, countenance and gesture) such
a grace, as may give a grace to the action, and move admiration in the
beholders.

To draw a Cord through your Nose, Mouth, or Hand, so sensible as is wonderful
to see.
A form or pattern of this bridle you shall see in the next page.
THere is another juggling knack, which they call the Bridle, being made of two
Elder-sticks, through the hollowness thereof is placed a Cord, the same being
put on the Nose like a pair of Tongs or Pinsers; and the Cord, which goes
round about the same, being drawn to and fro, the beholders will think the Cord
to go through your nose very dangerously. The knots at the end of the Cord,
which do stay the same from being drawn out of the stick, may not be put out at
the very top (for that must be stopped up) but half an inch beneath each end:
and so I say, when it is pulled, it will seem to pass through the nose; and
then may you take a Knife, and seem to cut the Cord asunder, and pull the
Bridle from your Nose.

The Conclusion, wherein the Reader is referred to certain Patterns of
Instruments wherewith diverse Feats here specified are to be executed.
HErein I might wade infinitely, but I hope it suffices, that I have delivered
unto you the principles, and also the principal feats belonging to this Art of
Juggling, so as any man conceiving thoroughly hereof may not only do all these
things, but also may devise other as strange, and vary every of these devices
into other forms as he can best conceive. And so long as the power of Almighty
God is not transported to the Juggler, nor offense ministered by his uncomely
speech and behavior, but the action performed in pastime, to the delight of
the beholders, so as always the Juggler confess in the end that these are no
supernatural actions, but devices of men, and nimble conveyances, let all such
curious conceited men as cannot afford their neighbors any comfort or
commodity, but such as pleases their melancholic dispositions, say what they
list; for this will not be only found among indifferent actions, but such as
greatly advance the power and glory of God, discovering their pride and
falsehood that take upon them to work miracles, Among what actions juggling is
to be counted.
and to be the mighty power of God, as James and Jambres, and also Simon Magus
did.

If any man doubt of these things, as whether they be not as strange to behold
as I have reported, A matchless fellow for Legierdemain.
or think with Bodin, that these matters are performed by familiars or Devils;
let him go into S. Martins, and enquire for one John Cautares (a French man by
birth, in conversation an honest-man) and he will show as much and as strange
actions as these, who gets not his living hereby, but labors for the same
with the sweat of his brows, and nevertheless has the best hand and conveyance
(I think) of any man that lives this day.

Neither do I speak (as they say) without Book herein. For if time, place, and
occasion serve, I can show so much herein, that I am sure Bodin, Spinaeus, and
Vairus, would swear I were a Witch, and had a familiar Devil at Commandment.
But truly my study and travel herein has only been employed to the end I might
prove them fools, and find out the fraud of them that make them fools, as
whereby they may become wiser, and God may have that which to him belongs.

And because the manner of these juggling conveyances is not easily conceived
by discourse of words; Touching the patterns of diverse juggling Instruments.
I have caused to be set down diverse forms of Instruments used in this Art;
which may serve for patterns to them that would thoroughly see the secrets
thereof, and make them for their own private practices, to try the event of
such devices, as in this Tract of Legierdemain are showed. Where note, that you
shall find every Instrument that is most necessarily occupied in the working of
these strange feats, to bear the just and true number of the page, where the
use hereof is in ample words declared.

Now will I proceed with another cosening point of Witchcraft, apt for the
place, necessary for the time, and in mine opinion meet to be discovered, or at
the least to be defaced among deceitful Arts. And because many are abused
hereby to their utter undoing, for that it has had passage under the
protection of learning, whereby they pretend to accomplish their works, it has
gone freely without general controlment through all Ages, Nations, and People.

Here follow patterns of certain Instruments to be used in the former juggling
knacks.
depiction of bead-stones and a bridle To pull three Bead-stones from off a
Cord, while you hold fast the ends thereof, without removing of your hand.

To draw a Cord through your Nose, Mouth or Hand, which is called the Bridle.



To be instructed in the right use of the said Bead-stones, read page 190. and
191. As for the Bridle, read page 198.

To thrust a Bodkin into your Head, and through your Tongue, etc.
three bodkins The hithermost is the Bodkin with the Bowt, the middlemost is
the Bodkin with the hollow haft; the furthermost is the plain Bodkin serving
for show.



To be instructed and taught in the right use and ready practice of these
Bodkins, read page 196.

To thrust a Knife through your Arm, and to cut half your Nose asunder, etc.
three knives The middlemost knife is to serve for show; the other two be the
Knives of device.



To be ready in the use and perfect practice of these Knives here portrayed,
see page 196.

To Cut off ones Head, and to lay it in a Platter, which the Jugglers call the
decollation of John Baptist.
depiction of props for magic trick The form of the plancks, etc.

The order of the action, as it is to be showed.



What order is to be observed for the practicing hereof with great admiration,
read page 197, 198.

BOOK XIV.
CHAP. I.
Of the Art of Alchymistry, of their words of Art and devices to blear men's
Eyes, and to procure credit to their Profession.

Alchymistry a craft, not an Art.
HEre I thought it not impertinent to say somewhat of the Art or rather the
craft of Alchymistry, otherwise called Multiplication; which Chaucer, of all
other men, most lively deciphereth. In the bowels hereof does both Witchcraft
and Conjuration lie hidden, as whereby some cosen others, and some are cosened
themselves. For by this mystery (as it is said in the Chanons man's prologue)
They take upon them to turn upside down,
G. Chaucer in the Chanons man's prolog.
All the Earth between Southwark and Canterbury town,
And to pave it all of silver and gold, etc.
But ever they lack of their conclusion,
And to much folk they do illusion.
For their stuff slides away so fast,
That it makes them beggars at the last,
And by this craft they do never win,
But make their purse empty, and their wits thin.


And because the practicers hereof would be thought wise, learned, cunning, and
their crafts Masters, they have devised words of Art, Sentences, and Epithets
obscure, and confections so innumerable (which are also compounded of strange
and rare simples) as confound the capacities of them that are either set on
work herein, or be brought to behold or expect their conclusions. For what
plain man would not believe, that they are learned and jolly fellows, that have
in such readiness so many mystical terms of Art: The terms of the Art
Alchymistical, devised of purpose to bring credit to cosenage.
as (for a taste) their subliming, amalgaming, englutting, imbibing,
incorporating, cementing, retrination, terminations, mollifications, and
indurations of bodies, matters combust and coagular, ingots, tests, etc. Or who
is able to conceive, (by reason of the abrupt confusion, contrariety, and
multitudes of drugs, simples, and confections) the operation and mystery of
their stuff and workmanship! For these things and many more, are of necessity
to be prepared and used in the execution of this endeavor; namely orpiment,
sublimed Mercury, Iron squames, Mercury crude, groundly large, Bole Armoniack,
Verdigreece, Horace, Boles, Gall, Arsenick, Sal Armoniack, Brimstone, Salt,
Paper, burnt Bones, unslaked Lime, Clay, Saltpeter, Vitriol, Saltartre,
Alcalie, Sal preparat, Clay made with Horse-dung, Mans-hair, Oil of Tartre,
Alum, Glass, Wort, Yest, Argol, Refagor, Gleir of an eye, Powders, Ashes,
Dung, Piss, etc. Then have they Waters corrosive and lincal, Waters of
Albification, and Water ru^ifying, etc. Also Oils, Ablutions, and Metals
fusible. Also their Lamps, their Urinals, Discensories, Sublimatories,
Alembecks, Viols, Crossets, Cucurbits, Stillatories, and their Furnace of
Calcination: also their soft and subtle fires, some of Wood, some of Coal,
composed specially of Beech, etc. And because they will not seem to want any
point of cosenage to astonish the simple, or to move admiration to their
enterprises, they have (as they affirm) four spirits to work withal; whereof
the first is Orpiment; the second, Quicksilver; the third, Sal-Armoniack; the
fourth, Brimstone. Then have they seven celestial Bodies; namely, Sol, Luna,
Mars, Mercury, Saturn, Jupiter, and Venus; to whom they apply seven terrestrial
bodies; to wit, Gold, Silver, Iron, Quicksilver, Lead, Tin, and Copper,
attributing unto these the operation of the other; specially if the terrestrial
bodies be qualified, tempered, and wrought in the hour and day according to the
feats of the celestial bodies, with more like vanity.

CHAP. II.
The Alchymisters drift; the Chanons Yeomans Tale; of Alchymistical Stones and
Waters.

NOw you must understand that the end and drift of all their works, is, to
attain unto the composition of the Philosophers Stone, called All^er, and to
the stone called Titanus; and to Magnatia, which is a Water made of the four
Elements, which (they say) the Philosophers are sworn neither to discover nor
to write of. And by these they mortify Quicksilver, and make it malleable and
to hold touch: hereby also they convert any other metal (but specially Copper)
into Gold. This Science (forsooth) is the secret of secrets: even as Solomon's
Conjuration is said among the Conjurers to be so likewise. And thus, when they
chance to meet with young men, or simple people, they boast and brag, and say
with Simon Magus, that they can work miracles, Acts 8.
and bring mighty things to pass. In which respect Chaucer truly hereof says:
Each man is as wise as Solomon, G. Chaucer in the Chanons man's tale.

When they are together everichone:
But he that seems wisest, is most fool in preef,
And he that is truest, is a very thief.
They seem friendly to them that know naught;
But they are fiendly both in word and thought,
Yet many men ride and seek their acquaintance,
Not knowing of their false governance.


He also says, and experience verifieth his assertion, that they look ill
favouredly, and are always beggarly attired: his words are these: Those
fellows look ill favouredly, Idem. ibid.

And are always tired beggarly,
So as by smelling and thredbare array,
These folk are known and discerned always.
But so long as they have a sheet to wrap them in by night,
Or a rag to hang about them in the daylight,
They will it spend in this craft,
They cannot stint tell nothing be laft.
Here one may learn if he have ought,
To multiply and bring his good to naught.
But if a man ask them privily,
Why they are clothed so unthriftily,
They will round him in the ear and say,
If they espied were, men would them slay,
And all because of this noble Science:
Lo thus these folk betraien innocence.


The points or parts of the Art Alchymistical which may be called the misty or
smoky Science.
The Tale of the Chanons Yeoman published by Chaucer, does make (by way of
example) a perfect demonstration of the Art of Alchymistry or Multiplication:
the effect whereof is this. A Chanon being an Alchymister or cosener, espied a
covetous Priest, whose purse he knew to be well lined, whom he assaulted with
flattery and subtle speech, two principal points belonging to this Art. At the
length he borrowed money of the Priest, which is the third part of the Art,
without which the Professors can do no good, nor endure in good estate. Then he
at his day repayed the money, which is the most difficult point in this Art,
and a rare experiment. Finally, to requite the Priests courtesy, he promised
unto him such instructions, as whereby with expedition he should become
infinitely rich, and all through this Art of Multiplication. And this is the
most common point in this Science; for herein they must be skilful before they
can be famous, or attain to any credit. The Priest disliked not his proffer,
specially because it tended to his profit, and embraced his courtesy. Then the
Chanon willed him forthwith to send for three ounces of Quicksilver, which he
said he would transubstantiate (by his Art) into perfect silver. The Priest
thought that a man of his profession could not dissemble, and therefore with
great joy and hope accomplished his request.

And now (forsooth) goes this jolly Alchymist about his business and work of
Multiplication, and causes the Priest to make a fire of coals, in the bottom
whereof he places a Croslet; and pretending only to help the Priest to lay the
coals handsomely, he foisteth into the middle ward or lane of coals, a Beechen
coal, within the which was conveyed an Ingot of perfect silver; which (when the
coal was consumed) slipped down into the Croslet, that was (I say) directly under
it. The Priest perceived not the fraud, The Alchymists bait to catch a fool.
but received the Ingot of silver, and was not a little joyful to see such
certain success proceed from his own handy work wherein could be no fraud (as
he surely conceived) and therefore very willingly gave the Chanon forty pounds
for the receipt of this experiment, who for that sum of money taught him a
lesson in Alchymistry, but he never returned to hear repetitions, or to see how
he profitted.

CHAP. III.
Of a Yeoman of the Country cosened by an Alchymist.

I Could cite many Alchymistical cosenages wrought by Doctor Burcot, Feats,
and such other; but I will pass them over, and only repeat three experiments of
that Art; the one practiced upon an honest Yeoman in the County of Kent, the
other upon a mighty Prince, the third upon a covetous Priest. And first
touching the Yeoman, he was overtaken and used in manner and form following, by
a notable cosening Varlet, who professed Alchymistry, Juggling, Witchcraft, and
Conjuration: and by means of his Companions and Confederates discussed the
simplicity and ability of the said Yeoman, and found out his estate and humor
to be convenient in this purpose; and finally came a woing (as they say) to his
daughter, to whom he made love cunningly in words, though his purpose tended to
another matter. And among other illusions and tales concerning his own
commendation, for wealth, parentage, inheritance, alliance, activity, learning,
pregnancy, and cunning, he boasted of his knowledge and experience in
Alchymistry, making the simple man believe that he could multiply, and of one
Angel make two or three. Which seemed strange to the poor man, insomuch as he
became willing enough to see that conclusion: whereby the Alchymister had more
hope and comfort to attain his desire, Note the cosening coveyance of this
Alchymistical practitioner.
than if his daughter had yielded to have married him. To be short, he in the
presence of the said Yeoman, did include within a little Ball of Virgin-Wax, a
couple of Angels; and after certain Ceremonies and conjuring words he seemed to
deliver the same unto him: but in truth (through Legierdemain) he conveyed into
the Yeomans hand another ball of the same scantling, wherein were enclosed many
more Angels than were in the ball which he thought he had received. Now
(forsooth) the Alchymister bad him lay up the same ball of Wax, and also use
certain ceremonies (which I thought good here to omit.) And after certain
days, hours, and minutes, they returned together, according to the
appointment, and found great gains by the multiplication of the angels.
Insomuch as he, being a plain man, was hereby persuaded, that he should not
only have a rare and notable good son-in-law, but a companion that might help
to add unto his wealth much treasure, and to his estate great fortune and
felicity. And to increase this opinion in him, as also to win his further
favor; but specially to bring his cunning Alchymistry, or rather his lewd
purpose to pass, he told him that it were folly to multiply a pound of Gold,
when as easily they might multiply a million: and therefore counseled him to
produce all the money he had, or could borrow of his neighbors and friends;
and did put him out of doubt, that he would multiply the same, and redouble it
exceedingly, even as he saw by experience how he dealt with the small sum
before his face. A notable fool.
This Yeoman in hope of gains and preferment, etc. consented to this sweet
motion, and brought out and laid before his feet, not the one half of his
goods, but all that he had, or could make or borrow any manner of way. Then
this juggling Alchymister, having obtained his purpose, folded the same in a
ball, in quantity far bigger than the other, and conveying the same into his
bosom or pocket, delivered another ball (as before) of the like quantity unto
the Yeoman, to be reserved and safely kept in his chest; whereof (because the
matter was of importance) either of them must have a key, and a several lock,
that no interruption might be made to the Ceremony, nor abuse by either of
them, in defrauding each other. Now (forsooth) these circumstances and
Ceremonies being ended, A cousening device by running away to save the credit
of the art.
and the Alchymisters purpose thereby performed; he told the Yeoman that
(until a certain day and hour limited to return) either of them might employ
themselves about their business and necessary affairs; the Yeoman to the
Plough, and he to the City of London, and in the mean time the Gold should
multiply, etc. But the Alchymister (belike) having other matters of more
importance came not just at the hour appointed, nor yet at the day, nor within
the year: so as although it were somewhat against the Yeomans conscience to
violate his promise, or break the league; yet partly by the longing he had to
see, and partly the desire he had to enjoy the fruit of that excellent
experiment, having (for his own security) and the others satisfaction, some
testimony at the opening thereof, to witness his sincere dealing, he brake up
the coffer, and lo he soon espied the ball of Wax, which he himself had laid up
there with his own hand: So as he thought (if the hardest should fall) he
should find his principal: and why not as good increase hereof now, as of the
other before? But alas! when the Wax was broken, and the metal discovered, the
Gold much abased, and became perfect lead.

Now who so list to utter his folly, G. Chaucer in the tale of the Chanons
yeoman^

Let him come forth and learn to multiply;
And every man that has ought in his Cofer,
Let him appear, and wax a Philosopher;
In learning of his elvish nice lore,
All is in vain, and pardee much more
Is to learn a lewd man this sutteltee,
Fie, speak not thereof it woll not be:
For he that has learning, and he that has none,
Conclude alike in multiplicatione.
CHAP. IV.
A certain King abused by an Alchymist, and of the Kings Fool, a pretty jest.

A King cousened by Alchymistry.
THe second example is of another Alchymist that came to a certain King,
promising to work by his art many great things, as well in compounding and
transubstantiating of metals, as in executing of other exploits of no less
admiration. But before he began, he found the means to receive by virtue of the
Kings Warrant, a great sum of money in pressed, assuring the King and his
Council, that he would shortly return, and accomplish his promise, etc. Soon
after, the Kings Fool among other jests, fell into a discourse and discovery of
fools, and handled that common place so pleasantly, that the King began to take
delight therein, and to like his merry vein. Whereupon he would needs have the
fool deliver unto him a schedule or scroll, containing the names of all the
most excellent Fools in the land.

So he caused the Kings name to be first set down, and next him all the names
of his Privy Council. The King seeing him so saucy and malapert, meant to have
had him punished: but some of his Council, knowing him to be a fellow
pleasantly conceited, besought his Majesty rather to demand of him a reason of
his Libell, etc. than to proceed in extremity against him. Then the fool being
asked why he so sawcily accused the King and his Council of principal folly,
answered; Because he saw one foolish knave beguile them all, and to cosen them
of so great a mass of Money, and finally to be gone out of their reach. Why
(said one of the Council) he may return and perform his promise, etc. Then
(quoth the fool) I can help all the matter easily. A wise fool.
How (said the King) can thou do that? Marry Sir, (said he) then I will blot
out your name, and put in his, as the most fool in the world. Many other
practices of the like nature might be hereunto annexed, for the detection of
their knavery and deceits whereupon this art depends, whereby the Readers may
be more delighted in reading, than the practisers benefited in simply using the
same. For it is an art consisting wholly of subtlety and deceit, whereby the
ignorant and plain-minded man through his too much credulity is circumvented,
and the humor of the other slye cosener satisfied.

CHAP. V.
A Notable Story written by Erasmus of two Alchymists; also of Longation and
Curtation.

Eras. in colloqu. de art Alchymistica.
THe third example is reported by Erasmus, whose excellent learning and wit is
had to this day in admiration. He in a certain dialogue entitled Alchymistica
does finely bewray the knavery of this crafty art; wherein he proposes one
Balbine, a very wise, learned, and devout priest, howbeit such a one as was
bewitched, and mad upon the art of Alchymistry. Which thing another cosening
Priest perceived, and dealt with him in manner and form following.

A flattering and clawing preamble.
Mr. Doctor Balbine (said he) I being a stranger unto you may seem very saucy to
trouble your worship with my bold suit, who always are busied in great and
divine studies. To whom Balbine, being a man of few words, gave a nodde: which
was more then he used to every man. But the Priest knowing his humor, said; I
am sure Sir, if you knew my suit, you would pardon my importunity. I pray thee
good Sir John (said Balbine) show me thy mind, and be brief. That shall I do
Sir (said he) with a good will, You know Mr. Doctor, through your skill in
Philosophy, that every man's destiny is not alike; and I for my part am at this
point, that I cannot tell whether I may be counted happy or unfortunate. For
when I weigh mine own case, or rather my state, in part I seem fortunate, and
in part miserable. But Balbine being a man of some surliness, always willed
him to draw his matter to a more compendious form: which thing the Priest said
he would do, and could the better perform, because Balbine himself was so
learned and expert in the very matter he had to repeat, and thus he began.

I have had, even from my childhood, a great felicity in the art of
Alchymistry, which is the very marrow of all Philosophy. Balbine at the naming
of the word Alchymistry, inclined and yielded himself more attentively to
hearken unto him: marry it was only in gesture of body; for he was spare of
speech, and yet he bade him proceed with his tale. Then said the Priest, wretch
that I am, it was not my luck to light on the best way: for you Mr. Balbine
know (being so universally learned) that in this art there are two ways, the
one called Longation, the other Curtation; and it was mine ill hap to fall upon
Longation. When Balbine asked him the difference of those two waves; Oh Sir,
Longation and Curtation in Alchymistry.
said the Priest, you might count me impudent, to take upon me to tell you that
of all other are best learned in this Art, to whom I come, most humbly to
beseech you to teach me that lucky way of Curtation. The cunninger you are, the
more easily you may teach it me: and therefore hide not the gift that God has
given you, from your brother, who may perish for want of his desire in this
behalf; and doubtless Jesus Christ will enrich you with greater blessings and
endowments.

Balbine being abashed partly with his importunity, and partly with the strange
circumstance, told him that (in truth) he neither knew what Longation or
Curtation meant; and therefore required him to expound the meaning of these
words. Well (quoth the Priest) since it is your pleasure, I will do it, though
I shall thereby take upon me to teach him that is indeed much cunninger than my
self. And thus he began: Oh Sir, Note how the Cousener circumventeth Balbine.
they that have spent all the days of their life in this divine faculty, do
turn one nature and form into another, two ways; the one is very brief, but
somewhat dangerous; the other much longer, marry very safe, sure, and
commodious. Howbeit, I think my self most unhappy that have spent my time and
travel in that way which utterly misliketh me, and never could get any one to
show me the other that I so earnestly desire. And now I come to your worship,
whom I know to be wholly learned and expert herein, hoping that you will (for
charities sake) comfort your brother, whose felicity and well-doing now rests
only in your hands; and therefore I beseech you relieve me with your counsel.

By these and such other words when this cousening Varlot had avoided suspicion
of guile, and assured Balbine that he was perfect and cunning in the other way:
Balbine's fingers itched, and his heart tickled, so as he could hold no longer,
but burst out with these words: Let this Curtation go to the Devil, whose name
I did never so much as once hear of before, and therefore do much less
understand it. But tell me in good faith, do you exactly understand Longation?
Yea, said the Priest, doubt you not hereof: but I have no fancy to that way,
it is so tedious. Why (quoth Balbine) what time is required in the
accomplishment of this work by way of Longation? Too too much said the
Alchymister, even almost a whole year: but this is the best, Fair words make
fools fain, and large offers blind the wise.
the surest and safest way, though it be for so many months prolonged, before
it yield advantage for cost and charges expended thereabouts. Set your heart at
rest (said Balbine) it is no matter, though it were two years, so as you be
well assured to bring it then to pass.

Finally, it was there and then concluded, that presently the Priest should go
in hand with the work, and the other should bear the charge, the gains to be
indifferently divided betwixt them both, and the work to be done privily in
Balbine's house. And after the mutual oath was taken for silence, which is
usual and requisite always in the beginning of this mystery, Balbine delivered
money to the Alchymister for Bellows, Glasses, Coals, etc. which should serve
for the erection and furniture of the Forge. Which money the Alchymister had no
sooner fingered, but he ran merrily to the Dice, to the Alehouse, and to the
Stews, and who there so lusty as cousening Sir John! who indeed this way made
a kind of Alchymistical transformation of Money. Now Balbine urged him to go
about his business, but the other cold him, that if the matter were once begun,
it were half ended: for therein consisted the greatest difficulty.

Well, at length he began to furnish the furnace; but now forsooth a new supply
of Gold must be made, as the seed and spawn of that which must be engendered and
grow out of this work of Alchymistry. For even as a fish is not caught without
a bait, no more is Gold multiplied without some parcels of Gold: and therefore
Gold must be the foundation and groundwork of that art, or else all the fat is
in the fire. But all this while Balbine was occupied in calculating, and musing
upon his account; casting by Arithmetic, how that if one ounce yield fifteen,
then how much gains two thousand ounces might yield: for so much he determined
to employ that way.

When the Alchymist had also consumed this Money, showing great travel a
month or twain, in placing the bellows, the coals, and such other stuff, and
no whit of profit proceeding or coming thereof. Balbine demanded how the world
went; our Alchymist was as a man amazed. Howbeit he said at length; Forsooth
even as such matters of importance commonly do go forward, whereunto there is
always very difficult access. There was (says he) a fault (which I have now
found out) in the choice of the coals, which were of Oak, and should have been
of Beech. One hundred Ducats were spent that way, so as the Dicing house and
the Stews were partakers of Balbines charges. But after a new supply of Money,
better coals were provided, and matters more circumspectly handled. Balbine was
bewitched with desire of gold, etc.
Howbeit, when the forge had traveled long, and brought forth nothing, there
was another excuse found out; to wit, that the glasses were not tempered as
they ought to have been. But the more Money was disbursed hereabouts, the worse
willing was Balbine to give over, according to the Dicers vein, whom fruitless
hope brings into a fools paradise.

The Alchymist, to cast a good color upon his knavery, took on like a man
moonsick, and protested with great words full of forgery and lies, that he
never had such luck before. But having found the error, he would be sure
enough never hereafter to fall into the like oversight, and that henceforward
all should be safe and sure, and thoroughly recompensed in the end, with large
increase. Hereupon the Workhouse is now the third time repaired, and a new
supply yet once again put into the Alchymists hand; Notable cousenage.
so as the glasses were changed. And now at length the Alchymist uttered
another point of his art and cunning to Balbine; to wit, that those matters
would proceed much better, if he sent our Lady a few French Crowns in reward;
for the art being holy, the matter cannot prosperously proceed, without the
favor of the Saints. Which counsel exceedingly pleased Balbine, who was so
devout and religious, that no day escaped him but he said our Lady Mattens.

The Alchymister brings Balbine into a fools paradise.
Now our Alchymister having received the offering of money, goes on his holy
pilgrimage, even to the next Village, and there consumes it every penny, among
Bawds and Knaves: and at his return, he told Balbine that he had great hope of
good luck in this business; the holy Virgin gave such favorable countenance,
and such attentive ear unto his prayers and vows. But after this, when there
had been great travel bestowed, and not a dram of Gold yielded not levied from
the forge; Balbine began to expostulate, and reason somewhat roundly with the
cousening fellow; who still said he never had such filthy luck in all his life
before, and could not devise by what means it came to pass, that things went
so overthwartly. But after much debating betwixt them upon the matter, at
length it came into Balbine's head to ask him if he had not foreslowed to hear
Mass, or to stay his hours; which if he had done, nothing could prosper under
his hand. Without doubt (said the cousener) you have hit the nail on the head.
Wretch that I am! I remember once or twice being at a long feast, I omitted to
say mine Ave Mary after dinner. So so (said Balline) no marvel then that a
matter of such importance has had so ill success. The Alchymister promised to
do penance; as to hear twelve masses for two that he had foreslowed; and for
every Ave overslipped, to render and repeat twelve to our Lady.

Soon after this, when all our Alchymisters money was spent, and also his
shifts failed how to come by any more, he came home with this device, as a man
wonderfully frayed and amazed, piteously crying and lamenting his misfortune.
Whereat Balbine being astonished, desired to know the cause of his complaint.
Oh (said the Alchymister) the Courtiers have spied our enterprise; Here the
Alchymister utters a notorious point of cousening knavery.
so as I for my part look for nothing but present imprisonment. Whereat Balbine
was abashed, because it was flat felony to go about that matter, without
special license. But (quoth the Alchymister) I fear not to be put to death, I
would it would fall out so; marry I fear lest I should be shut up in some
castle or tower, and there shall be forced to tug about this work and broil in
this business all the days of my life.

Now the matter being brought to consultation, Balbine, because he was cunning
in the art of Rhetoric, and altogether ignorant in law, beat his brains in
devising how the accusation might be answered, and the danger avoided. Alas
(said the Alchymister) you trouble your self all in vain, for you see the crime
is not to be denied, it is so generally bruited in Court: neither can the fact
be defended, because of the manifest law published against it. To be short,
when many ways were devised, and diverse excuses alleged by Balbine, and no
sure ground to stand on for their security; at length the Alchymister having
present want and need of money, framed his speech in this sort; Sir, said he to
Balbine, we use flow counsel, and yet the matter requires haste. Mark how this
Alchymister goes from one degree of cousenage to another.
For I think they are coming for me ere this time to hale me away to prison;
and I see no remedy but to die valiantly in the cause. In good faith (said
Balbine) I know not what to say to the matter. No more do I, (said the
Alchymister) but that I see these Courtiers are hungry for Money, and so much
the readier to be corrupted and framed to silence. And though it be a hard
matter to give those rakehells till they be satisfied, yet I see no better
counsel or advice at this time. No more could Balbine, who gave him thirty
ducats of gold to stop their mouths, who in an honest cause would rather have
given so many teeth out of his head, than one of those pieces out of his pouch.
This coin had the Alchymister, who for all his pretenses and gay gloses was in
no danger, other than for lack of Money to lose his Leman or Concubine, whose
acquaintance he would not give over, nor forbear her company, for all the goods
that he was able to get, were it by never so much indirect dealing, and
unlawful means.

Well, yet now once again does Balbine newly furnish the forge, a prayer being
made before to our Lady to bless the enterprise, and all things being provided
and made ready according to the Alchymisters own a^king, and all necessaries
largely ministered after his own liking; a whole year being likewise now
consumed about this bootless business, and nothing brought to pass; there fell
out a strange chance, and that by this means ensuing, as you shall hear.

Our Alchymister forsooth used a little extraordinary lewd company with a
Courtiers wife, whiles he was from home, who suspecting the matter, came to the
door unlooked for, and called to come in, threatening them that he would break
open the doors upon them. Some present device (you see) was now requisite, and
there was none other to be had, but such as the opportunity offered; to wit, to
leap out at a back window; which he did, not without great hazard, and some
hurt. But this was soon blazed abroad, so as it came to Balbine's ear, The
mildest and softest nature is commonly soonest abused.
who showed in countenance that he had heard thereof, though he said nothing.
But the Alchymister knew him to be devout, and somewhat superstitious; and such
men are easy to be entreated to forgive, how great soever the fault be, and
devised to open the matter in manner and form following.

O Lord (says he before Balbine) how unfortunately goes our business forward!
I marvel what should be the cause. Whereat Balbine, being one otherwise that
seemed to have vowed silence, took occasion to speak, saying; It is not hard to
know the impediment and stop hereof: for it is sin that hinders this matter;
which is not to be dealt in but with pure hands. Whereat the Alchymister fell
upon his knees, beating his breast, and lamentably cried, saying; Oh master
Balbine, you say most truly, it is sin that has done us all this displeasure;
not your sin Sir, but mine own, own good master Balbine. Neither will I be
ashamed to discover my filthiness unto you, as unto a most holy and ghostly
father. The infirmity of the flesh had overcome me, and the Devil had caught me
in his snare. Oh wretch that I am! Of a Priest I am become an Adulterer.
Howbeit, the Money that erst while was sent to our Lady, was not utterly lost;
for if she had not been, I had certainly been slain. For the good man of the
house brake open the door, and the window was less than I could get out
thereat. And in that extremity of danger it came into my mind to fall down
prostrate to the Virgin; beseeching her (if our gift were acceptable in her
sight) that she would, En immensa cavi spirant mendacia folles.
in consideration thereof, assist me with her help. And to be short, I ran to
the window, and found it big enough to leap out at. Which thing Balbine did not
only believe to be true, but in respect thereof forgave him, religiously
admonishing him to show himself thankful to that pitiful and blessed Lady.

Now once more again is made a new supply of money, and mutual promise made to
handle this divine matter hence forward purely and holily. To be short, after a
great number of such parts played by the Alchymister, one of Balbine's
acquaintance espied him, that knew him from his childehood to be but a
cousening Merchant; and told Balbine what he was, and that he would handle him
in the end, Balbine is ashamed that he should be overshot and overseen in a
case of flat cousenage.
even as he had used many others; for a knave he ever was, and so he would
prove. But what did Balbine, think you? Did he complain of this counterfeit, or
cause him to be punished? No, but he gave him money in his purse, and sent him
away; desiring him, of all courtesy, not to blab abroad how he had cousened
him. And as for the knave Alchimister, he need not care who knew it, or what
came of it; for he had nothing in goods or fame to be lost. And as for his
cunning in Alchimistry, he had as much as an Ass. By this discourse Erasmus
would give us to note, that under the golden name of Alchymistry there lies
lurking no small calamity; wherein there be such several shifts and suits of
rare subtleties and deceits, as that not only wealthy men are thereby many
times improverished, and that with the sweet allurement of this art, through
their own covetousness, as also by the flattering baits of hoped gain: but even
wise and learned men hereby are shamefully overshot, partly for want of due
experience in the wiles and subtleties of the world, and partly through the
softness and pliableness of their good nature, which cousening Knaves do
commonly abuse to their own lust and commodity, and to the others utter undoing.

CHAP. VI.
The Opinion of diverse learned men touching the folly of Alchimistry.

The substances of things are not transmutable.
ALbert in his book of Minerals reports, that Avicenna treating of
Alchymistry, says; Let the dealers in Alchymistry understand, that the very
nature and kind of things cannot be changed, but rather made by art to
resemble the same in show and likeness; so that they are not the very things
indeed, but seem so to be in appearance; as castles and towers do seem to be
built in the clouds, whereas the representations there showed, are nothing else
but the resemblance of certain objects below, caused in some bright and clear
cloud, when the air is void of thickness and grosseness. A sufficient proof
hereof may be the looking-glass. And we see (says he) that yellow or orrenge
color laid upon red, seems to be gold. Franc. Petrarch. lib. de remed. utr.
fort. 1. cap. 10.
Francis Petrarch treating of the same matter in form of a dialogue,
introduces a disciple of his, who fansied the foresaid fond profession and
practice, saying; I hope for prosperous success in Alchymistry. Petrach
answers him; It is a wonder from whence that hope should spring, since the
fruit thereof did never yet fall to thy lot, nor yet at any time chance to any
other; as the report commonly goes, that many rich men, by this vanity and
madness have been brought to beggary, whiles they have wearied themselves
therewith, weakened their bodies, and wasted their wealth in trying the means to
make gold engender gold. I hope for ^old according to the workmans promise,
says the disciple. He that has promised thee gold, will run away with thy
gold, and thou never the wiser, says Petrarch. He promises me great good,
says the disciple. He will first serve his own turn, and relieve his private
poverty, says Petrarch; for Alchymisters are a beggarly kind of people, who
though they confess themselves bare and needy, yet will they make others rich
and wealthy; as though others poverty did more molest and pity them then their
own. These be the words of Petrarch, a man of great learning and no less
experience; who as in his time he saw the fraudulent fetches of this compassing
craft; so has there been no age, since the same has been broached, wherein
some few wise men have not smelt out the evil meaning of these shifting
merchants, and bewrayed them to the world.

An ancient writer of a religious Order, Goschalcus Boll. ordinis S. August. in
suo praeceptorlo, fol. 244. col. b, c.d. and 1.
who lived above a thousand years since, discovering the diversities of thefts,
after a long enumeration, in Alchymisters, whom he calls Falsificantes
metallorum and mineralium, witches and counterfeiters of metals and minerals;
and sets them as deep in the degree of thieves, as any of the rest, whose
injurious dealings are brought to open arraignment. Ii is demanded (says he)
why the Art of Alchymistry does never prove that in effect, which it pretends
in precept and promise. The answer is ready; that if by art gold might be made,
then were it behoovefull to know the manner and proceeding of nature in
generation; since art is said to imitate and counterfeit nature. Again, No
certain ground in the art Alchymisticall.
it is because of the lameness and unperfectness of philosophy, specially
concerning minerals: no such manner of proceeding being set down by consent and
agreement of Philosophers in writing, touching the true and undoubted effect of
the same. Whereupon one supposes that gold is made of one kind of stuff this
way, others of another kind of stuff that way. And therefore it is a chance if
any attain to the artificial applying of the actives and passives of gold and
silver. Moreover, it is certain, that quicksilver and sulphur are the materials
(as they term them) of metals, and the agent is hear, which directs; howbeit
it is very hard to know the due proportion of the mixture of the materials;
which proportion the generation of gold does require. And admit that by chance
they attain to such proportion; yet can they not readily resume or do it again
in another work, because of the hidden diversities of materials, and the
uncertainty of applying the actives and passives.

The same ancient author concluding against this vain art, says, Idem ibid.
that of all Christian Lawmakers it is forbidden, and in no case tolerable in
any Commonwealth; first because it presumes to forge Idols for covetousness,
which are gold and silver: whereupon, says the Apostle, Covetousness is
Idol-worship; secondly, for that (as Aristotle says) Coin should be scant and
rare, Avaritia idol^rum cultus.
that it might be dear; but the same would wax vile, and of small estimation,
if by the art of Alchimistry gold and Silver might be multiplied; thirdly,
because (as experience proves) wise men are thereby bewitched, cousenors
increased, princes abused, the rich impoverished, the poor beggered, the
multitude made fools, and yet the craft and craftmasters (oh madness!)
credited. Thus far he. Whereby in few words he discountenanceth that
profession, not by the imaginations of his own brain, but by manifold
circumstances of manifest proof. Touching the which practice I think enough
has been spoken, and more a great deal than needed; since so plain and
demonstrable a matter requires the less travel in confutation.

CHAP. VII.
That vain and deceitful hope is a great cause why men are seduced by this
alluring art, and that their labors therein are bootless, etc.

HItherto somewhat at large I have detected the knavery of the art
Alchymisticall, partly by reasons, and partly by examples: so that the thing it
self may no less appear to the judicial eye of the considerers, than the bones
and sinews of a body anatomized, to the corporal eye of the beholders. Now it
shall not be amiss nor impertinent, to treat somewhat of the nature of that
vain and fruitless hope, which induces and draws men forward as it were with
cords, not only to the admiration, but also to the approbation of the same: in
such sort, that some are compelled ruefully to sing (as one in old time did, Of
vain hope.
whether in token of good or ill luck, I do not now well remember) Spes and
fortuna valete; Hope and good hap adieu.

No marvel then though Alchymistry allure men so sweetly, and entangle them in
snares of folly; since the baits which it uses is the hope of gold, the hunger
whereof is by the poet termed Sacra, which some do English, Holy; not
understanding that it is rather to be interpreted, J. Call. in comment upon
Deuteronomy. sermon. 127. pa. 781. col. 1. number 40.
Cursed or detestable, by the figure Acyron, when a word of an unproper
signification is cast in a clause as it were a cloud: or by the figure
Antiphrasis, when a word imports a contrary meaning to that which it commonly
has. For what reason can there be, that the hunger of gold should be counted
holy, the same having (as depending upon it) so many millions of mischiefs and
miseries: as treasons, thefts, adulteries, manslaughters, truce-breakings,
perjuries, cousenages, and a great troop of other enormities, A maxim.
which were here too long to rehearse. And if the nature of every action be
determinable by the end thereof, then cannot this hunger be holy, but rather
accursed, which pulls after it as it were with iron chains such a band of
outrages and enormities, as of all their labor, charge, care, and cost, etc.
they have nothing else left them in lieu of lucre, but only some few burned
bricks of a ruinous furnace, a peck or two of ashes, and such light stuff,
which they are forced peradventure in fine to sell when beggary has arrested
and laid his mace on their shoulders. As for all their gold, it is resolved In
primam materiam, or rather In levem quendam fumulum, into a light smoke or
fumigation of vapors, than the which nothing is more light, nothing less
substantial, spirits only excepted, out of whose nature and number these are
not to be exempted.

CHAP. VIII.
A continuation of the former matter, with a conclusion of the same.

Erasmus in coloq. cui titulus Coavivium fabulosum.
THat which I have declared before, by reasons, examples, and authorities, I
will now prosecute and conclude by one other example; to the end that we, as
others in former ages, may judge of vain hope accordingly, and be no less
circumspect to avoid the inconveniences thereof, than Ulysses was wary to
escape the incantations of Circes that old transforming witch. Which example of
mine is drawn from Lewis the French King, the eleventh of that name, who being
on a time at Burgundy, fell acquainted by occasion of hunting with one Conon, a
clownish but yet an honest and hearty good fellow. For Princes and great men
delight much in such plain clubhutchens. The King oftentimes, by means of his
game, used the Countrymans house for his refreshing; and as noble men sometimes
take pleasure in homely and course things, so the King did not refuse to eat
turnips and rape roots in Conons cottage. Shortly after King Jews being at his
palace, void of troubles and disquietness, Conons wife willed him to repair to
the Court, to show himself to the King, to put him in mind of the old
entertainment which he had at his house, and to present him with some of the
fairest and choicest rape roots that she had in store. Conon seemed loath,
alleging that he should but lose his labor: for princes (says he) have other
matters in hand, than to intend to think of such trifling courtesies. But
Conons wife overcame him, and persuaded him in the end, A hungry belly will not
be bridled.
choosing a certain number of the best and goodlyest Rape-roots that she had:
which when she had given her husband to carry to the Court, he set forward on
his journey a good trudging pace. But Conon being tempted by the way, partly
with the desire of eating, and partly with the toothsomness of the meat which
he bare, that by little and little he devoured up all the roots saving one,
which was a very fair and a goodly great one indeed. Now when Conon was come to
the Court, it was his luck to stand in such a place, as the King passing by,
and spying the man, did well remember him, and commanded that he should be
brought in. Conon very cheerily followed his guide hard at the heels, and no
sooner saw the King, but bluntly coming to him, reached out his hand, and
presented the gift to his Majesty. The King received it with more cheerfulness
than it was offered, and bad one of those that stood next him, to take it, and
lay it up among those things which he esteemed most, and had in greatest
account. Then he bad Conon to dine with him, and after dinner gave the
Countryman great thanks for his Rape-root; who made no bones of the matter,
but boldly made challenge and claim to the Kings promised courtesy. A Princely
Largess.
Whereupon the King commanded, that a thousand Crowns should be given him in
recompense for his Root.

The report of this bountifulness was spread in short space over all the Kings
household: insomuch as one of his Courtiers, in hope of the like or a larger
reward, gave the King a very proper Gennet. Whose drift the King perceiving,
and judging that his former liberality to the Clown, provoked the Courtier to
this covetous attempt, took the Gennet very thankfully: and calling some of his
Noble men about him, began to consult with them, what mends he might make his
servant for his Horse. Whiles this was a doing, the Courtier conceived passing
good hope of some Princely Largess, calculating and casting his Cards in this
manner: If his Majesty rewarded a silly Clown so bountifully for a simple
Rape-root, what will he do to a jolly Courtier for a gallant Gennet? Whiles the
King was debating the matter, and one said this, another that, and the Courtier
traveled all the while in vain hope, at last says the King, even upon the
sudden; I have now bethought me what to bestow upon him: and calling one of his
Nobles to him, whispered him in the ear, Sic ars deluditur art.
and willed him to fetch a thing, which he should find in his Chamber wrapped
up in silk. The Root is brought wrapped in silk, which the King with his own
hands gave to the Courtier, using these words therewithal, that he sped well,
insomuch as it was his good hap to have for his Horse a Jewel that cost him a
thousand Crowns. The Courtier was a glad man, and at his departing longed to be
looking what it was, and his heart danced for joy. In due time therefore he
unwrapped the silk (a sort of his fellow-Courtiers flocking about him to
testify his good luck) and having unfolded it, he found therein a dry and
withered Rape-root. Which spectacle though it set the standers about in a loud
laughter, yet it quailed the Courtiers courage, and cast him into a shrewd fit
of pensiveness. Thus was the confidence of this Courtier turned to vanity, who
upon hope of good speed was willing to part from his Horse for had I wist.

This story does teach us, The moral of the premises.
into what folly and madness vain hope may drive undiscreet and unexpert men.
And therefore no marvel though Alchymisters dream and dote after double
advantage, faring like Aesops dog, who greedily coveting to catch and snatch at
the shadow of the flesh which he carried in his mouth over the water, lost both
the one and the other: as they do their increase and their principal. But to
break off abruptly from this matter, and to leave these hypocrites (for why may
they not be so named, who as Homer, speaking in detestation of such rakehells,
says very divinely and truly; Homer.
Odi etenim seu claustra Erebi, quicunque loquuntur
Ore aliud, tacitoque aliud sub pectore claudunt:
Englished by Abraham Fleming; I hate even as the gates of Hell,
Those that one thing with tongue do tell,
And notwithstanding closely keep
Another thing in heart full deep.)


To leave these hypocrites (I say) in the dregs of their dishonesty, I will
conclude against them peremptorily, that they, with the rabble above rehearsed,
and the rout hereafter to be mentioned, are rank Couseners, and consuming
Cankers to the Commonwealth, and therefore to be rejected and excommunicated
from the fellowship of all honest men. For now their art, which turns all
kind of metals that they can come by into mist and smoke, is no less apparent
to the world, than the clear sunny rays at noonsted; insomuch that I may say
with the Poet; Aul. Persius, satyr. 3.
Hos populus ridet, multumque torosa juventus
Ingeminat tremulos naso crispante cachinnos:
Englished by Abraham Fleming; All people laugh them now to scorn,
each strong and lusty blood
Redoubleth quavering laughters loud
with wrinkled nose a good.


So that, if any be so addicted unto the vanity of the art Alchymisticall (as
every fool will have his fancy) and that (beside so many experimented examples
of diverse, whose wealth has vanished like a vapor, whiles they have been over
rash in the practice hereof) this discourse will not move to desist from such
extreme dotage, I say to him or them, and that aptly, Idem ibid.
-- dicitque facitque quod ipse
Non sani esse hominis non sanus juret Orestes:
Englished by Abraham Fleming; He says and does that every thing,
which mad Orestes might
With Oath aver became a man
bereft of reason right.


BOOK XV.
CHAP. I.
Of Magical Circles, and the reason of their Institution.

MAgitians, and the more learned sort of Conjurers, Imaginary Circles.
make use of Circles in various manners, and to various intentions. First, when
convenience serves not, as to time or place that a real Circle should be
delineated, they frame an imaginary Circle, by means of Incantations and
Consecrations, without either Knife, Pensil, or Compasses, circumscribing nine
foot of ground round about them, which they pretend to sanctify with words and
Ceremonies, spattering their Holy Water all about so far as the said Limit
extends; and with a form of Consecration following, do alter the property of
the ground, that from common (as they say) it becomes sanctified, and made fit
for Magical uses.

How to consecrate an imaginary Circle.
LEt the Exorcist, being clothed with a black Garment, reaching to his knee,
The form of Consecration.
and under that a white Robe of fine Linen that falls unto his ankles, fix
himself in the midst of that place where he intends to perform his
Conjurations: And throwing his old Shoes about ten yards from the place, let
him put on his, consecrated shoes of russet Leather with a Cross cut on the
top of each shoe. Then with his Magical Wand, which must be a new hazel-stick,
about two yards of length, he must stretch forth his arm to all the four Winds
thrice, turning himself round at every Wind, and saying all that while with
fervency:

I who am the servant of the Highest, do by the virtue of his Holy Name
Immanuel, sanctify unto my self the circumference of nine foot round about
me,. from the East, Glaurah; from the West, Garron; from the North, Cabon; from
the South, Berith; which ground I take for my proper defense from all malignant
spirits, that they may have no power over my soul or body, nor come beyond
these Limitations, but answer truly being summoned, without daring to
transgress their bounds: Worrh. worrah. harcot. Gambalon..

Which Ceremonies being performed, The time for Conjurations.
the place so sanctified is equivalent to any real Circle whatsoever. And in
the composition of any Circle for Magical feats, the fittest time is the
brightest Moonlight, or when storms of lightning, wind, or thunder, are
raging through the air; because at such times the infernal Spirits are nearer
unto the earth, and can more easily hear the Invocations of the Exorcist.

As for the places of Magical Circles, they are to be chosen melancholy, The
places for Circles.
doleful, dark and lonely; either in Woods or Deserts, or in a place where
three ways meet, or amongst ruins of Castles, Abbeys, Monasteries, etc. or
upon the Seashore when the Moon shines clear, or else in some large Parlour
hung with black, and the floor covered with the same, with doors and windows
closely shut, and Waxen Candles lighted. But if the Conjuration be for the
Ghost of one deceased, the fittest places to that purpose are places of the
slain, Woods where any have killed themselves, Churchyards, Burying-Vaults,
etc. As also for all forts of Spirits, the places of their abode ought to be
chosen, when they are called; as, Pits, Caves, and hollow places, for
Subterranean Spirits: The tops of Turrets, for Aerial Spirits: Ships and Rocks
of the Sea, for Spirits of the Water: Woods and Mountains for Faries, Nymphs,
and Satyrs; following the like order with rall the rest.

And as the places where, so the manner how the Circles are to be drawn, ought
to be perfectly known. The form of a Circle.
First, for Infernal Spirits, let a Circle nine foot over be made with black,
and within the same another Circle half a foot distant, leaving half a foot of
both these Circles open for the Magitian and his assistant to enter in: And
betwixt these Circles round about, write all the holy Names of God, with
Crosses and Triangles at every Name; making also a larger triangle at one side
of the Circle without on this manner with the names of the Trinity at the seven
corners, viz. Yehowah, Ruah Redesh, Immanuel, written in the little Circles.
triangle with circles at angles

The reason of Circles.
The reason that Magitians give for Circles and their Institution, is, That so
much ground being blessed and consecrated by holy Words, has a secret force to
expel all evil Spirits from the bounds thereof; and being sprinkled with holy
water, which has been blessed by the Master, the ground is purified from all
uncleanness; besides the holy Names of God written all about, whose force is
very powerful; so that no wicked Spirit has the ability to break through into
the Circle after the Master and Scholar are entered, and have closed up the
gap, by reason of the antipathy they possess to these Mystical Names. And the
reason of the Triangle is, that if the Spirit be not easily brought to speak
the truth, they may by the Exorcist be conjured to enter the same, where by
virtue of the names of the Sacred Trinity, they can speak nothing but what is
true and right.

But if Astral Spirits as Faries, Nymphs, and Ghosts of men, be called upon,
the Circle must be made with Chalk, without any Triangles; in the place whereof
the Magical Character of that Element to which they belong, must be described
at the end of every Name.

As for Spirits of the Air, Water, Fire. ^ Woods, Caves, Mountains. ^ Mines,
Desolate Buildings. ^

CHAP. II.
How to raise up the Ghost of one that has hanged himself.

THis experiment must be put in practice while the Carcass hangs; and therefore
the Exorcist must seek out for the straightest hazel wand that he can find, to
the top whereof he must bind the head of an Owl, with a bundle of St. John's
Wort, or Millies Perforatum: this done, he must be informed of some miserable
creature that has strangled himself in some Wood or Desert place (which they
seldom miss to do) and while the Carcass hangs, the Magitian must betake
himself to the aforesaid place, at 12 a clock at night, and begin his
Conjurations in this following manner.

First, stretch forth the consecrated Wand toward the four corners of the
World, saying, By the mysteries of the deep, by the flames of Banal, The
ceremonies of Necromancy.
by the power of the East, and the silence of the night, by the holy rites of
Hecate, I conjure and exorcize thee thou distressed Spirit, to present thy self
here, and reveal unto me the cause of thy Calamity, why thou did offer
violence to thy own liege life, where thou art now in being, and where thou will hereafter be.

Then gently smiting the Carcass nine times with the rod, say, I conjure thee
thou spirit of this N. deceased, to answer my demands that I am to propound
unto thee, as thou ever hopest for the rest of the holy ones, and the ease of
all thy misery; by the blood of Jesu which he shed for thy soul, I conjure and
bind thee to utter unto me what I shall ask thee.

Then cutting down the Carcass from the tree, lay his head toward the East,
and in the space that this following Conjuration is repeating, set a
Chasing-dish of fire at his right hand, into which power a little Wine, some
Mastick, and Gum Aromatic, and lastly a viol full of the sweetest Oil, having
also a pair of Bellows, and some unkindled Charcole to make the fire burn
bright at the instant of the Carcass's rising. The Conjuration is this:

I conjure thee thou spirit of N. that thou do immediately enter into thy
ancient body again, and answer to my demands, by the virtue of the holy
resurrection, The Conjuration.
and by the posture of the body of the Savior of the world, I charge thee, I
conjure thee, I command thee on pain of the torments and wandering of thrice
seven years, which I by the power of sacred Magic rites, have power to inflict
upon thee; by thy sighs and groans, I conjure thee to utter thy voice; so help
thee God and the prayers of the holy Church. Amen.

Which Conjuration being thrice repeated while the fire is burning with Mastick
and Gum Aromatic, the body will begin to rise, and at last will stand upright
before the Exorcist, answering with a faint and hollow voice, the questions
proposed unto it. Why it strangled it self; where its dwelling is; The answers
of the Spirit.
what its food and life is; how long it will be ere it enter into rest, and by
what means the Magitian may assist it to come to rest: Also, of the treasures
of this world, where they are hid: Moreover, it can answer very punctually of
the places where Ghosts reside, and how to communicate with them; reaching the
nature of Astral Spirits and hellish beings, so far as its capacity reaches.

All which when the Ghost has fully answered, How to lay the Spirit.
the Magitian ought out of commiseration and reverence to the deceased, to use
what means can possibly be used for the procuring rest unto the Spirit. To
which effect he must dig a grave, and filling the same half full of quick Lime,
and a little Salt and common Sulphur, put the Carcass naked into the same;
which experiment, next to the burning of the body into ashes, is of great force
to quiet and end the disturbance of the Astral Spirit.

But if the Ghost with whom the Exorcist consulteth, be of one that dyed the
common death, and obtained the ceremonies of burial, the body must be dig'd out
of the ground at 12 a clock at night; and the Magician must have a companion
with him, who bears a torch in his left hand, and smiting the Corpse thrice
with the consecrated rod, the Exorcist must turn himself to all the four winds,
saying:

Another form.
By the virtue of the holy resurrection, and the torments of the damned, I
conjure and exorcize thee spirit of N. deceased, to answer my liege demands,
being obedient unto these sacred ceremonies on pain of everlasting torment and
distress: Then let him say, Berald, Beroald, Balbin gab gabor agaba; Arise,
arise, I charge and command thee.

After which Ceremonies, let him ask what he desires and he shall be answered.

A Caution for the Exorcist.
But as a faithful caution to the practicer of this Art, I shall conclude with
this, That if the Magician, by the Constellation and Position of the Stars at
his nativity, be in the predicament of those that follow Magical Arts, it will
be very dangerous to try this experiment for fear of sudden death ensuing,
which the Ghosts of men deceased, can easily effect upon those whose nativities
lead them to Conjuration: And which sudden and violent death, the Stars do
always promise to such as they mark with the Stigma of Magicians.

CHAP. III.
How to raise up the three Spirits, Paymon, Bathin, and Barma: And what
wonderful things may be effected through their assistance.

THe Spirit Paymon is of the power of the Air, the sixteenth in the rank of
Thrones, subordinate to Corban and Marbas.

Their order.
Bathin is of a deeper reach in the source of the fire, the second after
Lucifers familiar, and has not his fellow for agility and affableness, in the
whole Infernal Hierarchy.

Barma is a mighty Potentate of the order of Seraphims, whom 20 Legions of
Infernal Spirits do obey; his property is to metamorphose the Magician or whom
he pleases, and transport into foreign Countries.

These three Spirits, though of various ranks and orders, are all of one power,
ability and nature, and the form of raising them all is one. Therefore the
Magician that desires to consult with either of these Spirits, must appoint a
night in the waxing of the Moon, wherein the Planet Mercury reigns, at 11 a
clock at night; not joining to himself any companion, because this particular
action will admit of none; and for the space of four days before the appointed
night, he ought every morning to shave his beard, The Utensils to be used.
and shift himself with clean linen, providing beforehand the two Seals of the
Earth, drawn exactly upon parchment, having also his consecrated Girdle ready
of a black Cats skin with the hair on, and these names written on the inner
side of the Girdle: Ya, Ya Aie, Aaie Elibra Elohim Saday Yah Adonay tuo robore
Cinctus Sum.

Upon his Shoes must be written Tetragrammaton, with crosses round about, and
his garment must be a Priestly Robe of black, with a Friars hood, and a Bible
in his hand.

When all these things are prepared, and the Exorcist has lived chastely, and
retired until the appointed time: Let him have ready a fair Parlour or Cellar,
with every chink and window closed; then lighting seven Candles, and drawing a
double Circle with his own blood, The Circle.
which he must have ready before hand: let him divide the Circle into seven
parts, and write these seven names at the seven divisions, setting at every
Name a Candle lighted in a brazen Candlestick in the space betwixt the Circles:
The names are these, Cados Escherie fire Anick Sabbac ^ Sagun Aba Abalidoth ^

When the Candles are lighted, let the Magician being in the midst of the
Circle, and supporting himself with two drawn Swords, say with a low and
submissive voice; The Consecration.
I do by the virtue of these seven holy Names which are the Lamps of the living
God, Consecrate unto my use this enclosed Circle, and exterminate out of, it
all evil Spirits, and their power; that beyond the limit of their
circumference they enter not on pain of torments to be doubled, Yah, Agion,
Helior, Heligah, Amen.

When this Consecration is ended, Let him sprinkle the Circle with consecrated
Water, and with a Chasing-dish of Charcole, perfume it with Frankincense and
Cinnamon, laying the Swords a cross the Circle, and standing over them; then
whilst the fumigation burns, let him begin to call these three Spirits in
this following manner:

I Conjure and Exorcize you the three Gentle and Noble Spirits of the power of
the North, by the great and dreadful name of Peolphan your King, The
Conjuration.
and by the silence of the night, and by the holy rites of Magic, and by the
number of the Infernal Legions, I adjure and invocate you; That without delay
ye present your selves here before the Northern quarter of this Circle, all of
you, or any one of you, and answer my demands by the force of the words
contained in this Book. This must be thrice repeated, and at the third
repetition, the three Spirits will either all appear, or one by lot, if the
other be already somewhere else employed; The Appearances.
at their appearance they will send before them three fleet Hounds opening
after a Hare, who will run round the Circle for the space of half a quarter of
an hour; after that more hounds will come in, and after all, a little ugly
Aethiop, who will take the Hare from their ravenous mouths, and together with
the Hounds vanish; at last the Magician shall hear the winding of a Hunts-mans
horn, and a Herald on Horseback shall come galloping with three Hunters behind
upon black Horses, who will compass the Circle seven times, and at the seventh
time will make a stand at the Northern quarter, dismissing the Herald that came
up before them, and turning their Horses toward the Magician, will stand all a
breast before him, saying; Gil pragma burthon machatan dennah; to which the
Magician must boldly answer; Beral, Beroald, Corath Kermiel; By the sacred
rites of Magic ye are welcome ye three famous Hunters of the North, and my
command is, that by the power of these Ceremonies ye be obedient and faithful
unto my summons, unto which I conjure you by the holy Names of God, Yah, Gian,
Soter, Yah, Jehovah, Immanuel, Letragrammaton, Yah, Adonay, Sabray, Seraphin;
Binding and obliging you to answer plainly, faithfully and truly, by all these
holy names, and by the awful name of your mighty King Peolphon.

Which when the Magician has said, the middle Hunter named Paymon, will
answer, Gil pragma burthon machatan dennah, The Condition.
We are the three mighty Hunters of the North, in the Kingdom of Fiacim, and
are come hither by the sound of thy Conjurations, to which we swear by him that
lives to yield obedience, if Judas that betrayed him be not named.

Then shall the Magician swear, By him that lives, The Magicians Oath.
and by all that is contained in this holy Book, I swear unto you this night,
and by the mysteries of this action, I swear unto you this night, and by the
bonds of darkness I swear unto you this night, That Judas the Traitor shall not
be named, and that blood shall not be offered unto you, but that truce and
equal terms shall be observed betwixt us. Which being said, the Spirits will
bow down their heads to the Horses crests, and then alighting down will call
their Herald to withdraw their Horses; which done, The Magician may begin to
bargain with all, or any one of them, as a familiar invisibly to attend him, or
to answer all difficulties that he propounds: Then may he begin to ask them
of the frame of the World, and the Kingdoms therein contained, which are
unknown unto Geographers: He may also be informed of all Physical processes and
operations; also how to go invisible and fly through the airy Region: They can
likewise give unto him the powerful Girdle of Victory, teaching him how to
compose and consecrate the same, The girdle of Victory.
which has the force, being tied about him, to make him conquer Armies, and
all men whatsoever. Besides, there is not any King or Emperor throughout the
world; but if he desires it, they will engage to bring him the most precious of
their Jewels and Riches in twenty four hours; discovering also unto him the way
of finding hidden treasures and the richest mines.

The form of discharge.
And after the Conjurer has fulfilled his desires, he shall dismiss the
aforesaid Spirits in this following form.

I charge you ye three officious Spirits to depart unto the place whence ye
were called, without injury to either man or Beast, leaving the tender Corn
untouched, and the seed unbruised; I dismiss you, and license you to go back
until I call you, and to be always ready at my desire, especially thou nimble
Bathin, whom I have chosen to attend me, that thou be always ready when I ring
a little Bell to present thy self without any Magical Ceremonies performed; and
so depart ye from hence, and peace be betwixt you and us, In the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen.

When the Magician has repeated this last form of dismission, he will hear
immediately a horn winding, after which the Herald with the jet black Horses,
and the three Spirits will mount upon them, compassing the Circle seven times,
with the Herald winding his horn before them, and at every Candle they will bow
toward the Horses crest, till coming toward the Northern quarter, they will
with great obeisance seem to march away out through the solid wall as through a
City gate.

CHAP. IV.
How to Consecrate all manner of Circles, Fumigations, Fire, Magical Garments,
and Utensills.

What things are to be consecrated.
COnsecrations are related either to the person or the thing consecrated. The
person is the Magitian himself, whose consecration consists in Abstinence,
Temperance, and holy Garments. The things consecrated are the Oil, the Fire,
the Water. The Fumigations consisting of oriental Gums and Spices; the magical
Sword, Pensils, Pens and Compasses, the measuring Rule and waxen Tapers, the
Pentacles, Periapts, Lamins, and Sigils, Vests, Caps, and Priestly Garments;
these are the materials to be consecrated.

Pentacles.
The sacred Pentacles are as signs and charms for the binding of Evil Demons,
consisting of Characters and Names of the Superior order of the good Spirits
opposite unto those evils ones whom the Magitian is about to Invocate: And of
sacred Pictures, Images, and Mathematical Figures adapted to the names and
natures of separated Substances whither good or evil. Now the form of
Consecrating such Magical Pentacles is to name the virtue of the holy Names and
Figures, their Antiquity and Institution with the intention of the Consecration
purifying the Pentacle by consecrated fire, and waving the same over the flames
thereof.

Utensils.
When the Exorcist would consecrate Places or Utensils, Fire or Water for
magical uses, he must repeat the Consecration or Dedication of Solomon the King
at the building of the Temple, the Vision of Moses at the Bush, and the Spirit
of the Lord on the tops of the Mulberry-trees, repeating also the Sacrifice of
it self being kindled; the Fire upon Sodom, and the Water of Eternal Life:
Wherein the Magitian must still remember to speak of the seven golden
Candlesticks, and Ezekiels Wheels, closing the Consecration with the deep and
mysterious Names of God and holy Demons.

Instruments.
When particular Instruments are to be sanctified, the Magitian must sprinkle
the same with consecrated Water, and fumigate them with fumigations, anoint
them with consecrated Oil: And lastly, Seal them with holy Characters; after
all which is performed, an Oration or Prayer must follow, relating the
particulars of the Consecration with Petitions to that Power in whose Name and
Authority the Ceremony is performed.

And in like manner shall thou consecrate and sanctify every Utensil
whatsoever, by Sprinklings, Fumigations, Unctions, Seals, and Benedictions, How
to consecrate.
commemorating and reiterating the sanctifyings in the holy Scripture, of the
Tables of the Law delivered to Moses; of the two Testaments in the New
Covenant, of the holy Prophets in their Mothers wombs, and of Aholiah, and
Aholibah, whom the Spirit of God inspired to frame all sorts of curious
workmanship for the Tabernacle. This is the sum of Consecrationn.

CHAP. V.
Treating more practically of the Consecration of Circles, Fires, Garments, and
Fumigations.

IN the Construction of Magical Circles, the hour, day, or night, Circles how
to be made.
and season of the year, and the Constellation are to be considered; as also
what sort of Spirits are to be called; and to what Region, Air, or Climate they
belong: Therefore this method is to be followed for the more orderly and
certain proceeding therein. First, a Circle nine foot over must be drawn,
within which another Circle three inches from the outermost must be also made,
in the Center whereof the name of the hour, the Angel of the hour, the Seal of
the Angel, the Angel of the day predominant, wherein the work is undertaken.
Note, these attributes are to be inscribed betwixt the Circles round about with
Alpha at the beginning, and Omega at the close.

When the Circle is composed, it must be sprinkled with holy Water, Fumigations.
while the Magician says, Wash me O Lord, and I shall be whiter then Snow: And
as for the Fumigations over them, this Benediction must be said; O God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, bless these thy subservient creatures, that they may
multiply the force of their excellent odors, to hinder evil spirits and
phantasms from entering the Circle, through our Lord. Amen.

An Exorcism for the fire.
The Exorcist ought to have an earthen Censer, wherein to preserve the fire for
magical uses, and the expiations and fumigations, Fire.
whose consecration is on this manner.

By him that created Heaven and Earth, and is the God and Lord of all, I
exorcize and sanctify thee thou creature of Fire, that immediately thou banish
every phantasm from thee, so that thou prove not hurtful in any kind: Which I
beseech thee O Lord to confirm by sanctifying and making pure this creature of
fire, that it may be blessed and consecrate to the honor of thy holy Name.
Amen.

At the putting on the Garments,
Let the Magician say, By the figurative mystery of this holy Stole or
Vestment, Garments.
I will cloth me with the armor of Salvation in the strength of the highest.
Ancor, Amacor, Amides, Lheodonias, Anitor. That my desired end may be effected
through thy strength Adonai, to whom the praise and glory will for ever belong.

Which Ceremonies being finished, Practice.
the Exorcist shall proceed to the practical part of Invocation and Conjuration
of all degrees of Spirits, having every utensil and appendix in readiness for
the performance, and proceeding according to the method in these following
Chapters.

CHAP. VI.
How to raise and exorcize all sorts of Spirits belonging to the Airy Region.

What sort of Garments must be used.
THe Garment which the Exorcist is clothed withal at the performance of this
action, ought according to the opinions of the chiefest Magicians, to be a
Priestly Robe, which if it can no where be procured, may be a neat and cleanly
linen Vest, with the holy Pentacle fastened thereunto upon Parchment made of a
Kids skin, over which an Invocation must be said, and then the Pentacle must be
sprinkled with holy Water. At the putting on the Magical Garment, this Prayer
must be repeated: By thy holy power Adonai Sabbath, And by the power and merit
of thine Angels and Archangels, and by the virtue of holy Church, which thou
have sanctified, do I cloth me with this consecrated Garment, that what I am
to practice may take effect through thy Name who art for ever and ever.

The manner of Conjuring.
Now as for the time of operation, and the manner thereof, The Instructions
before set down, are sufficient to direct the Exorcist; only the Acter and his
Scholar must be mindful in the way, as they go toward the place of
Conjuration, to reiterate the sacred forms of Consecrations, Prayers, and
Invocations, the one bearing an Earthen Vessel with consecrated fire, and the
other the Magical Sword, the Book and Garments, till approaching nigh the place
where the Circle is to be drawn, they must then proceeed to compose it after
the aforesaid manner. And at last Exorcize the Spirits on this following manner:

The form.
Seeing God has given us the power to bruise the Serpents head, and command
the Prince of Darkness, much more to bear rule over every airy Spirit:
Therefore by his strong and mighty Name Jehovah do I conjure you, (naming the
Spirits), and by his secret commands delivered to Moses on the Mount, and by
his holy Name Tetragrammaton, and by all his wonderful Names and Attributes,
Sadai, Ollon, Emillah, Athanatos, Paracletos, etc. That ye do here immediately
appear before this Circle, in humane form, and not terrible or of monstrous
shape, on pain of eternal misery that abides you, unless you speedily fulfill my
commands, Bathar, Baltar, Archim, Anakim, Nakun. Amen.

When the Exorcist has finished this Conjuration, he and his companion shall
continue constantly turning themselves to the East, West, North and South,
saying, with their Caps in their hands, Gerson, Anek, Nephaton, Basannah,
Cabon; The Apparitions.
and within a little space they will behold various apparitions upon the
ground, and in the air, with various habits, shapes, and instruments; after
that, he shall perceive a troop of armed men with threatening carriage appear
before the Circle, who after they are conjured to leave off their phantasms,
will at last present themselves before the Exorcist in humane form.

Then the Master must be mindful to take the consecrated Sword, and the cup of
Wine into his hands; the Wine he shall pour into the fire, and the Sword he
shall brandish in his right arm, being girded about with a Scarlet Ribbon;
after this the Magician shall say, Gahire, Gephna, Anephexaton; then the
Spirits will begin to bow unto the Exorcist, saying, We are ready to fulfill thy
pleasure.

So that when the Magician has brought the Spirits to this length, he may ask
what ever he desires, and they will answer him, provided the questions belong
to that order whereof they are.

What these Spirits can do.
Now the properties wherein they excel, are these; They can give the gift of
Invisibility, and the foreknowledge of the change of weather; they can teach
the Exorcist how to excite Storms and Tempests, and how to calm them again;
they can bring news in an hours space of the success of any Battle, Seidge, or
Navy, how far off soever; they can also teach the language of Birds, and how
to fly through the air invisibly.

'Twas through the assistance of these airy Spirits, that Charchiancungi, An
example of their power.
the Tartarian Emperor did give the Chinois such a desperate rout near the
year 1646. for it is reported, that he had constantly in his presence two
Magicians, named Ran and Sionam, who perceived every motion of the China's
Army, and had intelligence by these Spirits of the Emperors private Counsels
and Consultations.

And it is credibly reported by Magicians, that wonderful things may be with
facility effected through the assistance of these aforesaid Spirits, so that
the Exorcist must be very affable unto them, and gently dismiss them (when he
is satisfied) in this following manner;

Seeing ye have willingly answered all our Interrogations and desires, How to
dismiss them.
we give you leave and license, In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
to depart unto your place, and be ever ready to attend our call; Depart, I say,
in peace, and peace be confirmed betwixt us and you. Amen..

After all these Ceremonies are finished, the Spirits will begin to depart,
making obeisance as they go; and then the Master must demolish the Circle, and
taking up all the Utensils repeat the Pater Noster as they are going away from
the place of Conjuration.

CHAP. VII.
How to obtain the familiarity of the Genius or Good Angel, and cause him to
appear.

ACcording to the former Instructions in conjuring Spirits, How to consult with
Familiars or Genii.
we must proceed to consult with the Familiars or Genii; first, after the
manner prescribed by Magicians, the Exorcist must inform himself of the name of
his good Genius, which he may find in the Rules of Travius and Philermus; as
also, what Character and Pentacle, or Lamin, belongs to every Genius. After
this is done, Let him compose an earnest Prayer unto the said Genius, which he
must repeat thrice every morning for seven days before the Invocation.

The Magician must also perfectly be informed to what Hierarchy or Order the
Genius belongs, and how he is dignified in respect of his Superiors and
Inferiors; for this form of Conjuration belongs not to the Infernal or Astral
Kingdom, but to the Celestial Hierarchy; and therefore great gravity and
sanctity is herein required, besides the due observation of all the other
injunctions, until the time approach wherein he puts the Conjuration in
execution.

When the day is come wherein the Magician would invocate his proper Genius, he
must enter into a private closet, having a little Table and Silk Carpet, and
two Waxen Candles lighted; as also a Crystal Stone shaped triangularly about
the quantity of an Apple, which Stone must be fixed upon a frame in the center
of the Table: And then proceeding with great devotion to Invocation, he must
thrice repeat the former Prayer, concluding the same with Pater Noster, etc.
and a Missale de Spiritu Sancto.

Then he must begin to Consecrate the Candles, Carpet, Table and Crystal;
sprinkling the same with his own blood, and saying, I do by the power of the
holy Names Aglaon, Eloi, Eloi, Sabbathon, Anephexaton, Iah, Agian, Iah, The
form of Consecration. The Prayer.
Jehovah, Immanuel, Archon Archonton, Sadai, Sadai, Ieovaschah, etc. sanctify
and consecrate these holy utensils to the performance of this holy work, In the
Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Amen.

Which done, the Exorcist must say this following Prayer with his face toward
the East, and kneeling with his back to the consecrated Table.

O thou blessed Phanael my Angel Guardian, vouchsafe to descend with thy holy
Influence and presence into this spotless Crystal, that I may behold thy glory
and enjoy thy society O thou who art higher then the fourth Heaven, and know
the secrets of Elanel. Thou that ridest upon the wings of the wind, and art
mighty and potent in thy celestial and super-lunary motion, do thou descend and
be present I pray thee, and desire thee, if ever I have merited thy society, or
if my actions and intentions be pure and sanctified before thee, bring thy
external presence hither, and converse with thy submissive Pupil, by the tears
of Saints and Songs of Angels, In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
who are one God for ever and ever.

This Prayer being first repeated toward the East, must be afterward said
toward all the four winds thrice. And next the 70. Psalm repeated out of a
Bible that has been consecrated in like manner as the rest of the utensils,
which ceremonies being seriously performed; the Magician must arise from his
knees, and sit before the Crystal bare-headed with the consecrated Bible in his
hand, and the Waxen Candles newly lighted, waiting patiently and internally for
the coming and appearance of the Genius.

Signs of the appearance.
Now about a quarter of an hour before the Spirit come. There will appear great
variety of apparitions and sights within the glass; as first a beaten road or
tract, and travelers, men and women marching silently along; next there will
Rivers, Wells, Mountains and Seas appear: after that a Shepherd upon a pleasant
hill feeding a goodly flock of Sheep, and the Sun shining brightly at his going
down; and lastly, innumerable shows of Birds and Beasts, Monsters and strange
appearances, noises, glances, and affrightments, which shows will all at last
vanish at the appearance of the Genius.

The Appearance.
And then the Genius will present it self amidst the Crystal, in the very same
apparel and similitude that the person himself is in, giving instructions unto
the Exorcist how to lead his life and rectify his doings.

But especially (which is the proper work of every Genius) he will touch his
heart and open his senses and understanding, so that by this means, he may
attain to the knowledge of every Art and Science, which before the opening of
his Intellect was locked and kept secret from him.

After which, the Genius will be familiar in the Stone at the Prayer of the
Magician.

CHAP. VIII.
A form of Conjuring Luridan the Familiar, otherwise called Belelah.

The nature of Luridan.
LVridan is a Familiar Domestic Spirit of the North, who is now become servant
to Balkin, Lord and King of the Northern Mountains, he calls himself the Astral
Genius of Pomonia, an Island amongst the Orcades beyond Scotland. But he is not
particularly resident there; for in the days of Solomon and David, he was in
Jerusalem, or Salem, being then under the name of Belilah; after that he came
over with Julius Caesar, and remained some hundred of years in Cambria, or
Wales, instructing their Prophetical Poets in British Rhimes, being then
surnamed Urthin-Wadd Elgin, from thence he betook himself unto this Island,
Anno 1500. and continued there for 50 years, after which he resigned his
Dominion to Balkin, and has continued ever since an attendant unto this Prince.

His Office.
He is a Spirit of the Air in the order of Glauron, and is said to procreate as
mortals do; He is often sent by his Master upon errands to Lapland, Finland,
and Strik-finia; as also to the most Northern parts of Russia, bordering on the
Northern frozen Ocean: His office (being called by Magicians) is to demolish
strong holds of Enemies, destroying every night what they build the day before;
to extinguish fires, and make their Gunshot that it has no power to be
enkindled; for his nature is to be at enmity with fire: and under his Master
with many Legions he wageth continual wars with the fiery Spirits that inhabit
the Mountain Hecla in Ise-land, where they endeavor to extinguish these fiery
flames, and the inhabiting Spirits defend the flames from his Master and his
Legions.

In this contest they do often totally extirpate and destroy one another, The
Wars of Spirits.
killing and crushing when they meet in mighty and violent Troops in the Air
upon the Sea; and at such a time many of the fiery Spirits are destroyed, when
the Enemy has brought them off the Mountain to fight upon the water; on the
contrary, when the battle is on the Mountain it self, the Spirits of the Air
are often worsted, and then great mournings and doleful noises are heard both
in Iseland and Russia, and Norway for many days after.

But to proceed to the form of conjuring this aforesaid Spirits, The form of
the Circle and Ceremonies.
the Magician must draw a Circle in a Moonshine night in some solitary Valley;
the Circle must be 18 foot over, and another Circle a foot distance within the
same, being both drawn with chalk, and the Exorcist being girded about with two
Snakes skins tied together, and having many Snakes skins tied to his cap, and
hanging down before and behind, must also with Chalk draw the form of a fiery
Mountain at one side of the Circle on this manner; And round about the Mountain
these following names must be wrote, Glauron, Opotok, Balkin, Opotok, Vrthin,
Opotok, Swaknar, Nalah, Opotok, The Consecration of the Mountain.
. After the Mountain is drawn, he must consecrate the same in these following
words, Ofron, Anephexaton, Baron Barathron, Nah halge tour heela, In the Name
of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, Amen.. After the Magician has consecrated
the Mountain, he must write betwixt the circles these following words; Vrthin
Malc hii Kiddal Kattton Agla Glaura Bashemo Yhowah Elohim Immannel Amen. fire
fire fire. Which done, he must begin to Invocate the Spirit on this following
manner.

O ye Powers of the East, Athanaton; of the West, Orgon; of the South, The
Conjuration.
Boralim; of the North, Glauron; I charge and command you by the dreadful Names
here mentioned, and the Consecration of this terrible Mountain, to present your
selves one of every sort before this Circle by the power of Immanuel, and his
holy Name. After this has with fervency been thrice repeated, the Exorcist
will hear great noises of Swords and fighting, Horses neighing, The Apparitions.
and Trumpets sounding, and at last there will appear four little Dwarfs or
Pigmies naked before the Circle, their speech will be ancient Irish; which
afterward being confined to a Triangle, they will interpret; the substance
thereof will be from whence they came last, and what wonderful things they can
do; Then the Magician must ask them, if they know one Luridan a familiar; they
will answer Hamah ni trulloh Balkin, he is Secretary or servant unto Balkin,
and after the Exorcist has charged them to bring the said Luridan unto him,
Luridan.
they will immediately bring him like a little Dwarf with a crooked nose, and
present him before the Magician in the triangle; then the Magician shall bind
and tie him with the bond of obligation, and with his own blood, without any
contract of conditions to be performed, that he will attend him constantly at
his thrice repeating Luridan, Luridan, Luridan, And be ever ready to go whether
he will, to the Turks, or to the uttermost parts of the Earth, which he can do
in an hour, and destroy all their Magazines.

The Compact.
After the Magician has so bound him, he shall receive from the Spirit a scrole
written in this manner; ^ which is the Indenture to serve him for a year and a
day; and then the Magician shall dismiss him for that time in the form of
dismission.

CHAP. IX.
How to Conjure the Spirit Balkin the Master of Luridan.

AS in the former Chapter, the Exorcist is instructed to draw the form of the
Mountain Hecla within the circle, so in this form of Conjuration he must do the
same, adding these names to be written round the Mountain Mathiel; The names of
Olympic Angels.
Rahuniel, Seraphiel, Hyniel, Rayel, Fraciel. These are the names of Olympic
Angels, governing the North, and ruling over every airy Spirit that belongs
unto the Northern Climate; so that the authority of these names must be used in
the calling up of this Spirit, because he is a great Lord, and very lofty,
neither will he appear without strong and powerful Invocations.

Therefore the Magician must make upon Virgin Parchment the two Seals of the
Earth, and provide unto himself a Girdle made of a Bears skin with a rough side
next his body, and these names wrote round about in the outerside, Alpha
Coronzon, Yah, Laniah, Adonay Soncas Damael Angeli fortes pur pur Elibra,
Elohim Omega per flammam ignis per vitam Coronzon Amen.. Also he must provide a
black Priestly Robe to reach to his ankles, and a new Sword with Agla on the
one side, and On upon the other; having likewise been very continent and chaste
for three days before the execution of his design: and when the appointed night
approaches, he must take with him an earthen pan with fire therein, and a
little Viol with some of his own blood, as also some of the Gum or Rozin that
comes from the Firr-tree.

And coming to the appointed place in some solitary Valley, the circle must be
drawn with chalk, as the former, one circle within another, and these powerful
names in the circumference, Otheos on Panthon Breshit Hashamaim, Vaharetz
Vahayah Lohu va Bohu magnus es tu ben Elohim qui super alas ventorum equitaris.

This Circumscription is accounted amongst Magicians of all the most powerful
and prevalent.

After this the Circle, Mountain, Fire, Turpentine, Girdle, Garments, Sword and
Blood must be consecrated according to the foregoing forms of Consecration,
adding also this to the end of the consecration.

Mighty art thou O Adonay, Elohim, Ya, Ya, Aie, Aie, Acimoy, who have created
the light of the day, and the darkness of the night, unto whom every knee bows
in Heaven and on Earth, who have created the Lohu and the Bohu, that is stupor
or numbness in a thing to be admired, and mighty are thy magnificient Angels
Damael and Guael, whose influence can make the winds to bow, and every airy
Spirit stoop; Let thy right hand sanctify these consecrated utensils,
exterminating every noxious thing from their bodies, and the circumference of
this Circle. Amen. Calerna, Shalom, Shalom, Agla on Sassur, Lafrac, Angeli
fortes. In Nomine Patris, Filii, and Spiritus Sancti. Amen, Amen, Amen. After
that, he shall sweep the circle gently with a Foxes tail, and sprinkle the same
round with his blood, dipping also the Sword, or anointing it with the same,
and brandishing the same in his right hand, he shall begin to conjure the
Spirit on this following manner:

I Exorcize and Conjure thee thou great and powerful Balkin, Lord of Glauron,
Lord of Luridan, and of fifteen hundred Legions, Lord of the Northern
Mountains, and of every Beast that dwells thereon by the holy and wonderful
Names of the Almighty Jehovah, Athanato Aionos Dominus sempiternus Aletheios
Saday Jehovah, Kedesh, El gabor Deus fortissimus Anaphexaton, Amorule, Ameron
Panthon Craton Muridon Iah, Jehovah, Elohim pentasseron trinus et unus I
Exorcize and Conjure, I Invocate and Command thee thou aforesaid Spirit, by the
powers of Angels and Archangels, Cherubim and Seraphim, by the mighty Prince
Coronzon, by the blood of Abel, by the righteousness of Seth, and the Prayers
of Noah, by the voices of Thunder and dreadful day of Judgment; by all these
powerful and royal words abovesaid, that without delay or malicious intent,
thou do come before me here at the circumference of this consecrated Circle, to
answer my proposals and desires without any manner of terrible form either of
thy self, or attendants; but only obediently, fairly, and with good intent, to
present thy self before me, this Circle being my defense, through his power who
is Almighty, and has sanctified the same, In the Name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost. Amen.

After the Magician has thrice repeated this Conjuration, Let him immediately
set the fire before him, and put the Rozin thereon to fumigate at the
appearance of the conjured Spirits, and at the instant of their appearance he
shall hold the Censer of fire in his left hand, and the Sword in his right,
still turning round as the Spirits do.

For in a little space after the Invocation is repeated, he shall hear the
noise of Thunders, and perceive before him in the Valley a mighty storm of
Lightning and Rain; after a while the same will cease, and an innumerable
company of Dwarfs or Pigmies will appear mounted upon Chamelions to march
toward the Circle surrounding the same.

Next comes Balkin with his Attendants; he will appear like the god Bacchus
upon a little Goat, and the rest that follow will march after him afoot.

As Soon as they come near the Circle, they will breath out of their mouths a
mist, or fog, which will even obscure the light of the Moon, and darken the
Magician, that he cannot behold them nor himself; yet let him not be
discomfited, or afraid, for that fog will be quickly over; and the Spirits will
run round the Circle after Balkin their Lord, who rides upon a Goat; they will
continue to surround the Circle, till the Magician begin the form of obligation
or binding their Leader or King in this form, with the Sword in his right hand,
the Fire and Rozin burning before him.

I conjure and bind thee Balkin, who art appeared before me, by the Father, by
the Son, and by the Holy Ghost, by all the holy Consecrations I have made, by
the powerful Names of Heaven, and of Earth, and of Hell, that I have used and
uttered in calling upon thee, by the Seals which thou here beholdest, and the
Sword which I present unto thee, by this sanctified Girdle, and all the
sanctified and potent things aforesaid, That here thou remain peaceably, and of
thy present shape before the Northern quarter of this Circle, without injury to
me in body, soul, or fortune; but on the contrary, to answer faithfully unto my
demands, and not hence to remove, till I have licenced thee to depart, In the
Name of the Father, Son, and holy Spirit. Amen.

When he is thus obliged, he will alight from his Goat, and cause his
Attendants to remove further into the Valley, then will he stand peaceably
before the Circle to answer the Magician.

After this the Magician shall begin to demand into his own possession a
Familiar to build or pull down any Castle or strong hold in a night; and that
this Familiar bring with him the Girdle of Conquest, or Victory, that the
Magician being girded with the same may overcome all enemies whatsoever,

And further, the Spirit is able to inform him of all questions concerning
Thunder and Lightning, the Motions of the Heavens, the Comets and Apparitions
in the air, Pestilence and Famine, noxious and malevolent blasts, as also of
the Inhabitants of the Northern Pole, and the wonders undiscovered throughout
the world.

Likewise if the Exorcist inquire concerning the habitations of starry Spirits,
he will readily answer him, describing their orders, food, life, and past-time
truly and exactly.

After the Magician has satisfied himself with inquiries, and curious
questions unto the Spirit, there will come from amongst the company a little
Spirit of a span long, like a little Ethiop, which the great King Balkin will
deliver unto the Exorcist to continue as a Familiar with him as long as his
life shall last. This familiar the possessor may name at it pleases him.

The three last, who had this Spirit into possession, were three Northern
Magicians, the first Honduros a Norwegian, who called it Philenar, and
commanded it at his pleasure with a little Bell.

After him Benno his eldest Son enjoyed the same under the same name.

And Swarkzar a Polonian Priest was the last who enjoyed it under the Name of
Muncula; all which names were imposed upon it, according to the pleasure of the
Masters; and therefore the naming of this familiar is left to the discretion of
the Exorcist.

Now when the Master has taken this familiar into his custody and service, the
Spirit Balkin will desire to depart, being wearied if the action continue
longer then an hour. Therefore the Magician must be careful to dismiss him in
this following form:

Because thou have diligently answered my demands, and been ready to come at my
first call, I do here license thee to depart unto thy proper place, without
injury or danger to man or Beast; depart, I say, and be ever ready at my call,
being duly exorcized and conjured by sacred Rites of Magic; I charge thee to
withdraw with quiet and peace; and peace be continued betwixt me and thee, In
the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen.

Then the Spirits company will begin to march about their Prince, and in a
formal Troop will march along the Valley, whilst the Magician repeateth Pater
Noster, etc. until the Spirits be quite out of sight and vanished.

This is a complete form of conjuring the aforesaid Spirit, according to the
Rules of Vaganostus the Norwegian.

CHAP. X.
The exposition of Iidoni, and where it is found, whereby the whole Art of
Conjuration is deciphered.

THis word Iidoni is derived of Iada, which properly signifies to know; it is
sometimes translated, Divinus, which is a Diviner or Soothsayer, as in Deuteronomy.
18. Levit. 20. sometimes Ariolus, which is one that also takes upon him to
foretell things to come, and is found Levit. 19. 2 King. 23. Isai. 19. To be
short, the opinion of them that are most skilful in the tongues, is, The large
signification of the word Iidoni.
that it comprehends all them, which take upon them to know all things part
and to come, and to give answers accordingly. It always follows the word Ob,
and in the Scriptures is not named severally from it, and differs little from
the same in sense, and do both concern Oracles uttered by Sririts, possessed
people, or Coseners. What will not Coseners or Witches take upon them to do?
Wherein will they profess ignorance? Ask them any question, they will undertake
to resolve you, even of that which none but God knows. And to bring their
purposes the better to pass, as also to win further credit unto the counterfeit
Art which they profess, they procure confederates, whereby they work Wonders.
And when they have either learning, eloquence, or nimbleness of hands to
accompany their confederacy, or rather knavery, then (forsooth) they pass the
degree of Witches, and entitle themselves to the name of Conjurors. And these
deal with no inferior causes: these fetch Devils out of Hell, Vide Philast.
Brix. Episc. haereseon catal. de Phitonissa.
and Angels out of Heaven; these raise up what bodies they list, though they
were dead, buried and rotten long before; and fetch souls out of Heaven or
Hell, with much more expedition than the Pope brings them out of Purgatory.
These I say (among the simple, and where they fear no law nor accusation) take
upon them also the raising of Tempests, and Earthquakes, and to do as much as
God himself can do. These are no small fools, they go not to work with a
baggage Toad, J. Wierus in Pseudomonarchia daemonum.
or a Cat, as witches do; but with a kind of Majesty, and with Authority they
call up by name, and have at their commandment Seventy and nine Principal and
Princely Devils, who have under them as their ministers, a great multitude of
Legions of petty Devils; as for example.

CHAP. XI.
An Inventary of the Names, Shapes, Powers, Govenment, and effects of Devils
and Spirits; of their several segniories and degrees; a strange discourse worth
the reading.

THeir first and principal King (which is of the power of the East) is called
Baell; who when he is conjured up, appears with three heads; Solomon's notes
of Conjuration. Baell.
the first like a Toad; the second like a Man; the third like a Cat. He
speaks with a hoarse voice; he makes a man go invisible; he has under his
obedience and rule Sixty and six Legions of Devils.

The first Duke under the power of the East, is named Agares; Agares.
he comes up mildly in the likeness of a fair old man, riding upon a
Crocodile, and carrying a Hawk on his fist; he teaches presently all manner of
tongues; he fetches back all such as run away, and makes them run that stand
still; he overthrows all Dignities supernatural and temporal; he makes
Earthquakes, and is of the order of Virtues, having under his regiment Thirty
one Legions.

Marbas.
Marbas, alias, Barbas is a great president, and appears in the form of a
mighty Lion; but at the commandment of a Conjuror comes up in the likeness of
a Man, and answers fully as touching any thing which is hidden or secret; he
brings diseases and cures them; he promoteth wisdom and the knowledge of
Mechanical Arts, or Handicrafts; he changes men into other shapes: and under
his presidency or Government are Thirty six Legions or Devils contained.

Amon.
Amon, or Aamon, is a great and mighty Marquess, and comes abroad in the
likeness of a Wolf, having a Serpents tail, spetting out and breathing flames
of fire; when he puts on the shape of a man, he shows out dogs teeth, and
a great head like to a mighty Raven; he is the strongest Prince of all other,
and understands all things past and to come; he procures favor, and
reconcileth both friends and foes, and rules Forty Legions of Devils.

Barbatos.
Barbatos, a great County or Earl, and also a Duke, he appears in Signo
sagittarii Sylvestris, with four Kings, which bring companies and great troops.
He understands the singing of Birds, the barking of Dogs, the lowing of
Bullocks, and the voice of all living creatures: He detecteth treasures hidden
by Magicians and Inchanters, and is of the order of virtues which in part bear
rule: he knows all things past and to come, and reconcileth friends and
powers, and governs Thirty Legions of Devils by his authority.

Buer.
Buer, is a great president, and is seen in this sign; he absolutely teaches
Philosophy moral and natural, and also Logic, and the virtue of Herbs: he
gives the best familiars; he can heal all Diseases, specially of men, and
reigns over Fifty Legions.

Gusoin.
Gusoin, is a great Duke and a strong, appearing in the form of a Xenophilus:
he answers all things, present, past, and to come, expounding all questions:
he reconcileth friendship, and distributeth honors and dignities, and rules
over Forty Legions of Devils.

Botis.
Botis, otherwise Otis, a great President and an Earl, he comes forth in the
shape of an ugly Viper, and if he put on humane shape, he shows great teeth,
and two horns, carrying a sharp sword in his hand: he gives answers of things
present, past and to come, and reconcileth friends and foes, ruling Sixty
Legions.

Bathin.
Bathin, sometimes called Mathim, a great Duke and a strong, he is seen in the
shape of a very strong man, with a Serpents tail, sitting on a pale horse,
understanding the virtues of herbs and precious stones, transferring men
suddenly from Country to Country, and rules Thirty Legions of Devils.

Purson.
Purson, alias Curson, a great King, he comes forth like a Man with a Lions
face, carrying a most cruel Viper, and riding on a Bear; and before him go
always trumpets: he knows things hidden, and can tell all things present,
past, and to come: he bewrays treasure: he can take a body either humane or
aerie, he answers truly of all things earthly and secret, of the divinity and
creation of the World, and brings forth the best familiars; and there obey
him Two and twenty Legions of Devils, partly of the order of Virtues, and
partly of the order of Thrones.

Eligor.
Eligor, alias Abigor, is a great Duke, and appears as a goodly Knight,
carrying a Lance, an Ensign, and a Scepter; he answers fully of things
hidden, and of Wars, and how Soldiers should meet: he knows things to come,
and procures the favor of Lords and Knights, governing Sixty Legions of
Devils.

Leraje.
Leraje, alias Oray, a great Marquess, showing himself in the likeness of a
gallant Archer, carrying a Bow and a Quiver: he is author of all battles: he
does putrify all such wounds as are made with Arrows by Archers, Quos optimos
objicit trilus dielus, and he has regiment over Thirty Legions.

Valefar,
Valefar, alias Malephar, is a strong Duke, comes forth in the shape of a
Lion, and the head of a thief: he is very familiar with them to whom he makes
himself acquainted, till he has brought them to the gallows, and rules Teu
Legions.

Morax, Morax.
alias Foraji, a great Earl and a President; he is seen like a Bull, and if he
take unto him a Man's face, he makes men wonderful cunning in Astronomy, and in
all the liberal Sciences; he gives good familiars and wise, knowing the power
and virtue of herbs and stones which are precious, and rules Thirty six
Legions.

Ipos, Ipos.
alias Ayporos, is a great Earl and a Prince, appearing in the shape of an
Angel, and yet indeed more obscure and filthy than a Lion, with a Lions head, a
Gooses feet, and a Hares tail; he knows things to come and past, he makes a
man witty, and bold, and has under his jurisdiction Thirty six Legions.

Naberius, Naberius.
alias Carberus, is a valiant Marquess, showing himself in the form of a Crow,
when he speaks with a hoarse voice; he makes a man amiable and cunning in
all Arts, and specially in Rhetoric; he procures the loss of Prelacies and
Dignities; Nineteen Legions hear and obey him.

Glasya Labolas, Glasya Labolas.
alias Caacrinolaas, or Caassimolar, is a great President, who comes forth
like a Dog, and has wings like a Griffin, he gives the knowledge of Arts, and
is the Captain of all Manslayers; he understands things present and to come;
he gains the minds and love of friends and foes; he makes a man go
invisible, and has the rule of Thirty six Legions.

Zepar, Zepar.
is a great Duke, appearing as a Soldier, inflaming Women with the love of
Men, and when he is hidden he changes their shape, until they may enjoy their
beloved; he also makes them barren, and Twenty six Legions are at his obey and
commandment.

Bileth, Bileth.
is a great King and a terrible, riding on a pale Horse, before whom go
Trumpets, and all kind of melodious Music. When he is called up by an
Exorcist, he appears rough and furious, to deceive him. Then let the Exocist
or Conjuror take heed to himself, and to allay his courage, let him hold a
hazel bat in his hand, wherewithal he must reach out toward the East and South,
and make a triangle without besides the Circle; but if he hold not out his hand
unto him, and he bid him come in, and he still refuse the bond or chain of
Spirits, let the Conjuror proceed to reading, and by and by he will submit
himself, and come in, and do whatsoever the Exorcist commands him, and he
shall be safe. If Bileth the King be more stubborn, and refuse to enter into
the Circle at the first call, and the Conjuror show himself fearful, or if he
have not the chain of Spirits, certainly he will never fear nor regard him
after: Also if the place be unapt for a triangle to be made without the Circle,
then set there a boll of Wine, and the Exorcist shall certainly know when he
comes out of his house, with his fellows, and that the aforesaid Bileth will
be his helper, his friend, and obedient unto him when he comes forth. And when
he comes, let the Exorcist receive him courteously, and glorify him in his
pride, and therefore he shall adore him as other Kings do, because he says
nothing without other Princes. Also, if he be cited by an Exorcist, always a
silver Ring of the middle finger of the left hand must be held against the
Exorcists face, as they do for Amaimon. Vide Amaimon.
And the dominion and power of so great a Prince, is not to be determined; for
there is none under the power and dominion of the Conjuror, but he that
detaineth both men and women in doting love, till the Exorcist has had his
pleasure. He is of the orders of Powers, hoping to return to the seventh
Throne, which is not altogether credible; and he rules Eighty five Legions.

Sitri, alias Bitru, is a great Prince, appearing with the face of a Leopard,
Sitri a baudy Devil.
and having wings as a Griffin: when he takes humane shape, he is very
beautiful; he inflameth a man with a woman's love, and also stirs up women to
love men; being commanded, he willingly detaineth secrets of Women, laughing at
them and mocking them, to make them luxuiously naked; and there obey him Sixty
Legions.

Paimon, Paimon.
is more obedient to Lucifer than any other Kings are. Lucifer is here to be
understood, he that was drowned in the depth of his knowledge: he would needs
be like God, and for his arrogance was thrown out into destruction, of whom it
is said, Ezekiel. 28.13.
Every precious stone is thy covering. Paimon is constrained by divine virtue
to stand before the Exorcist, where he puts on the likeness of a man: he
sits on a beast called a Dromedary, which is a swift runner, and wears a
glorious crown, and has an effeminate countenance: there goes before him an
host of men with Trumpets and well sounding Cymbals, and all Musical
Instruments. At the first he appears with a great cry and roaring, as in
Circulo Solomonis and in the Art is declared. And if this Paimon speak
sometimes that the Conjuror understand him not, let him not therefore be
dismayed. But when he has delivered him the first obligation, to observe his
desire, he must bid him also answer him distinctly and plainly to the questions
he shall ask you, of all Philosophy, Wisdom, and Science, and of all other
secret things. And if you will know the disposition of the World, and what the
earth is, or what holds it up in the water, or any other thing, or what is
Abyssus, or where the wind is, or from whence it comes, he will teach you
abundantly. Consecrations also, as well as Sacrifices, as otherwise may be
reckoned. He gives dignities and confirmations; he binds them that resist
him in his own chains, and subjecteth them to the Conjuror; he prepares good
familiars, Cautions for the Exorcist or Conjuror.
and has the understanding of all Arts. Note, that at the calling up of him,
the Exorcist must look toward the Northwest, because there is his house. When
he is called up, let the Exorcist receive him constantly without fear, let him
ask what questions or demands he list, and no doubt he shall obtain the same of
him. And the Exorcist must beware he forget not the Creator, for those things
that have been rehearsed before of Paimon; some say, he is of the order of
Dominions; others say, of the order of Cherubims. There follow him Two hundred
Legions, partly of the order of Angels, and partly of Potestates. Note, that if
Paimon be cited alone by an offering or sacrifice, two Kings follow him; to
wit, Bebal, and Abalam, and other Potentates; in his host are Twenty five
Legions, because the Spirits subject to them are not always with them, except
they be compelled to appear by divine virtue.

The fall of Belial.
Some say that the King Belial was created immediately after Lucifer, and
therefore they think, that he was father and seducer of them which fell being
of the orders: For he fell first among the worthier and wiser sort, which went
before Michael, and other heavenly Angels, which were lacking. Although Belial
went before all them that were thrown down to the earth, yet he went not before
them that tarryed in heaven. This Belial is constrained by Divine virtue, when
he takes Sacrifices, Gifts, and Offerings, that he again may give unto the
Offerers true answers. But he tarryeth not one hour in the truth, except he be
constrained by the Divine power, as is said. He takes the form of a beautiful
Angel, sitting in a fiery Chariot; he speaks fair, he distributeth
preferments of Senatorship, and the favor of friends, and excellent familiars:
He has rule over Eighty Legions, partly of the order of Virtues, partly of
Angels; he is found in the form of an Exorcist in the bonds of Spirits. The
Exorcist must consider, that this Belial does in every thing assist his
subjects. Solomon gathered all the Devils together in a brazen vessel.
If he will not submit himself, let the bond of Spirits be read: the Spirits
chain is sent for him, wherewith wise Solomon gathered them together with their
Legions in a brazen vessel, where were enclosed among all the Legions Seventy
two Kings, of whom the chief was Biloth, the second was Belial, the third
Asmoday, and above a thousand thousand Legions. Without doubt (I must confess)
I learned this of my master Solomon; but he told me not why he gathered them
together, and shut them up so; but I believe it was for the pride of this
Belial. Certain Negromancers do say, that Solomon being on a certain day
seduced by the craft of a certain Woman, inclined himself to pray before the
same idol, Belial by name; which is not credible. And therefore we must rather
think (as it is said) that they were gathered together in that great brazen
vessel for pride and arrogance, and thrown into a deep lake or hole in Babylon;
for wise Solomon did accomplish his works by the Divine power, which never
forsook him. And therefore we must think he worshipped not the image of Belial;
for then he could not have constrained the Spirits by Divine virtue: for this
Belial, with three Kings, were in the lake. The Babylonians disappointed of
their hope.
But the Babylonians wondering at the matter, supposed that they should find
therein a great quantity of treasure, and therefore with one consent went down
into the lake, and uncovered and brake the vessel, out of the which immediately
flew the Captain Devils, and were delivered to their former and proper places.
But this Belial entered into a certain image, and there gave answer to them that
offered and sacrificed unto him, as Toex, in his sentences reports, and the
Babylonians did worship and sacrifice thereunto.

Bune, Bune.
is a great and a strong Duke, he appears as a Dragon with three heads, the
third whereof is like a Man; he speaks with a Divine voice; he makes the
dead to change their place, and Devils to assemble upon the sepulchers of the
dead; he greatly inricheth a man, and makes him eloquent and wise, answers
truly to all demands, and Thirty Legions obey him.

Forneus, Forneus.
is a great Marquess, like unto a Monster of the Sea; he makes men wonderful
in Rhetoric; he adorneth a man with a good name, and the knowledge of tongues,
and makes one beloved as well of foes as friends; there are under him Twenty
nine Legions, of the order partly of Thrones, and partly of Angels.

Ronove, Ronove.
a Marquess and an Earl; he is resembled to a Monster; he brings singular
understanding in Rhetoric, faithful servants, knowledge of tongues, favor of
friends and foes, and Nineteen Legions obey him.

Berith, is a great and a terrible Duke, and has three Names; Berith a golden
Devil.
of some he is called Beal; of the Jews Berith; of Necromancers Bolfry; he
comes forth as a red Soldier, with red clothing, and upon a Horse of that
color, and a Crown on his head: he answers truly of things present, past,
and to come: he is compelled to a certain hour, through Divine virtue, by a
ring of Art Magic: he is also a liar; he turns all metals into gold; he
adorneth a man with Dignities, and confirms them; he speaks with a clear
and subtle voice, and Twenty six Legions are under him.

Astaroth, Astaroth.
is a great and a strong Duke, coming forth in the shape of a foul Angel,
sitting upon an infernal Dragon, and carrying on his right hand a Viper; he
answers truly to matters present, past, and to come, and also of all secrets;
he talks willingly of the creator of Spirits and their fall, and how they
sinned and fell; he says he fell not of his own accord: he makes a man
wonderful learned in the Liberal Sciences; he rules Forty Legions. Let every
Exorcist take heed, that he admit him not too near him, because of his stinking
breath: And therefore let the Conjuror hold near to his face a Magical Ring,
and that shall defend him.

For As, For As.
alias Forcas, is a great President, and is seen in the form of a strong Man,
and in humane shape, he understands the virtue of herbs and precious stones;
he teaches fully Logic, Ethics, and their parts; he makes a man Invisible,
Witty, Eloquent, and to live long; he recovereth things lost, and discovers
treasures, and is Lord over Twenty nine Legions.

Furfur, Furfur.
is a great Earl, appearing as an Heart, with a fiery tail, he lies in every
thing, except he be brougnt up within a triangle; being bidden he takes
Angelical form; he speaks with a hoarse voice, and willingly makes love
between man and wife; he raises Thunders, Lightnings, and Blasts. Where he is
commanded, he answers well, both of secret and also of Divine things, and
has rule and dominion over Twenty six Legions.

Marchosias, Marchosias.
is a great Marquess, he shows himself in the shape of a cruel she Wolf, with
Griffins wings, with a Serpents tail, and spetting I cannot tell what out of
his mouth. When he is in a man's shape, he is an excellent fighter; he answers
all questions truly; he is faithful in all the Conjurors business; he was of
the order of Dominations, under him are Thirty Legions: he hops after 1200
years to return to the seventh Throne, but he is deceived in that hope.

Malphas.
Malphas, is a great President, he is seen like a Crow, but being clothed with
humane Image, speaks with a hoarse voice; he builds houses and high towers
wonderfully, and quickly brings Artificers together; he throws down also
the enemies edifications; he helps to good familiars; he receives Sacrifices
willingly, but he deceives all the Sacrificers; there obey him Forty Legions.

Vepar.
Vepar, alias Separ, a great Duke and a strong; he is like a Mermaid; he is the
guide of the waters, and of ships laden with armor; he brings to pass (at
the commandment of his Master) that the Sea shall be rough and stormy, and
shall appear full of ships; he kills men in three days, with putrefying
their wounds, and produces Maggots into them; howbeit, they may be all healed
with diligence; he rules Twenty nine Legions.

Sabnack.
Sabnack, alias Salmack, is a great Marquess and a strong; he comes forth as
an armed Soldier with a Lions head, sitting on a pale Horse; he does
marvellously change man's form and favor; he builds high towers full of
weapons, and also Castles, and Cities; he inflicteth men thirty days with
wounds both rotten and full of maggots; at the Exorcists commandment, he
provideth good familiars, and has dominion over Fifty Legions.

Sidonay.
Sidonay, alias Asmoday, a great King, strong and mighty, he is seen with three
heads, whereof the first is like a Bull, the second like a man, the third like
a Ram, he has a Serpents tail; he belcheth flames out of his mouth; he has
feet like a Goose; he sits on an infernal Dragon, be carries a lance and a
flag in his hand, he goes before others which are under the power of Amaymon.
When the Conjuror exercises this office, let him be abroad, let him be wary
and standing on his feet; if his cap be on his head, he will cause all his
doings to be bewrayed, which if he do not, the Exorcist shall be deceived by
Amaymon in every thing. But so soon as he sees him in the form aforesaid, he
shall call him by his name, saying, Thou art Asmoday; he will not deny it, and
by and by he boweth down to the ground; he gives the ring of virtues, he
absolutely teaches Geometry, Arithmetic, Astronomy, and handicrafts. To all
demands he answers fully and truly; he makes a man invisible; he shows the
places where treasure lies, and gardeth it, if it be among the Legions of
Amaymon; he has under his power Seventy two Legions.

Gaap.
Gaap, alias Tap, a great President and a Prince, he appears in a meridional
sign, and when he takes humane shape, he is the guide of the four principal
Kings, as mighty as Bileth. There were certain Necromancers that offered
sacrifices and burnt offerings unto him; and to call him up, they exercised an
art, saying, Who was the first Necromancer.
that Solomon the wise made it, which is false: for it was rather Cham, the son
of Noah, who after the flood began first to invocate wicked Spirits. He
invocated Bileth, and made an Art in his name, and a book which is known to
many Mathematitians. There were burnt offerings and sacrifices made, and gifts
given, and much wickedness wrought by the Exorcist, who mingleth therewithal
the holy Names of God, the which in that Art are everywhere expressed. Marry
there is an Epistle of those names written by Solomon, as also write Helias
Aierosolymitanus and Helisaeus. It is to be noted, that if any Exorcist have
the Art of Bileth, and cannot make him stand before him, nor see him, I may not
bewray how, and declare the means to contain him, because it is an abomination,
and for that I have learned nothing from Solomon of his dignity and office. But
yet I will not hide this, to wit, that he makes a man wonderful in Philosophy
and all the Liberal Sciences; he makes love, hatred, insensibility,
consecration, and consecration of those things that are belonging unto the
domination of Amaymon, and delivers familiars out of the possession of other
Conjurors, answering truly and perfectly of things present, past, and to come;
and transferreth men most speedily into other Nations; he rules Sixty six
Legions, and was of the order of Potestates.

Shax.
Shax, alias Scox, is a dark and great Marquess, like unto a Stork, with a
hoarse and subtle voice, he does marvellously take away the sight, hearing, and
understanding of any man, at the commandment of the Conjuror; he takes away
money out of every Kings house, and carries it back after 1200 years, if he be
commanded; he is a horse-stealer; he is thought to be faithful in all
commandments; and although he promise to be obedient to the Conjuror in all
things, yet he is not so, he is a liar, except he be brought into a triangle,
and there he speaks divinely, and tells of things that are hidden, and not
kept of wicked Spirits; he promises good familiars, which are accepted if they
be not deceivers; he has Thirty Legions.

Procel, Procel.
is a great and strong Duke, appearing in the shape of an Angel, but speaks
darkly of things hidden; he teaches Geometry, and the Liberal Arts; he makes
great noises, and causes the waters to roar, where are none; he warmeth
waters, and distempereth baths at certain times, as the Exorcist appoints
him; he was of the order of Potestates, and has Forty eight Legions under his
power.

Furcas, Furcas.
is a Knight, and comes forth in the similitude of a cruel Man, with a long
beard and a hoary head; she sits on a pale horse, carrying in his hand a
sharp weapon; he perfectly teaches practick Philosophy, Rhetoric, Logic,
Astronomy, Chiromancy, Pyromancy, and their parts: there obey him Twenty
Legions.

Murmur, Murmur.
is a great Duke and an Earl, appearing in the shape of a Soldier, riding on a
Griffin, with a Dukes crown on his head; there go before him two of his
Ministers, with great trumpets; he teaches Philosophy absolutely, he
constrains souls to come before the Exorcist, to answer what he shall ask
them; he was of the order partly of Thrones, and partly of Angels, and rules
Thirty Legions.

Caim, Caim.
is a great President, taking the form of a Thrush; but when he puts on man's
shape, he answers in burning ashes, carrying in his hand a most sharp sword;
he makes the best disputers; he gives men the understanding of all birds, of
the lowing of bullocks, and barking of Dogs, and also of the sound and noise of
waters; he answers best of things to come; he was of the order of Angels, and
rules Thirty Legions.

Raum, Raum.
or Raim, is a great Earl, he is seen as a Crow, but when he puts on humane
shape, at the commandment of the Exorcist, he steals wonderfully out of the
Kings house, and carries it whether he is assigned; he destroys Cities, and
has great despite unto dignities; he knows things present, past, and to
come, and reconcileth friends and foes; he was of the order of Thrones, and
governs Thirty Legions.

Halphas, Halphas.
is a great Earl, and comes abroad like a Stork, with a hoarse voice, he
notably builds up Towns full of ammunition and weapons, he sends men of war
to places appointed, and has under him Twenty six Legions.

Focalor, Focalor.
is a great Duke, comes forth as a man, with wings like a Griffin, he kills
men, and drowneth them in the waters, and overturneth ships of war, commanding
and ruling both Winds and Seas. And let the Conjuror note, that if he bid him
hurt no man, he willingly consents thereto: he hops after 1000 years to
return to the seventh Throne, but he is deceived; he has Three Legions.

Vine, Vine.
is great King and an Earl, he shows himself as a Lion, riding a black Horse,
and carries a Viper in his hand; he gladly builds large Towers, he throws
down stone walls, and makes waters rough. At the commandment of the Exorcist,
he answers of things hidden, of Witches, and of things present, past, and to
come.

Bifrons, Bifrons.
is seen in the similitude of a Monster, when he takes the image of man; he
makes one wonderful cunning in Astrology, absolutely declaring the mansions of
the Planets; he does the like in Geometry, and other admeasurements; he
perfectly understands the strength and virtue of herbs, precious stones, and
woods; he changes dead bodies from place to place; he seems to light candles
upon the sepulchers of the dead, and has under him Twenty six Legions.

Gamigin.
Gamigin, is a great Marquess, and is seen in the form of a little horse; when
he takes humane shape, he speaks with a hoarse voice, disputing of all
Liberal Sciences; he brings also to pass, that the souls which are drowned in
the Sea, or which dwell in Purgatory (which is called Cariagra, that is,
affliction of souls) shall take airy bodies, and evidently appear and answer to
interrogatories at the Conjurors commandment; he tarryeth with the Exorcist,
until he have accomplished his desire, and has Thirty Legions under him.

Zagan.
Zagan, is a great King and a President, he comes abroad like a Bull, with
Griffins wings; but when he takes humane shape, he makes men witty, he
turns all metals into the coin of that dominion, and turns water into wine,
and wine into water; he also turns blood into wine, and wine into blood, and
a fool into a wise man; he is head of Thirty three Legions.

Orias.
Orias, is a great Marquess, and is seen as a Lion, riding on a strong horse,
with a Serpents tail, and carries in his right hand two great Serpents
hissing; he knows the mansion of Planets, and perfectly teaches the virtues
of the Stars; he transformeth men, he gives Dignities, Prelacies and
Confirmations, and also the favor of friends and foes, and has under him
Thirty Legions.

Valac.
Valac, is a great President, and comes abroad with Angels wings like a boy
riding on a two-headed Dragon, he perfectly answers of treasures hidden, and
where Serpents may be seen, which he delivers into the Conjurors hands, void
of any force or strength, and has dominion over Thirty Legions of Devils.

Gemory.
Gemory, a strong and mighty Duke, he appears like a fair woman, with a
Duchess crownet about her middle, riding on a Camel; he answers well and
truly of things present, past and to come, and of treasure hid, and where it
lies; he procures the love of women, especially of maids, has Twenty six
Legions.

Decarabia.
Decarabia, or Carabia, he comes like a *, and knows the force of herbs and
precious stones, and makes all birds fly before the exorcist, and to tarry
with him as though they were tame, and that they shall drink and sing as their
manner is, and has Thirty Legions.

Amduscias.
Amduscias, a great and a strong Duke, he comes forth as an Unicorn, when he
stands before his Master in humane shape, being commanded, he easily brings
to pass, that Trumpets and all Musical Instruments may be heard and not seen;
and also that trees shall bend and incline, according to the Conjurors will; he
is excellent among familiars, and has Twenty nine Legions.

Andras.
Andras, is a great Marquess, and is seen in an Angels shape, with a head like
a black night Raven, riding upon a black and a very strong Wolf, flowrishing
with a sharp sword in his hand; he can kill the Master, the Servant, and all
Assistants; he is author of discords, and rules Thirty Legions.

Andrealphus.
Andrealphus, is a great Marquess, appearing as a Peacock, he raises great
noises, and in humane shape perfectly teaches Geometry, and all things
belonging to Admeasurements; he makes a man to be a subtle Disputer, and
cunning in Astronomy, and transformeth a man into the likeness of a bird, and
there are under him Thirty Legions.

Ose.
Ose, is a great President, and comes forth like a Leopard, and counterfeiting
to be a Man, he makes one cunning in the Liberal Sciences; he answers truly
of divine and secret things; he transformeth a Man's shape, and brings a man
to that madness, that he thinks himself to be that which he is not; as he
that is a King or a Pope, or that he wears a Crown on his head, Duratque id
regnum ad horam.

Aim.
Aim, or Haborim, is a great Duke and a strong, he comes forth with three
heads, the first like a Serpent, the second like a man having two *, the third
like a Cat; he rides on a Viper, carrying in his hand a light fire brand, with
the flame whereof Castles and Cities are fired; he makes one witty every kind
of way; he answers truly of privy matters, and reigns over Twenty six
Legions.

Orobas, Orobus.
is a great Prince, he comes forth like a Horse, but when he puts on him a
man's idol, he talks of Divine virtue, he gives true answers of things
present, past and to come, and of the divinity, and of the creation; he
deciveth none, nor suffers any to be tempted, he gives Dignities and
Prelacies, and the favor of friends and foes, and has rule over Twenty
Legions.

Vapula, Vapula.
is a great Duke and a strong, he is seen like a Lion with Griffins wings; he
makes a man subtle and wonderful in Handicrafts, Philosophy, and in Sciences
contained in books, and is ruler over Thirty six Legions.

Cimeries, Cimeries.
is a great Marquess and a strong, ruling in the parts of Africa; he teaches
perfectly Grammar, Logic, and Rhetoric, he discovers treasures and things
hidden; he brings to pass, that a man shall seem with expedition to be turned
into a Soldier; he rides upon a great black Horse, and rules Twenty Legions.

Amy, Amy.
is a great President, and appears in a flame of fire, but having taken man's
shape, he makes one mavelous in Astrology, and in all the liberal Sciences;
he procures excellent familiars; he bewrays treasures preserved by Spirits;
he has the government of Thirty six Legions; he is partly of the order of
Angels, partly of Potestates; he hops after a thousand two hundred years to
return to the seventh Throne: which is not credible.

Flauros is a strong Duke, Flauros.
is seen in the form of a terrible strong Leopard, in humane shape he shows a
terrible countenance, and fiery eyes; he answers truly and fully of things
present, past, and to come; if he be in a triangle, he lies in all things, and
deceives in other things, and beguileth in other businesses; he gladly talks
of Divinity, and of the creation of the World, and of the fall; he is
constrained by Divine virtue, and so are all Devils and Spirits, to burn and
destroy all the Conjurors adversaries. And if he be commanded, he suffers the
Conjuror not to be tempted, and he has Legions under him.

Balam, Balam.
is a great and a terrible King, he comes forth with three heads, the first of
a Bull, the second of a Man, the third of a Ram; he has a Serpents tail, and
flaming eyes, riding upon a furious Bear, and carrying a Hawk on his fist; he
speaks with a hoarse voice, answering perfectly of things present, past, and
to come; he makes man invisible and wise; he governs Forty Legions, and was
of the order of Dominions.

Allocer, Allocer.
is a strong Duke and a great, he comes forth like a Soldier, riding on a
great Horse; he has a Lions face, very red, and with flaming eyes, he speaks
with a big voice, he makes a man wonderful in Astronomy, and in all the
liberal Sciences, he brings good familiars, and rules Thirty six Legions.

Saleos, Saleos.
is a great Earl, he appears as a gallant Soldier, riding on a Crocodile,
and wears a Dukes crown, peaceable, etc.

Vuall, Vuall.
is a great Duke and a strong, he is seen as a great and terrible Dromedary,
but in humane form, he sounds out in a base voice the Egyptian tongue. This
man, above all other, procures especial love of Women, and knows things
present, past, and to come, procuring the love of friends and foes; he was of
the order of Potestates, and governs Thirty seven Legions.

Haagenti, Haagenti.
is a great President, appearing like a great Bull, having the wings of a
Griffin, but when he takes humane shape, he makes a man wise in every thing,
he changes all metals into gold, and changes Wine and Water, the one into the
other, and commands as many Legions as Zagan.

Phoenix, Phoenix.
is a great Marquess, appearing like the bird Phoenix, having a child's voice;
but berore he stands still before the Conjuror, he sings many sweet notes.
Then the Exorcist, with his companions, must beware he give no ear to the
melody, but must by and by bid him put on humane shape; then will he speak
marvellously of all wonderful Sciences. He is an excellent Poet, and obedient;
he hops to return to the seventh Throne, after a thousand two hundred years,
and governs Twenty Legions.

Stolas is a great Prince, appearing in the form of a Night-raven, before the
Exorcist; he takes the image and shape of a man, and teaches Astronomy,
absolutely understanding the virtues of herbs and precious stones; there are
under him Twenty six legions.

Note, that a Legion is 6666. and now by Multiplication count how many Legions
do arise out of every particular.

This was the work of one T.R. written in fair letters of red and black upon
parchment, and made by him Anno 1570. To the maintenance of his living, the
edifying of the poor, and the glory of Gods holy name: as he himself says.
Secretum secretorum,
The secret of secrets:
Tu operans sis secretus horum,
Thou that workest them be secret in them.
CHAP. XII.
The hours wherein principal Devils may be bound; to wit, raised and restrained
from doing of hurt.

AMaymon King of the East, Corson King of the South, Zimimar King of the North,
Goap King and Prince of the West, may be bound from the third hour till noon,
and from the ninth hour till evening. Marquesses may be bound from the ninth
hour till compline, and from compline to the end of the day. Dukes may be bound
from the first hour till noon; and clear weather is to be observed. Prelates
may be bound in any hour of the day. Knights from day dawning till Sun rising,
or from evensong till the Sun set. A President may not be bound in any hour of
the day, except the King whom he obeys, be invocated; nor in the shutting of
the evening. Counties or Earls may be bound at any hour of the day, so it be in
the woods or fields, where men resort not.

CHAP. XIII.
The form of adjuring or citing of the Spirits aforesaid to arise and appear.

WHen you will have any Spirit, you must know his Name and Office; you must
also fast, and be clean from all pollution, three or four days before; so will
the Spirit be the more obedient unto you. Then make a Circle, and call up the
Spirit with great intention, and holding a ring in your hand, rehearse in your
own name, and your companions (for one must always be with you) this Prayer
following, and so no Spirit shall annoy you, and your purpose shall take
effect. And note how this agrees with Popish Charms and Conjurations.

In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost
holy Trinity and unspeakable Unity, I call upon thee, that thou may be my
salvation and defense, and the protection of my body and soul, and of all my
goods; through the virtue of thy holy Cross, and through the virtue of thy
passion, I beseech thee O Lord Jesus Christ, by the merits of thy blessed
Mother S. Mary, and of all thy Saints, That thou give me Grace and Divine power
over all the wicked Spirits, so as which of them soever I do call by name, they
may come by and by from every coast, and accomplish my will, that they neither
be hurtful nor fearful unto me, but rather obedient and diligent about me. And
through thy virtue straightly commanding them, let them fufil my commandments.
Amen.

Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath, which wilt come to judge the quick and
the dead, thou which art A and O, first and last, King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, Ioth, Aglanabrath, El, Abiel, Anathiel, Amazim, Sedomel, Grayes, Note,
what names are attributed unto Christ by the Conjuror in this his exorcising
exercise.
Heli, Messiah, Tolimi, Elias, Ischiros, Athanatos, Imas, By these thy holy
Names, and by all other I do call upon thee, and beseech thee O Lord Jesus
Christ, by thy Nativity and Baptism, by thy Cross and Passion, by thine
Ascension, and by the coming of the Holy Ghost, by the bitterness of thy soul
when it departed from the body, by thy five wounds, by the blood and water
which went out of thy body, by thy virtue, by the Sacrament which thou gave
thy Disciples the day before thou sufferedst, by the holy Trinity, and the
inseparable Unity, by blessed Mary thy Mother, by thine Angels, Archangels,
Prophets, Patriarchs, and by all thy Saints, and by all the Sacraments which
are made in thine honor, I do worship and beseech thee, to accept these
prayers, Conjurations, and words of my mouth, which I will use. I require thee,
O Lord Jesus Christ, that thou give me thy virtue and power over all thine
Angels (which were thrown down from heaven to deceive mankind) to draw them to
me, to tie and bind them, and also to loose them, to gather them together
before me, and to command them to do all that they can, and that by no means
they contemn my voice, or the words of my mouth; but that they obey me and my
sayings, and fear me. I beseech thee by thine Humanity, Mercy and Grace, and I
require thee Adony, Amay, Horta, Vegedora, Mitai, Hell, Suranat, Yston, Ysesy,
and by all thy holy Names, and by all thine holy He-Saints, and She-Saints, by
all thine Angels, and Archangels, Powers, Dominions, and Virtues, and by that
name that Solomon did bind the Devils, and shut them up, Elbrach, Evanher,
Agle, Goth, Ioth, Othie, Venoch, Nabrat, and by all thine holy Names which are
written in this book, and by the virtue of them all, that thou enable me to
congregate all thy Spirits thrown down from heaven, What wonderful force
Conjurers do believe consists in these forged names of Christ.
that they may give me a true answer of all my demands, and that they satisfy
all my requests, without the hurt of my body or soul, or any thing else that is
mine, through our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, which lives and reigns with
thee in the unity of the Holy Ghost, one God, world without end.

Oh Father Omnipotent, oh wise Son, oh holy Ghost, the searcher of hearts, oh
you three in persons, one true Godhead in substance, which did spare Adam and
Eve in their sins; and oh thou Son, which dyedst for their sins a most filthy
death, sustaining it upon the holy cross; oh thou most merciful, when I fly
unto thy mercy, and beseech thee by all the means I can, by these the holy
Names of thy Son; to wit, A and O, and all other his Names, grant me thy Virtue
and Power, that I may be able to cite before me, thy Spirits which were thrown
down from heaven, and that they may speak with me, and dispatch by and by
without delay, and with a good will, and without the hurt of my body, soul, or
goods, etc. as is contained in the book called Annulus Solomonis.

Oh great and eternal virtue of the highest, which through disposition, these
being called to judgment, Vachoon, Stumulamaton, Esphares, Tetragrammaton,
Olioram, Cryon, Esytion, Existion, Eriona, Onela, Brasim, Noym, Messiah, Soter,
Emanuel, Sabbath, Adonay, I worship thee, I invocate thee, I implore thee with
all the strength of my mind, that by thee, my present Prayers, Consecrations,
and Conjurations be hollowed; and wheresoever wicked Spirits are called in the
virtue of thy names, they may come together from every coast, and diligently
fulfill the will of me the Exorcist. Fiat, fiat, fiat, Amen.

CHAP. XIV.
A confutation of the manifold vanities contained in the precedent Chapters,
specially of commanding of Devils.

HE that can be persuaded that these things are true, or wrought indeed,
according to the assertion of Coseners, or according to the supposion of
Witchmongers and Papists, may soon be brought to believe that the Moon is made
of green Cheese. You see in that which is called Solomon's Conjuration, See
Chap. 11. of this book.
there is a perfect inventary registered of the number of Devils, of their
Names, of their Offices, of their Personages, of their Qualities, of their
Powers, of their Properties, of their Kingdoms, of their Governers, of their
Orders, of their Dispositions, of their Subjection, of their Submission, and of
the ways to bind or loose them; with a note what Wealth, Learning, Office,
Commodity, pleasure, etc. they can give, and may be forced to yield in spite
of their hearts, This is contrary to the Scripture which says, That every good
gift comes from the Father of light, etc.
to such (forsooth) as are cunning in this Art: of whom yet was never seen any
rich man, or at least that gained any thing that way; or any unlearned man,
that became learned by that means; or any happy man, that could with the help
of this Art, either deliver himself, or his friends, from adversity; or add
unto his Estate any point of felicity: yet these men, in all worldly happiness,
must needs exceed all others, if such things could be by them accomplished, A
breviary of the inventary of Spirits.
according as it is presupposed. For if they may learn of Marbas, all secrets,
and to cure all diseases; and of Furcas, wisdom, and to be cunning in all
Mechanical Arts; and to change any man's shape, of Zepar: if Bune can make them
rich and eloquent; if Beroth can tell them of all things present, past, and to
come; if Asmodie can make them go invisible, and show them all hidden treasure;
if Salmacke will afflict whom they list; and Allocer can procure the love of
any Woman; if Amy can provide them excellent Familiars; if Caym can make them
understand the voice of all Birds, and Beasts; and Buer and Bifrons can make
them live long; and finally, if Orias could procure unto them great friends,
and reconcile their enemies, and they in the end had all these at commandment;
should they not live in all worldly honor and felicity? Whereas, contrariwise,
they lead there lives in all obloquy, misery and beggary; and in fine, come to
the gallows, as though they had chosen unto themselves the spirit Valefer, who
they say brings all them with whom he enters into familiarity, to no better
end then the gibbet or gallows.

The Authors further purpose in the detection of conjuring.
But before I proceed further to the confutation of this stuff, I will show
other Conjurations, devised more lately, and of more Authority; wherein you
shall see how fools are trained to believe these absurdities, being won by
little and little to such credulity. For the Author hereof begins, as though
all the cunning of Conjurors were derived and fetched from the Planetary
motions, and true course of the Stars, Celestial bodies, etc.

CHAP. XV.
The names of the Planets, their Characters, together with the twelve signs of
the Zodiac, their Dispositions, Aspects, and Government; with other
observations.

The Characters of the Planets.
Saturn. Jupiter. Mars. Sol. Venus. Mercury. Luna. The five Planetary Aspects.
fire Conjunction. Sextile. Quadrat. Trine. Opposition. The twelve signs of the
Zodiac, their Characters and Denominations, etc.
Aries. Taurus. Gemini. Cancer. Leo. Virgo. Libra. Scorpio. Sagittarius.
Capricornus. Aquarius. Pisces.

Their Disposition or Inclinations.
Good signs.
Evil signs.
Signs indifferent.
Very good signs.
Very evil signs.

The Disposition of the Planets.
planets good, Indifferent, Evil ^ A fiery Triplicitie. An earthie
Triplicitie A waterie Triplicitie. An aierie Triplicitie.

The Aspects of the Planets.
Is the best Aspect with good Planets, and the worst with evil. Is a mean
Aspect in goodness or badness. fire Is very good in aspect to good Planets, and
hurts not in evil. This Aspect is of enimity not full perfect. This Aspect is
of enimity most perfect.
How the Day is divided or distinguished.
A Day natural is the space of four and twenty hours, accounting the Night
withal, and begins at one of the clock after midnight.

An artificial day is that space of time, which is betwixt the rising and
falling of the Sun, etc. all the rest is night and begins at the Sun rising.

Hereafter follows a Table showing how the day and the night is divided by
hours, and reduced to the regiment of the Planets.
The division of the Day, and the Planetary Regiment.
day lord 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 day lord day lord day lord day lord day
lord day lord day lord

The division of the Night, and the Planetary Regiment.
night lord 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 night lord night lord night lord night
lord night lord night lord night lord

CHAP. XVI.
The Characters of the Angels of the seven days, with their names: of Figures,
Seals and Periapts.

These Figures are called the Seals of Earth, without the which no Spirit will
appear, except thou have them with thee.
Michael. Gabriel. Samael. Yaphael. Sachiel Anael. Calliel. vel gaphriel


Emanuel Sabbath Adonay panthou ufyon Messyas Sother

Dut tha gen Lap tenop Ty^ithaoth

otheos yon

mala

la

Aries Leo



mala

Alpha et o

on

ely eloy



Who so bears this sign about him, all Spirits shall do him homage.

Who so bears this sign about him, let him fear no fo, but fear GOD.



CHAP. XVII.
An Experiment of the Dead.

Conjuring for a dead Spirit.
FIrst fast pray three days, and abstain thee from all filthiness; go to one
that i^ now buried, such a one as killed himself, or destroyed himself
wilfully: or else get the promise of one that shall be hanged, and let him
swear an Oath to thee, after his body is dead, that his Spirit shall come to
thee, and do thee true service, at thy commandments, in all days, hours, and
minutes. And let no persons see thy doings, but For the cosenor (the Conjuror I
should say) can do nothing to any purpose without his confederate.
thy fellow. And about eleven a clock at night, go to the place where he was
buried, and say with a bold faith, and hearty des^re; to have the spirit come
that thou do call for, thy fellow having a Candle, in his left hand, and in
his right hand a Crystal-stone, and say these words following, the Master
having a Hazel-wand in his right hand, and these names of God written
thereupon, Tetragrammaton Adonai Agla Craton Then strike three strokes on the
ground, and say; Arise N. Arise N. Arise N. I'conjure thee Spirit N. by the
Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, Note that Numerus ternarius, which is
counted mystical, be observed.
that thou do obey my words, and come unto me this night verily and truly, as
thou believe to be saved at the day of Judgment. And I will swear to thee an
Oath, by the peril of my soul, that if thou will come to me, and appear to me
this night, and show me true visions in this Crystal-stone, and fetch me the
fairie Sibylia, that I may talk with her visibly, Ex inferno nulla redemptio,
says the Scripture: Ergo you lie quoth Nota.
and she may come before me, as the Conjuration leads: and in so doing I will
give thee an alms-deed, and pray for thee N. to my Lord God, whereby thou
may be restored to thy Salvation at the Resurrection day, to be received as
one of the Elect of God, to the everlasting glory. Amen.

The Master standing at the head of the grave, his fellow having in his hands
the Candle and the Stone, must begin the conjuration as follows, and the
Spirit will appear to you in the Crystal-stone, in a fair form of a child of
twelve years of age. And when he is in, feel the stone, and it will be hot; and
fear nothing, for he or she will show many delusions, to drive you from your
work: Fear God, but fear him not. This is to constrain him, as follows.

I conjure thee Spirit N. by the living God, the true God, and by the holy God,
and by their virtues and powers which have created both thee and me, and all
the world. I conjure thee N. by these holy Names of God, Note what these great
words may do.
Tetragrammaton Adonay Algramay Saday Sabbath Planaboth Panthon Craton
Neupmaton Deus Homo Omnipotens Sempiternus Ysus Lerra Vnigentius Salbator Via
Vita Manus Fons Origo Filius. And by their virtues and powers, and by all their
names, by the which God gave power to man, both to speak or think; so by their
virtues and powers I conjure thee spirit N. that now immediately thou do appear
in this Crystal-stone visibly to me and to my fellow, without any tarrying or
deceit. I conjure thee N. by the excellent Name of Jesus Christ A and O the
first and the last. For this holy Name of Jesus is above all Names; for in this
Name of Jesus every knee does bow and obey, both of heavenly things, earthly
things, and infernal. And every tongue does confess that our Lord Jesus Christ
is in the glory of the Father: neither is there any other Name given to man
whereby he must be saved. Therefore in the Name of Jesus of Nazareth, and by
his Nativity, Resurrection, and Ascension, and by all that appertains unto
his passion, and by their virtues and powers I conjure thee Spirit N. that thou
do appear visibly in this Crystal-stone to me, and to my fellow, without any
dissimulation. I conjure thee N. by the blood of the innocent Lamb Jesus
Christ, which was shed for us upon the cross; for all those that Daemones
credendo contremiscunt.
do believe in the virtue of his blood shall be saved. I conjure thee N. by the
virtues and powers of all the royal names and words of the living God of me
pronounced, that thou be obedient unto me and to my words rehearsed. If thou
refuse this to do, I by the Holy Trinity, and by their virtues and powers do
condemn thee thou Spirit N. into the place where there is no hope of remedy or
rest, but everlasting horror of pain there dwelling, and a place where there is
pain upon pain, daily, horribly, A heavy sentence denounced of the Conjuror
against the Spirit in case of disobedience, contempt, or negligence.
and lamentably, thy pain to be there augmented as the Stars in the Heaven,
and as the gravel or Sand in the Sea: except thou Spirit N. do appear to me and
to my fellow visibly, immediately in this Crystal Stone, and in a fair form and
shape of a child of twelve years of age, and that thou alter not thy shape, I
change thee upon pain of everlasting condemnation. I conjure thee Spirit N. by
the golden Girdle, which girdeth the loins of our Lord Jesus Christ; so thou
Spirit N. be thou bound into the perpetual pains of Hell fire, for thy
disobedience and unreverent regard, that thou have to the holy names and words,
and his precepts. I conjure N. by the two edged Sword, which John saw proceed
out of the month of the Almighty; and so thou Spirit N. be torn and How can
that be; when a spirit has neither flesh, blood, nor bones?
cut in pieces with that Sword, and to be condemned into everlasting pain,
where the fire goes not out, and where the worm dies not. I conjure thee N.
by the Heavens, and by the celestial City of Jerusalem, and by the Earth and
the Sea, and by all things contained in them, and by their virtues and powers;
I conjure thee Spirit N. by the obedience that thou do owe unto the principal
Prince. And except thou Spirit N. do come and appear visibly in this
Crystal-stone in my presence, here immediately as it is aforesaid, Let the
great curse of God, the anger of God, the shadow and darkness of death, and of
eternal condemnation be upon thee Spirit N. for ever and ever; because thou
have denied thy faith, thy health, and salvation. For thy great disobedience,
thou art worthy to be condemned. Therefore let the divine Trinity, Thrones,
Dominions, Principates, Potestates, Virtutes, Cherubim and Seraphim, and all
the souls of Saints, both of men and women, condemn thee for ever, and be a
witness against thee at the day of judgment, because of thy disobedience. And
let all creatures of our Lord Jesus Christ, say thereunto Fiat, Fiat, fiat.
Amen.

And when he is appeared in the Crystal-stone, as is said before, bind him with
this bond as follows; to wit, I conjure thee Spirit N. that art appeared to
me in this Crystal-stone, to me and to my fellow; I conjure thee by The
Conjuror imputes the appearing of a spirit by constraint unto words quoth Nota.
all the royal words aforesaid, the which did constrain thee to appear
therein, and their virtues; I charge thee by them all, that thou shall not
depart out of this Crystal-stone, until my will being fulfilled, thou be
licened to depart. I conjure and bind thee Spirit N. by that omnipotent God,
which commanded the Angel S. Michael to drive Lucifer out of the Heavens with a
Sword of vengeance, and to fall from joy to pain; and for dread of such pain as
he is in, I charge thee Spirit N. that thou shall not go out of the
Crystal-stone; nor yet to alter thy shape at this time, except I command thee
otherwise; but to come unto me at all places, and in all hours and minutes,
when and wheresoever I shall call thee, by the virtue of our Lord Jesus Christ,
or by any Conjuration of words that is written in this Book, and to show me and
my friends true visions in this Crystal-stone, of any thing or things that we
would see, at any time or times; and also to go and fetch me the fairy Sibylia,
that I may talk with her in all kind of talk, as I shall call her by any
Conjuration of words contained in this Book. I conjure thee Spirit N. by the
great wisdom and divinity of his Godhead, my will to fulfill as is aforesaid; I
charge thee upon pain of condemnation, both in this world and in the world to
come, Fiat, fiat, fiat. Amen.

This done, go to the place fast by, and in a fair Parlor or Chamber, make a

Sorthie, Sorthia, Sorthios.

circle with chalk, as hereafter follows: and make another circle for the
fairy Sibylia to appear in four foot from the circle thou art in, and make no
names therein, or cast any holy thing therein; but make a circle round with
chalk; and let the Master and his fellow sit down in this circle, the Master
having the Book in his hand, his fellow having the Crystal-stone in his right
hand, looking in the Stone when the Fairy does appear. The Master also must
have upon his breast this figure here written in Parchment, and begin to work in
the new of the and in the hour of the and the to be in one of inhabiters
signs, as. This bond as follows, is to cause the Spirit in the
Crystal-stone, to fetch unto thee the fairy Sibylia. All things fulfilled,
begin this bond as follows, and behold, for doubtless they will come before
thee, before the Conjuration be read seven times.

I conjure thee spirit N. in this Crystal-stone, by God the Father, by God the
Son Jesus Christ, and by God the Holy Ghost, three Persons and one God, and by
their virtues, And why might not be do it himself, as well as Madam Sibylia?
I conjure thee spirit, that thou do go in peace, and also come again to me
quickly, and to bring with thee into that circle appointed, Sibylia Fairie,
that I may talk with her in those matters that shall be to her honor and
glory; and so I charge thee declare unto her. I conjure thee spirit N. by the
blood of the innocent Lamb, the which redeemed all the world, by the virtue
thereof I charge thee thou spirit in the Crystal-stone, that thou do declare
unto her this message. Also I conjure thee spirit N. by all Angels and
Archangels, Thrones, Dominations, Principates, Potestates, Virtutes, Cherubim
and Seraphim, and by their virtues and powers. I conjure thee N. that thou do
depart with speed, and also to come again with speed, and to bring with thee
the fairie Sibylia, to appear in that circle before I do read the Conjuration
in this Book seven times. Thus I charge thee my will to be fulfilled, upon pain
of everlasting condemnation: Fiat, fiat, fiat. Amen.

The Fairie Sibylia conjured to appear, etc.
Then the figure aforesaid pinned on thy breast, rehearse the words therein, and
say, Sorthie Sorthia Sorthios then begin your Conjuration as follows here,
and say; I conjure thee Sibylia, O gentle Virgin of Fairies, by the mercy of
the Holy Ghost, and by the dreadful day of doom, and by their virtues and
powers, I conjure thee Sibylia, O gentle Virgin of Fairies, and by all the
Angels of and their characters and virtues, and by all the spirits of and and
their characters and virtues, and by all the characters that be in the
Firmament, and by the King and Queen of Fairies, and their virtues, and by the
faith and obedience that thou bear unto them. I conjure thee Sibylia by the
blood that ran out of the side of our Lord Jesus Christ crucified, and by the
opening of Heaven, and by the renting of the Temple, and by the darkness of the
Sun in the time of his death, and by the rising up of the dead in the time of
his Resurrection, and by the Virgin Mary Mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
by the unspeakable Name of God Letragramaton. I conjure thee O Sibylia; O
blessed and beautiful Virgin, by all the royal words aforesaid, I conjure thee
Sibylia, by all their virtues to appear in that circle before me visibly, in
the form and shape of a beautiful woman in a bright and white vesture, adorned
and garnished most fair, and to appear to me quickly without deceit or
tarrying; and that thou fail not to fulfill my will and desire effectually: For
I will choose thee to be my blessed Virgin, and will have common copulation
with thee. Therefore make have and speed to come unto me, and to appear as I
have said before. To whom be honor and glory for ever and ever, Amen.

The which done and ended, if she come not, repeat the Conjuration till they do
come: for doubtless they will come. And when she is appeared, take your
censers, and incense her with frankincense; then bind her with the bond as
follows: The manner of binding the fair Sibylia at her appearing.
I do conjure thee Sibylia, by God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy
Ghost, three Persons and one God, and by the blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of our
Lord Jesus Christ; and by all the whole and holy company of Heaven, and by the
dreadful day of doom, and by all Angels and Archangels, Thrones, Dominations,
Principates, Potestates, Virtutes, Cherubim and Seraphim, and their virtues and
powers. I conjure thee and bind thee Sibylia, that thou shall not depart out of
the circle wherein thou art appeared, nor yet to alter thy shape; except I give
thee license to depart. I conjure thee Sibylia by the blood that ran out of the
side of our Lord Jesus Christ crucified, and by the virtue hereof I conjure
thee Sibylia to come to me, and to appear to me at all times visibly, as the
Conjuration of words leads, written in this Book. I conjure thee Sibylia, O
blessed Virgin of Fairies, by the opening of Heaven, and by the renting of the
Temple, and by the darkness of the Sun at the time of his death, If all this
will not fetch her up, the Devil is a Knave.
and by the rising of the dead in the time of his glorious Resurrection, and by
the unspeakable Name of God Tetragrammaton and by King and Queen of Fairies,
and by their virtues I conjure thee Sibylia to appear, before the Conjuration
be read over four times, and that visibly to appear, as the the Conjuration
leads written in this Book, and to give me good counsel at all times, and to
come by treasures hidden in the earth, and all other things that is to do me
pleasure, and to fulfill my will without any deceit or tarrying; nor yet that
thou shall have any power of my body or soul, earthly or ghostly; nor yet to
perish so much of my body as one hair of my head. I conjure thee Sibylia by all
the royal words aforesaid, and by their virtues and powers, I charge and bind
thee by the virtue thereof, to be obedient unto me, and to all the words
aforesaid, and this bond to stand between thee and me, upon pain of everlasting
condemnation. Fiat, fiat, fiat, Amen.

CHAP. XVIII.
A License for Sibylia to go and come by at all times.

I Conjure thee Sibylia, which art come hither before me, by the commandment
of thy Lord and mine, that thou shall have no power in thy going or coming unto
me, imagining any evil in any manner of ways, in the earth, or under the
earth, of evil doings, to any person or persons. I conjure and command thee
Sibylia by all the royal words and virtues that be written in this Book, that
thou shall not go to the place from whence thou came, but shall remain
peaceably, invisibly, and look thou be ready to come unto me, when thou art
called by any conjuration of words that be written in this Book, to come (I
say) at my commandment, and to answer unto me truly and duly of all things, my
will quickly to be fulfilled. Vade in pace, in Nomine Patris, and Filii, and
Spiritus Sancti. And the holy cross between thee and me, or between us and you,
and the Lion of Juda, the root of Jess, the kindred of David, be between thee
and me Christ comes Christ commands Christ gives power Christ defend me and
his innocent blood from all perils of body and soul, sleeping and waking: Fiat,
fiat, Amen.

CHAP. XIX.
To know of Treasure hidden in the Earth.

WRite in paper these characters following, on the Saturday, This would be much
practiced if it were not a cosening knack.
in the hour of, and lay it where thou think Treasure to be: if there be
any, the paper will burn, else not. And these be the characters.

symbols described above

This is the way to go invisible by these three Sisters of Fairies.
IN the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. First go to
a fair Parlor or Chamber, and an even ground, and in no loft, and from people
nine days, for it is the better: and let all thy clothing be clean and sweet.
Then make a Candle of Virgin Wax, and light it, and make a fair fire of
Charcoles in a fair place, in the middle of the Parlour or Chamber. Then take
fair clean water, that runs against the East, and set it upon the fire: and
if thou washest thy self, say these words, going about the fire three times,
holding the Candle in thy right hand Panthon Craton Muriton Bisecognaton Siston
Diaton Maton Tetragrammaton Agla Agarion Tegra Pentessaron Tendicata Then
rehearse these names Sorthie Sorthia Sorthios Milia Achilia Sibylia In Nomine
Patris, et Filii, The three sisters of the Fairies, Milita, Achilia, and
Sibylia.
et Spiritus Sancti, Amen. I conjure you three sisters of Fairies, Milia,
Achilia, Sibylia; by the Father, by the Son, and by the Holy Ghost, and by
their virtues and powers, and by the most merciful and living God, that will
command his Angel to blow the trump at the day of Judgment; and he shall say,
Come, come, come to judgment; and by all Angels, Archangels, Thrones,
Dominations, Principates, Potestates, Virtutes, Cherubim and Seraphim, and by
their virtues and powers; I conjure you three sisters, by the virtue of all the
royal words aforesaid: I charge you that you do appear before me visibly, in
form and shape of fair women, in white vestures, and to bring with you to me,
the Ring of Invisibility, by the which I may go invisible at mine own will and
pleasure, and that in all hours and minutes: In Nomine Patris, and Filii, and
Spiritus Sancti, Amen. Such a Ring it was that advanced Giges to the Kingdom of
Italy. Plato lib. 2. de justo.
Being appeared, say this bond following.

O blessed Virgins Milia Achilia I conjure you in the Name of the Father, in
the Name of the Son, and the Name of the Holy Ghost, and by their virtues I
charge you to depart from me in peace for a time. And Sibylia I conjure thee,
by the virtue of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the virtue of his flesh and
precious blood, that he took of our blessed Lady the Virgin, and by all holy
company in Heaven, I charge thee Sibylia, by all the virtues aforesaid, that
thou be obedient unto me, in the Name of God; that when, and what time and
place I shall call thee by this foresaid Conjuration written in this Book, look
thou be ready to come unto me, at all hours and minutes, The Ring of
Invisibility.
and to bring unto me the Ring of Invisibility, whereby I may go invisible at
my will and pleasure, and that at all hours and minutes; Fiat, fiat, Amen.

And if they come not at the first night, then do the same the second night,
and so the third night, until they do come: for doubtless they will come, and
lie thou in thy bed, in the same Parlor or Chamber; And lay thy right hand out
of the bed, and look thou have a fair silken Kercher bound about thy head, and
be not afraid, they will do thee no harm: For there will come before thee three
fair women, and all in white clothing, and one of them will put a Ring upon
thy finger, wherewith thou shall go invisible. Then with speed bind them with
the bond aforesaid. When thou have this Ring on thy finger, look in a Glass,
and thou shall not see thy self. And when thou will go invisible, put it on thy
finger, the same finger that they did put it on, and every new renew it again:
For after the first time thou shall ever have it, and ever begin this work in
the new of the and in the hour of and the.

CHAP. XX.
An Experiment following, of Citrael, etc. Angeli diei Dominici.

Michael. Gabriel. Samael. Raphael. Sachiel. Anael. Cassiel.


SAy first the Prayers of the Angels every day, for the space of seven days,
O ye glorious Angels written in this square, be you my coadjutors and helpers
in all questions and demands, in all my business, and other causes, by him
which shall come to judge both the quick and the dead, and the world by fire. O
Angeli gloriosi in hac quadra scripti, estote coadjutores and auxiliatores in
omnibus quaestionibus and interrogationibus, in omnibus negotiis, caeterisque
causis per eum qui venturus est judicare vivos and mortuos and mundum per ignem.

Say this Prayer fasting, called O queen or Governess of the tongue.
Regina linguae. Lemae Solmaac Elmay Gezagra Raamaasin Ezierego Mial Egziephiaz
Iosamin Sahach ha aem re he esapha Sephar Ramar Semoit Lamajo Pheralon Amic
Phin Gergain Letos Amin Amin.

In the Name of the most pitifulliest and mercifulliest God of Israel and of
Paradise, of Heaven and of Earth, of the Seas and of the Infernals, by thine
Omnipotent help I may perform this work, which live and reignest ever one God
world without end, Amen.

O most strongest and mightiest God, without beginning or ending, by thy
clemency and knowledge, I desire that my questions, work, and labor may be
fully and truly accomplished through thy worthyness, good Lord, which live
and reignest ever one God world without end, Amen.

O holy, patient, and merciful great God, and to be worshipped, the Lord of all
wisdom, clear and just; I most heartily desire thy holiness and clemency, to
fulfill, perform and accomplish this my whole work, through thy worthiness and
blessed power, which live and reignest ever one God, Per omnia saecula
saeculorum, Amen.

CHAP. XXI.
Howw to enclose a Spirit in a Crystal-stone.

THis operation following, is to have a Spirit enclosed into a Crystal-stone or
Beryl-glass, or into any other like instrument, etc. Observations of
clealiness, abstinence, and devotion.
First thou in the new of the being clothed with all new, and fresh and clean
array, and shaven, and that day to fast with bread and water; and being clean
confessed, say the seven Psalms, and the Letany for the space of two days, with
this Prayer following.

I desire thee O Lord God, my merciful and most loving God, the giver of all
graces, the giver of all Sciences; grant that I thy wel-beloved N. (although
unworthy) may know thy grace and power, against all the deceits and craftiness
of Devils. And grant to me thy power good Lord, to constrain them by this Art:
for thou art the true, and lively, and eternal God, which live and reignest
ever one God through all, Amen.

Thou must do this five days, and the sixth day have in a readiness, An
observation touching the use of the five Swords.
five bright Swords: and in some secret place make one circle with one of the
said Swords. And then write this name, Sitrael, which done, standing in the
circle, thrust in thy Sword into that name. And write again Malanthon, with
another sword; and Thamaor, with another; and Falaor, with another; and
Sitrami, with another: and do as ye did with the first. All this done, turn
thee to Sitrael, and kneeling, say thus, having the Crystal-stone in thine
hands.

O Sitrael, Malantha, Lhamaor, Falaur, and Sitrami, Written in these circles,
appointed to this work; I do conjure, and I do exorcise you, by the Father, by
the Son, and by the Holy Ghost, by him which cast you out of Paradise, and by
him which spoke the word and it was done, and by him which shall come to judge
the quick and the dead, and the world by fire, that all you five infernal
Masters and Princes do come unto me, to accomplish and to fulfill all my desire
and request, which I shall command you. Also I conjure you Devils, and command
you, I bid you, A weighty charge of conjuration upon the five Kings.
and appoint you, by the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the most highest God,
and by the blessed and glorious Virgin Mary, and by all the Saints, both of men
and women of God, and by all the Angels, Archangels, Patriarchs, and Prophets,
Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, and Confessors, Virgins, and Widows, and all
the elect of God. Also I conjure you, and every of you, ye infernal Kings, by
the Heaven, by the Stars, by the and by thee and all the Planets, by the
Earth, Fire, Air, and Water, and by the terrestrial Paradise, and by all things
in them contained, and by your Hell, and by all the Devils in it, and dwelling
about it, and by your virtue and power, and by all whatsoever, and with
whatsoever it be, which may constrain and bind you. Therefore by all the
aforesaid virtues and powers, I do bind you and constrain you into my will and
power; that you being thus bound, may come unto me in great humility, and to
appear in your circles before me visibly, in fair form and shape of mankind
Kings, and to obey unto me all things, whatsoever I shall desire, and that you
may not depart from me without my license. A penalty for not appearing, etc.
And if you do against my precepts, I will promise unto you that you shall
descend into the profound deepness of the Sea, except that you do obey unto me,
in the part of the living Son of God, which lives and reigns in the unity of
the Holy Ghost, by all world of worlds, Amen.

Say this true Conjuration five courses, and then shall thou see come out of
the North-part five Kings with a mavelous company: which when they are come
to the circle, they will alight down off from their Horses, and will kneel down
before thee, saying, Master, command us what thou will, and we will out of hand
be obedient unto thee. Unto whom thou shall say; See that ye depart not from
me, without my license; anll that which I will command you to do, let it be
done truly, surely, faithfully, and essentially. And then they all will swear
unto thee to do all thy will; and after they have sworn, say the Conjuration
immediately following.

The five spirits of the North: as you shall see in the type expressed in the
page next following.
I conjure, charge, and command you, and every of you, Sitrael, Malanthan,
Lhamaar, Falaur, and Sitrami, you Infernal Kings, to put into this
Crystal-stone one spirit learned and expert in all Arts and Sciences, by the
virtue of this Name of God Tetragrammaton, and by the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and by the blood of the innocent Lamb, which redeemed all the world,
and by all their virtues and power I charge you, ye noble Kings, that the said
spirit may teach, show and declare unto me, and to my friends, at all hours and
minutes, both night and day, the truth of all things both bodily and ghostly,
in this world, whatsoever I shall request or desire, declaring also unto me my
very name. And this I command in your part to do, and to obey thereunto, as
unto your own Lord and Master. That done, they will call a certain spirit, whom
they will command to enter into the center of the circled or round Crystal.
Then put the Crystal between the two circles, and thou shall see the Crystal
made black.

Then command them to command the spirit in the Crystal, not to depart out of
the Stone, till thou give him license, and to fulfill thy will for ever. That
done, thou shall see them go upon the Crystal, both to answer your requests,
and to tarry your license. That done, the spirits will crave license: and say;
Go ye to your place appointed of Almighty God, in the Name of the Father, etc.
And then take up thy Crystal, and look therein, asking what thou will, and it
will show it unto thee. Let all your Circles be nine foot every way, and made
as follows. Work this work in or in the hour of the or. And when the spirit
is enclosed, if thou fear him bind him with some bond, in such sort as is
elsewhere expressed already in this our Treatise.

A Figure or Type proportional, showing what form must be observed and kept, in
making the Figure, whereby the former secret of enclosing a Spirit in Crystal
is to be accomplished, etc. The names written within the five circles do
signify the five infernal Kings: See page 248, 249, 250.

2 ^alanta ^.

3 Thamaor.

1 ^itrael.

4 Ifalaur.

5 ^itrami.

North

South

Est

West

Agla

el

ya

Panthon

dextera dm^i exaltauit me dextera dm^i fecit unt^le dextera dm^i exalfa^tine
dextera d^mi fect virtute

Messiah

Emanuel

Alpha et o



CHAP. XXII.
An Experiment of Bealphares.

THis is proved the noblest carrier that ever did serve any man upon the earth,
and here begins the enclosing of the said Spirit, and how to have a true
answer of him, without any craft or harm; and he will appear unto thee in the
likeness of a fair man or fair woman, the which Spirit will come to thee at all
times. And if thou will command him to tell thee of hidden treasures that be in
any place, he will tell it thee: or if thou will command him to bring to thee
gold or silver, he will bring it thee: or if thou will go from one Country to
another, he will bear thee without any harm of body or soul. Therefore
Memorandum with what vices the cosenor (the Conjuror I should say) must not be
polluted; therefore he must be no knave, etc.
he that will do this work, shall abstain from lecherousness and drunkenness,
and from false swearing, and do all the abstinence that he may do, and namely
three days before he go to work, and in the third day when the night is come,
and when the Stars do shine, and the element fair and clear, he shall bath
himself and his fellows (if he have any) all together in a quick wellspring;
Then he must be clothed in clean white clothes; and he must have another
privy place, and bear him ink and pen, wherewith he shall write this holy Name
of God Almighty in his right hand Agla and in his left hand this name ^ and he
must have a dry thong of a Lions or of a Hearts skin, and make thereof a girdle,
and write the holy names of God all about, The Conjurors brust-place.
and in the end A and O. And upon his breast he must have this present figure or
mark written in Virgin Parchment, as it is Homo sacarus, museo lomeas,
cherubozca.
here showed. And it must be sowed upon a piece of new linen, and so made fast
upon thy breast. And if thou will have a fellow to work with thee, he must be
appointed in the same manner. You must have also a bright knife that was never
occupied, Solomon's circle.
and he must write on the one side of the blade of the knife Agla and on the
otherside of the knifes blade ^ And with the same knife he must make a circle,
as hereafter follows: the which is called Solomon's circle. When that is made,
go into the circle, and close again the place, there where thou wentest in,
with the same knife, and say; Per crucis hoc signum fugiat procul omne
malignum; Et per idem signum salbetur quodque benigum; By the sign of the Cross
may all evil fly far away, and by the same sign may all that is good be
preserved; and make suffumigations to thy self, and to thy fellow or fellows,
with Frankincense, Mastick, Lignum Aloes: then put it in Wine, and say with
good devotion, in the worship of the high God Almighty, all together, that he
may defend you from all evils. And when he that is Master will close the
Spirit, he shall say toward the East with meek and devout devotion, these
Psalms and Prayers as follows here in order.

The two and twentieth Psalm.

O My God my God, look upon me, why have thou forsaken me, and art so far from
my health, and from the words of my complaint? Memorandum that you must read
the 22. and 51 Psalm. all over; or else rehearse them by heart; for these are
counted necessary, etc.
And so forth to the end of the same Psalm, as it is to be found in the Book.

This Psalm also following, being the fifty one Psalm, must be said three times
over, etc.

HAve mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness, according to the
multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offenses. And so forth to the end of the
same Psalm, concluding it with, Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost; As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without
end, Amen. Then say this verse: O Lord leave not my soul with the wicked; nor
my life with the blood-thirsty. Then say a Pater noster, an Ave Maria, and a
Credo and Ne nos inducas. O Lord show us thy mercy, and we shall be saved. Lord
hear our prayer, and let our cry come unto thee. Let us pray.

O Lord God Almighty, as thou warnedst by thine Angel, the three Kings of
Cullen, Jasper, Melchior, and Balthazar, when they came with worshipful
presents toward Bethelem; Jasper brought myrrh; Melchior, incense; Balthazar,
gold; worshipping the high King of all the world, Jesus Gods Son of Heaven, the
second Person in Trinity, being born of the holy and clean Virgin S. Mary Queen
of Heaven, Empress of Hell, and Lady of all the world: at that time the holy
Angel Gabriel warned and bad the foresaid three Kings, that they should take
another way, for dread of peril, that Herod the King by his Ordinance would
have destroyed these Gasper, Balthazar, and Melchior, who followed the Star,
wherein was the image of a little Babe bearing a cross, is Longa legenda
Coloniae; lie not.
three Noble Kings, that meekly sought out our Lord and Savior. As wittily and
truly as these three Kings turned for dread, and took another way; so wisely
and so truly, O Lord God, of thy mightiful mercy, bless us now at this time,
for thy blessed passion save us, and keep us all together from all evil; and
thy holy Angel defend us. Let us pray.

O Lord, King of all Kings, which containest the Throne of Heavens, and
beholdest all deeps, weighest the hills, and shuttest up with thy hand the
earth, hear us most meek God, and grant unto us (being unworthy) according to
thy great mercy, to have the verity and virtue of knowledge of hidden treasure
by this Spirit invocated, through thy help O Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be all
honor and glory, from worlds to worlds everlastingly, Amen. Then say these
names, Helie Helion essejere Deus eternus Eloy clemens Heloye Deus sanctus
Sabbath Deus exercituum Adonay Deus mirabilis jao berax anepheneton Deun
ineffabilis Sodoy Dominatoz Dominus on fortissimus Deus qui, the which would
be prayed unto of sinners, receive (we besiech thee) these sacrifices of
praise, and our meek Prayers, which we unworthy do offer unto thy Divine
Majesty. Deliver us, and have mercy upon us, and prevent with thy Holy Spirit
this work, and with thy blessed help to follow after, that this our work begun
of thee, maybe ended by thy mighty power; Amen. Then say this anon after Homo
sacarus Musceolameus cherubozca being the figure upon thy breast aforesaid, the
Girdle about thee, the circle made, bless the Circle with holy Water, and sit
down in the midst, and read this Conjuration as follows, sitting back to back
at the first time.

I exercise and conjure Baalphares, the practiser and preceptor of this Art, by
the maker of Heavens and of Earth, and by his virtue and by his unspeakable
Name Tetragrammaton, and by all the holy Sacraments, and by the holy Majesty
and Deity of the living God. I conjure and exorcise thee Bealphares, by the
virtue of all Angels, Archangels, Thrones, Dominations, Principates,
Potestates, Virtutes, Cherubim and Seraphim; and by their virtues, and by the
most truest and speciallest Name of your Master, that you do come unto us, in
fair form of man or woman-kinde, here visibly before this circle; and not
terrible by any manner of ways, This Which must be environed with a goodly
company of crosses.
circle being our tuition and protection, by the merciful goodness of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, and that you do make answer truly, without craft or
deceit, unto all my demands and questions, by the virtue and power of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Amen.

CHAP. XXIII.
To bind the Spirit Bealphares, and to loose him again.

NOw when he is appeared, bind him with these words which follow. * I conjure
thee Bealphares, by God the Father, by God the Son, and by God the Holy Ghost,
and by all the holy company in Heaven; and by their virtues and powers I charge
thee Bealphares, that thou shall not depart out of my sight, nor yet to alter
thy bodily shape, that thou art appeared in, nor any power shall thou have of
our bodies or souls, earthly or ghostly, but be obedient unto me, and to the
words of my Conjuration, that be written in this Book. I conjure thee
Bealphares, by all Angels and Archangels, Thrones, Dominations, Principates,
Potestates, Virtutes, Cherubim and Seraphim, and by their virtues and powers. I
conjure and charge, bind and constrain thee Bealphares, by all the royal words
aforesaid, and by their virtues that thou be obedient unto me, and to come and
appear visibly unto me, and that in all days, hours, On Sundays, Festival days,
and Holy days, none excepted.
and minutes, wheresoever I be, being called by the virtue of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the which words are written in this Book. Look ready thou be to appear
unto me, and to give me good counsel, how to come by treasures hidden in the
earth, or in the water, and how to come to dignity and knowledge of all things,
that is to say, of the Magic Art, and of Grammar, Dialectike, Rhetorike,
Arithmetic, Music, Geometry, and of Astronomy, and in all other things my
will quickly to be fulfilled; I charge upon pain of everlasting condemnation.
Fiat, fiat, fiat. Amen.

He dares do no other being so conjured I trow.
When he is thus bound, ask him what thing thou will, and he will tell thee,
and give thee all things that thou will request of him, without any Sacrifice
doing to him, and without forsaking thy God, that is, thy Maker. And when the
Spirit has fulfilled thy will and intent, give him license to depart as
follows:

A License for the Spirit to depart.
GO unto the place predestined and appointed for thee; where thy Lord God
has appointed thee, until I shall call thee again. Be thou ready unto me and
to my call, as often as I shall call thee, upon pain of everlasting damnation.
And if thou will, thou may recite two or three times the last Conjuration,
until thou do come to this term, In throno, if he will not depart, and then
say, In throno, That thou depart from this place, without hurt or damage of any
body, or of any deed to be done; that all creatures may know, that our Lord is
of all power, most mightiest, and that there is none other God but he, which is
three, and one, living for ever and ever. And the malediction of God the Father
Omnipotent, the Son and the Holy Ghost, descend upon thee, and dwell always
with thee, except thou do depart without damage of us, or of any creature, or
any other evil deed to be done; and thou to go to the predestined. And by our
Lord Jesus Christ I do else send thee to the great pit of Hell, except (I say)
that thou depart to the place, whereas thy Lord God has appointed thee. And
see thou be ready to me and to my call, at all times and places, at mine own
will and pleasure, day or night, without damage or hurt of me, or of any
creature; upon pain of everlasting damnation; Fiat, fiat, fiat. Amen. Amenl The
peace of Jesus Christ be between us and you, In the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen. Per crucis hoc signum, etc. Say In
principio erat Verbum, and Verbum erat apud Deum; In thee beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and God was the Word: and so forward, as
follows in the first Chapter of Saint John's Gospel, staying at these words,
Full of grace and truth: to whom be all honor and glory world without end.
Amen.

The fashion or form of the Conjuring knife, with the Names thereon to be
graven or written.
AGLA And on the other side this name ^



A Type or Figure of the Circle for the Master and his Fellows to sit in,
showing how, and after what fashion it should be made.
Agla

eL

ya

panthon

dextera dm^i fecit virtutem dextera dm^i exaltauit me dextera dm^i fecit
virtutem dextera dm^i exaltauit me

mellyas

emanuel

alpha et. o

Tetragrammaton

Jesus nazarenus

Adonay

Elfelbey

Magister



THis is the Circle for the Master to sit in, and his fellow or fellows at the
first calling, sit back to back, when he calls the Spirit; and for the
Fairies make this circle with chalk on the ground, as is said before. This
Spirit Bealphares being once called and found, shall never have power to hurt
thee. Call him in the hour of or the increasing.

CHAP. XXIV.
The making of Holy Water.

EXorciso te creaturam salis, per Deum vivum per Deum verum per Deum sanctum
per Deum quite per Elizaeum Prophet^m in aquam miti jussit, Absque exorcismo
sal non fit sanctus. It is not convenient to English these 4. following
Exorcisms, the name and power of God is so often therein abused to a vain and
ridiculous purpose.
ut sanaretur sterilitas aquae, ut efficiaris sal exorcisatus in salutem
credentium; ut sis omnibus te sumentibus sanitas animae and corporis, and
effugiat a que discedat ab eo loco, qui aspersus fuerit, omnis phantasia and
nequitia, vel versutia Diabolicae fraudis, omnisque spiritus, adjuratus per
cum, qui venturus est judicare vivos and mortuos, and saeculum per ignem. Amen.
Oremus.

Immensam clementiam tuam, Onmipotens aeterne Deus, humiliter imploramus, ut
hanc creaturam salis, quam in usum generis humani tribuisti, been dicere and
sancti ficare tua pietate digneris, ut sit omnibus sumentibus salus mentis and
corporis, ut quicquid ex eo tactum fuerit, vel respersum, careat omni
immunditia, omnique impugnatione spiritualis nequitiae, per Dominum nostrum
Jesum Christum Filium tuum, qui tecum vivit and regnat in unitate spiritus
sancti, Deus per omnia saecula saeculorum. Amen.

To the Water say as follows.
EXorciso te creaturam aquae in nemine Patris and Jesu Christi Filii ejus,
Domini nostri, and in virtute Spiritus Sancti ut fiat aqua exorcisata, ad
effugandani omnen potestatem inimici, and ipsum inimicum eradicare and
explantare valeas, cum angelis suis Apostatis, per virtutem ejusdem Domini
nostri Jesu Christi, qui venturus est judicare vivos and mortuos, and seculum
per ignem. Amen. Oremus.

Deus, qui ad salutem humani generis maxima quaeque sacramenta in aquarum
substantia condidisti, adesto propitius invocationibus nostris, and elemento
huic multimodis purificationibus praeparato, virtutem tuea been dictionis
infunde, ut creatura tua mysteriis tuis serviens, ad abigendos Daemones,
morbosque pellendos divinae gratiae sumat effectum, ut quicquid in domibus, vel
in locis fidelium haec unda resperserit, careat omni immunditia, liberetur a
noxa, non illic resideat spiritus pestilens, non aura corrumpens, discedant
omnes insidiae latentis inimici, and si quid est quod aut incolumitati
habitantium invidet aut quieti, aspersione hujus aquae effugiat, us salubritas
per invocationem sancti tui nominis expetita ab omnibus fit impugnationibus
defensa, per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum Filium tuum, qui tecum vivit and
regnat, in unitate spiritus sancti, Deus per omnia saecula saeculorum. Amen.

Then take the Salt in thy hand, and say putting it it into the Water, making
in the manner of a Cross.
COmmixtio salis and aquae pariter fiat, In Nomine Patris, and Filii, and
Spiritus Sancti. Amen. Dominus vobiscum, Et cum spiritu tuo. Oremus. Oration ad
Deum ut sali exorcisato vires addat.
Deus invicte virtutis Author, and insuperabilis Imperii Rex, ac semper
magnificus triumphator, qui adversae dominationis vires reprimis, qui inimici
rugientis saevitiam superas, qui hostiles nequitias potens expugnas; te Domine
trementes and supplices deprecamur ac petimus, ut hanc creaturam salis and
aquae aspicias, benignus illustres, pietatis tuae rore sancti fices, ubicunque
fuerit aspersa, per invocationem sancti tui nominis, omnis infestatio immundi
spiritus abjiciatur, terrorque venenosi serpentis procul pellatur, and
praesentia sancti spiritus nobis misericordiam tuam poscentibus ubique adesse
dignetur, per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum Filium tuum, qui tecum vivit and
regnat in unitate Spiritus Sancti, Deus per omnia sacula saeculorum. Amen.

Then sprinkle upon any thing, and say as follows.
Oration, in qua dicenda, exorcista sese sacri laticis aspergine debet perrorare.
ASperges me Domine hyssopo, and mundabor, lavabis me, and supra nivem
dealbabor. Miserere mei Deus, secundum magnam misericordiam tuam, and supra
nivem dealbabor. Gloria Patri, and Filio, and Spiritui sancto: Sicut erat in
principio, and nunc, and semper, and in saecula saeculorum. Amen. Et supra
nivem dealbabor, asperges me, etc. Ostende nobis domine misericordiam tuam, and
salutare tuum da nobis; exaudi nos Domine Sancte, Pater Omnipotens, Aeterne
Deus, and mittere dignare sanctums Angelum tuum de Coelis, qui custodiat,
foveat, visitet, and defendat omnes habitantes in hoc habitaculo, per Christum
Dominum nostrum. Amen, Amen.

CHAP. XXV.
To make a Spirit to appear in a Crystal.

I Do conjure thee N. by the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, the which
is the beginning and the ending, the first and the last, and by the latter day
of judgment, that thou N. do appear in this Crystal-stone, or any other
instrument, at my pleasure, to me and my fellow, gently and beautifully, in
fair form of a Boy of twelve years of age, without hurt or damage of any of our
bodies or souls; and certainly to inform and show me, without any guil or
craft, all that we do desire or demand of thee to know, by the virtue of him
which shall come to judge the quick and the dead, and the World by fire. Amen.

Mark how consonant this is with Popery, etc.
Also I conjure and exorcise thee N. by the Sacrament of the Altar, and by the
substance thereof, by the wisdom of Christ, by the Sea, and by his virtue, by
the earth, and by all things that are above the Earth, and by their virtues, by
the and the by and and by their virtues, by the Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors,
and the Virgins and Widow, and the chaste, and by all Saints of men's or of
women, and innocents, and by their virtues, by all the Angels and Archangels,
Thrones, Dominations, Principates, Potestates, Virtutes, Cherubim and Seraphim,
and by their virtues, and by the holy Names of God, Tetragrammaton, El, Ousion,
Agla, and by all the other holy Names of God, and by their virtues, by the
Circumcision, Passion, and Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ; by the
heaviness of our Lady the Virgin, and by the joy which she had when she saw her
Son rise from death to life, that thou N. do appear in this Crystal-stone, or
any other instrument, at my pleasure, to me and to my fellow, gently, and
beautifully, and visibly, in fair form of a child of twelve years of age,
without hurt or damage of any of our bodies or souls, and truly to inform and
show unto me and to my fellow, without fraud or guil, all things according to
thine oath and promise to me, whatsoever I shall demand or desire of thee,
without any hindrance or tarrying, and this Conjuration be read of me three
times, upon pain of eternal condemnation at the last day of Judgment: Fiat,
fiat, fiat, Amen.

And when he is appeared, bind him with the bond of the dead above written:
then say as follows. I charge thee N. by the Father, For hidden treasure.
to show me true Visions in this Crystal-stone, if there be any treasure hidden
in such a place N. and wherein it lies, and how many foot from this piece of
Earth, East, West, North, or South.

CHAP. XXVI.
An Experiment of the Dead.

FIrst go and get of some person that shall be put to death, a promise, and
swear an oath unto him, that if he will come to thee, after his death, his
Spirit to be with thee, and to remain with thee all the days of thy life, and
will do thee true service, as it is contained in the oath and promise
following. Then lay thy hand on thy Book, and swear this oath unto him.
Promises and oaths interchangeably made between the Conjuror and the Spirit.
I N. do swear and promise to thee N. to give for thee an alms every month, and
also to pray for thee once in every week, to say the Lords Prayer for thee, and
so to continue all the days of my life, as God me help and holy doom, and by
the contents of this Book, Amen.

Then let him make his oath to thee as follows, and let him say after thee,
laying his hand upon the Book. I N. do swear this oath to thee N. by God the
Father Omnipotent, by God the Son Jesus Christ, and by his precious blood which
has redeemed all the world, by the which blood I do trust to be saved at the
general day of judgment, and by the virtues thereof, I N. do swear this oath to
thee N. that my spirit that is within my body now, shall not ascend, nor
descend, nor go to any place of rest, but shall come to thee N. and be very
well pleased to remain with thee N. all the days of thy life, and so to be
bound to thee N. and to appear to thee N. in any Crystal-stone, Glass, or other
mirror, and so to take it for my resting place. And that, so soon as my spirit
is departed out of my body, straightway to be at your commandments, and that
in and at all days, nights, hours, and minutes, to be obedient unto thee N.
being called of thee by the virtue of our Lord Jesu Christ, and out of hand to
have common talk with thee at all times, and in all hours and minutes, to open
and declare to thee N. the truth of all things present, past, and to come, and
how to work the Magic Art, and all other noble Sciences, under the Throne of
God. Note the penalty of breaking promise with the Spirit.
If I do not perform this oath and promise to thee N. but do fly from any part
thereof, then to be condemned for ever and ever. Amen.

Also I N. do swear to thee by God the Holy Ghost, and by the great wisdom that
is in the divine Godhead, and by their virtues, and by all the holy Angels,
Archangels, Thrones, Dominations, Principates, Potestates, Virtutes, Cherubim
and Seraphim, and by all their virtues do I N. swear, and promise thee to be
obedient as is rehearsed. And here, for a witness, do I N. give thee N. my
right hand, and do plight thee my faith and troth, as God me help and holydome.
And by the holy contents in this Book do I N. swear, that my spirit shall be
thy true servant, all the days of thy life, as is before rehearsed, and here
for a witness, that my Spirit shall be obedient unto thee N. and to those bonds
of words that be written in this N. before the bonds of words shall be
rehearsed thrice; else to be damned for ever; and thereto say all faithful
souls and spirits, Amen, Amen.

Then let him swear this Oath Three times, in reverence (peradventure of the
Trinity, P.F.SS.)
three times, and at every time kiss the Book, and at every time make marks to
the bond. Then perceiving the time that he will depart, get away the people
from you, and get or take your stone or glass, or other thing in your hand, and
say the Pater noster, Ave, and Credo, and this Prayer as follows. And in all
the time of his departing, rehearse the bonds of words; and in the end of every
bond, say oftentimes; Remember thine Oath and promise. And bind him strongly to
thee, and to thy stone, and suffer him not to depart, reading thy bond 24
times. And every day when you do call him by your other bond, bind him strongly
by the first bond: by the space of 24. days apply it, and thou shall be made a
man for ever.

Now the Pater noster, Ave, and Credo must be said, and then the Prayer
immediately following.
O God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, God of Tobias; the which did
deliver the three children from the hot burning oven, Sidrac, Misac, and
Abednago, and Susanna from the false crime, and Daniel from the Lions power:
even so O Lord Omnipotent, I beseech thee, for thy great mercy sake, to help me
in these my works, and to deliver me this Spirit of N. that he may be a true
subject unto me N all the days of my life, and to remain with me, and with this
N. all the days of my life. O glorious God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, I
beseech thee to help me at this time, and to give me power by thy holy Name,
Merits and virtues, whereby I may conjure and constrain this Spirit of N. that
he may be obedient unto me, and may fulfill his Oath and promise, at all times,
by the power of all thine holiness. This grant O Lord God of Hosts, as thou art
righteous and holy, and as thou art the Word, and the Word God, the beginning
and the end, sitting in the Thrones of thine everlasting Kingdoms, and in the
divinity of thine everlasting Godhead, to whom be all honor and glory, now and
for ever und ever, Amen, Amen.

CHAP. XXVII.
A Bond to bind him to thee, and to thy N. as follows.

Note the sum of this obligation or bond.
I Conjure and constrain the Spirit of N. by the living God, by the true God,
and by the holy God, and by their virtues and powers I conjure and constrain
the Spirit of thee N. that thou shall not ascend nor descend out of thy body,
to no place of rest, but only to take thy resting place with N. and with this
N. all the days of my life, according to thine Oath and promise, I conjure and
constrain thee Spirit of N. by ehese holy Names of God Tetragrammaton Adonay
Agla Saday Sabbath Planabothe Panthon Craton Neupmaton Deus homo omnipotens
sempiternus ysus terra unigenitus salbator via vita manus sons origo filius,
and by their virtues and powers I conjure and constrain the Spirit of N. that
thou shall not remain in the fire, nor in the water, in the air, nor in any
privy place of the earth, but only with we N. and with this N. all the days of
my life. I charge thee Spirit of N. upon pain of everlasting condemnation,
remember thine Oath and promise. Also I conjure the spirit of N. and constrain
thee by the excellent Name of Jesus Christ, A and O, the first and the last;
for this holy Name of Jesus is above all names, for unto Scripture as well
applied of the Conjuror, as that of Satan in tempting Christ, Matthew. 4.6.
it all knees do bow, and obey both of heavenly things, earthly things, and
infernals. Nor is there any other Name given to man, whereby we have any
salvation, but by the Name of Jesus. Therefore by the Name, and in the Name of
Jesus of Nazareth, and by his Nativity, Resurrection and Ascension, and by all
that appertains to his Passion, and by their virtues and powers, I do conjure
and constrain the Spirit of N. that thou shall not take any resting place in
the nor in the nor in nor in nor in nor in nor in nor in any of the twelve
signs, nor in the concavity of the Clouds, nor in any other privy place, to
rest or stay in, but only with me N. or with this N. all the days of my life.
If thou be not obedient unto me, according to thine Oath and promise, I N. do
condemn the spirit of N. into the pit of hell for over, Amen.

I Conjure and constrain the spirit of N. by the blood of the innocent Lamb
Jesus Christ, the which was shed upon the Cross, for all those that do obey
unto it, and believe in it, shall be saved; and by virtue thereof, and by all
the aforesaid royal names and words of the living God by me pronounced, I do
conjure and constrain the spirit of N. that thou do be obedient unto me,
according to thine Oath and promise. If thou refuse to do as is aforesaid, I N.
by the holy Trinity, Note what sore penalties the spirit is in joined to suffer
for disobedience.
and by his virtue and power do condemn the spirit of N. into the place whereas
there is no hope of remedy, but everlasting condemnation, and horror, and pain
upon pain, daily, horribly, and lamentably the pains there to be augmented, so
thick as the stars in the Firmament, and as the gravel sand in the Sea, except
thou Spirit of N. obey me N. as is before rehearsed; else I N. do condemn the
spirit of N. into the pit of everlasting condemnation, Fiat, fiat, Amen.

Also I conjure thee, and constrain the spirit of N. by all Angels, Archangels,
Thrones, Dominations, Principates, Potestates, Virtutes, Cherubim and Seraphim,
and by the four Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, and by all things
contained in the old Law and the new, and by their virtues, and by the twelve
Apostles, and by all Patriarchs, Prophets, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins,
Innocents, and by all the elect and chosen, is, and shall be, which follows
the Lamb of God; and by their virtues and powers I conjure and constrain the
spirit of N. strongly, to have common talk with me, at all times, and in all
days, nights, hours, and minutes, and to talk in my mother tongue plainly, that
I may hear it, and understand it, declaring the truth unto me of all things,
according to thine oath and promise; else to be condemned for ever, Fiat, fiat,
Amen.

Also I conjure and constrain the spirit of N. by the There is no mention made
in the Gospels that Christ was worth a golden girdle.
golden Girdle, which girdeth the loins of our Lord Jesus Christ, so thou
spirit of N. be thou bound and cast into the pit of everlasting condemnation,
for thy great disobedience and unreverent regard that thou have to the holy
names and words of God Almighty, by me pronounced. Fiat, Amen.

Also I conjure, constrain, command, and by the spirit of N. by the two-edged
Sword which John saw proceed out of the mouth of God Almighty: except thou be
obedient as is aforesaid, the Sword cut thee in pieces, Bugs words.
and condemn thee into the pit of everlasting pains, where the fire goes not
out, and where the worm dies not, Fiat, fiat, fiat, Amen.

Also I conjure and constrain the spirit of N. by the Throne of the Godhead,
and by all the Heavens under him, and by the celestial City new Jerusalem, and
by the Earth, by the Sea, and by all things created and contained therein, and
by their virtues and powers, and by all the infernals, and by their virtues and
powers, and by all things contained therein, and by their virtues and powers, I
conjure and constrain the spirit of N. than now immediately thou be obedient
unto me, at all times hereafter, and to those words of me pronounced according
to thine oath and promise: Is it possible to be greater than S. Adelberts curse?
else let the great curse of God, the anger of God, the shadow and darkness of
everlasting condemnation be upon thee thou spirit of N. for ever and ever,
because thou have denied thine health, thy faith, and salvation, for the great
disobedience thou art worthy to be condemned. Therefore let the divine Trinity,
Angels and Archangels, Thrones, Dominations, Principates, Potestates, Virtutes,
Chrumbim and Seraphim, and all the souls of the Saints, that shall stand on the
right hand of our Lord Jesus Christ, at the general Day of Judgment, condemn
the spirit of N. for ever and ever, and be a witness against thee, because of
thy great disobedience, in and against thy promises. Fiat, fiat, Amen.

Being thus bound, he must needs be obedient unto thee, whether he will or no:
prove this. And here follows a bond to call him to your N. and to show you
true visions at all times, as in the hour of to bind or inchant any thing and
in the hour of, These planetary hours must in any case be observed.
for peace and concord; in the hour of, to mar, to destroy, and to make sick;
in the hour of the, to bind tongues and other bonds of men; in the hour of, to
increase love, joy, and good will; in the hour of, to put away enimity or
hatred, to know of theft; in the hour of the, for love, good will and concord:
lead, tin, iron, gold, copper, quicksilver, silver, etc.

CHAP. XXVIII.
This Bond as follows, is to call him into your Crystal-stone, or Glass, etc.

ALso I do conjure thee spirit N. by God the Father, by God the Son, and by God
the Holy Ghost, A and O, the first and the last, and by the latter day of
Judgment, of them which shall come to judge the quick and the dead, and the
world by fire, and by their virtues and powers, I constrain thee spirit N. to
come to him that holds the Crystal-stone in his hand, and to appear visibly,
as hereafter follows. Also I conjure thee Spirit N. by these holy Names of
God Letragrammaton Adonay El Ousion Agla Jesus of Nazareth, and by the virtues
thereof, and by his nativity, death, burial, resurrection, and ascension, and
by all other things appertaining unto his passion, and by the A Popish
supplement.
blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by all the joy which
she had when she saw her Son rise from death to life, and by the virtues and
powers thereof, I constrain thee Spirit N. to come into the Crystal-stone, and
to appear visibly, as hereafter shall be declared. Also I conjure thee N. thou
Spirit, by all Angels, Archangels, Thrones, Dominations, Principates,
Potestates, Virtutes, Cherubim and Seraphim, and by the, and by the twelve
signs, and by their virtues and powers, and by all things created and
confirmed in the Firmament, and by their virtues and powers, I constrain thee
Spirit N. to appear visibly in that Crystal-stone, in fair Belike he had the
gift to appear in sundry shapes, as it is said of Proteus in Ovid. lib.
metamorph. 8 fab. 10. and of Vertumnus: lib. metamorph. 14. fab. 16.
form and shape of a white Angel, a green Angel, a black Angel, a Man, a Woman,
a Boy, a maiden Virgin, a white Greyhound, a Devil with great horns, without
any hurt or danger of our bodies or souls, and truly to inform and show unto
us, true visions of all things in that Crystal-stone, according to thine Oath
and Promise, and that without any hinderance or tarrying, to appear visibly, by
this Bond of words read over by me three times, upon pain of everlasting
condemnation. Fiat, fiat. Amen.

Then being appeared, say these words following.
I Conjure thee Spirit, by God the Father, that thou show true visions in that
Crystal-stone, where there be any N. in such a place or no, upon pain of
everlasting condemnation, Fiat. Amen. Also I conjure thee Spirit N. by God the
Son Jesus Christ, that thou do show true visions unto us, whether it be gold or
silver, or any other metals, or whether there were any or no, upon pain of
condemnation, Fiat. Amen. Also I conjure thee Spirit N. by God the Holy Ghost,
the which does sanctify all faithful souls and spirits, and by their virtues
and powers, I constrain thee Spirit N. to speak open and to declare the true
way, how we may come by these treasures hidden in N. and how to have it in our
custody, and who are the keepers thereof, and how many there be, and what be
their names, and by whom it was laid there, and to show me true visions of what
sort and similitude they be, and how long they have kept it, and to know in
what days and hours we shall call such a Spirit N. to bring unto us these
treasures into such a place N. upon pain of everlasting condemnation. Also I
constrain thee Spirit N. by all Angels, Note, that the Spirit is tied to
obedience under pain of condemnation and hell fire.
Archangels, Thrones, Dominations, Principates, Potestates, Virtutes, Cherubim
and Seraphim, that you do show a true vision in this Crystal-stone, who did
convey or steal away such a N. and where it is, and who has it, and how far
off, and what is his or her name, and how and when to come unto it, upon pain
of eternal condemnation, Fiat. Amen. Also I conjure thee Spirit N. by the and
by all the Characters in the Firmament, that thou do show unto me a true vision
in this Crystal-stone, where such N. and in what state he is, and how long he
has been there, and what time he will be in such a place, what day and hour:
and this and all other things to declare plainly, on pain of Hell fire. Fiat.
Amen.

A License to Depart.
DEpart out of the sight of this Crystal-stone in peace for a time, and ready
to appear therein again at any time or times I shall call thee, by virtue of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the bonds of words which are written in this
Book, and to appear visibly, as the words be rehearsed. I constrain thee Spirit
N. by the divinity of the Godhead, to be obedient unto these words rehearsed,
upon pain of everlasting condemnation, both in this world and in the world to
come. Fiat, fiat, fiat. Amen.

CHAP. XXIX.
When to talk with Spirits, and to have true answers to find out a Theif.

THe days and hours of and the is best to do all crafts of Necromancy, and for
to speak with Spirits, and for to find theft, This is condemned for rank folly
by the Doctors, as by Chrysostom. sup. Matthew. Gregor. in homil. sup. Epiphan.
Domini; and others.
and to have true answer thereof, or of any other such like. And in the days
and hours of is best to do all experiments of love, and to purchase grace, and
for to be invisible, and to do any operation whatsoever it be, for any thing,
the being in a convenient sign. * As when thou labourest for theft, see the
Moon be in an earthy sign, as, or of the air, as. * And if it be for love,
favor or grace, let the be in a sign of the fire, as and for hatred, in a sign
of the water, as. For any other experiment, let the be in. * And if thou
find the and the in one sign that is called in even number, then thou may
write, consecrate, conjure, and make ready all manner of things that thou will
do, etc.

To speak with Spirits.
CAll these names, Orimoth, Beltmoth, Lymock, and say thus: I conjure you up by
the names of the Angels Satur and Azimor, that you intend to me in this hour,
and send unto me a Spirit caded Sagrigrit, that he do fulfill my commandment
and desire, and that also can understand my words for one or two years, or as
long as I will.

CHAP. XXX.
A Confutation of Conjuration, especially of the raising, binding and dimissing
of the Devil, of going invisible, and other lewd practices.

THus far have we waded in showing at large the vanity of Necromancers, All the
former practices briefly confuted.
Conjurors and such as pretend to have real conference and consultation with
Spirits and Devils: wherein (I trust) you see what notorious blasphemy is
committed, besides other blind superstitious Ceremonies, a disordered heap,
which are so far from building up the endeavors of these Black Art practitiers,
that they do altogether ruinate and overthrow them, making them in their
follies and falsehoods as bare and naked as an Anatomy: As for these ridiculous
Conjurations, last rehearsed, being of no small reputation among the ignorant,
they are for the most part made by T.R. (for so much of his name he bewrays)
and John Cockars, See the title of the Book, with the Authors intent, in a
marginal note, page 277.
invented and devised for the augmentation and maintenance of their living, for
the edifying of the poor, and for the propagating and enlarging of Gods glory,
as in the beginning of their Book of Conjurations they protest; which in this
place, for the further manifestation of their impiety, and of the Witchmongers
folly and credulity, I thought good to insert, whereby the residue of their
proceeding may be judged or rather detected. For if we seriously behold the
matter of Conjuration, and the drift of Conjurors, we shall find them, in mine
opinion, more faulty then such as take upon them to be Witches, as manifest
offenders against the Majesty of God, and his holy Law, as apparent violators
of the laws and quietness of this Realm: although indeed they bring no such
thing to pass, as is surmised and urged by credulous persons, coseners, liars,
and Witchmongers. For these are always learned, and rather abusers of others,
than they themselves by others abused.

But let us see what appearance of truth or possibility is wrapped within these
mysteries, and let us unfold the deceit. They have made choice of certain
words, whereby they say they can work miracles, Luke 16. etc.
etc. And first of all, that they call Devils and souls out of Hell, (though we
find in the Scripture manifest proofs, that all passages are stopped concerning
the egress out of Hell) so as they may go thither, but they shall never get
out, for Ab inferno nulla est redemptio, out of hell there is no redemption.
Well, when they have gotten them up, they shut them in a circle made with
Chalk, which is so strongly beset and environed with crosses and names, that
they cannot for their lives get out; which is a very probable matter. An
Ironical confutation.
Then can they bind them and loose them at their pleasures, and make them that
have been liars from the beginning, to tell the truth, yea they can compel them
to do any thing. And the Devils are forced to be obedient unto them, and yet
cannot be brought to due obedience unto God their Creator. This done, (I say)
they can work all manner of miracles (saving blew miracles) and this is to
believed of many to be ttue; Tam credula men's hominis, and arrectae fabulis
aures. Englished by Abraham Fleming: So light of belief is the mind of man,
And attentive to tales his ears now and than.


But if Christ (only for a time) left the power of working miracles among his
Apostles and Disciples for the confirmation of his Gospel, and the faith of his
elect: yet I deny altogether that he left that power with these Knaves, which
hide their cosening purposes under those lewd and foolish words, according to
that which Peter says; 2 Pet. 2. Ephesians. 5. Psalm. 72. and 78.
With feigned words they make merchandise of you. And therefore the counsel is
good that Paul gives us, when he bids us, Take heed that no man deceive us
with vain words; For it is the Lord only that works great wonders, and
brings mighty things to pass. It is also written, that Gods Word, and not the
words of Conjurors, Sap. 16. Eccles. 43.
or the Charms of Witches, heals all things, makes tempests, and stilleth
them.

To deny the subsistence or natural being of a thing material and visible is
impudency.
But put case the Devil could be fetched up and fettered, and loosed again at
their pleasure, etc. I marvel yet, that any can be so bewitched as to be made
to believe, that by virtue of their words, any earthly creature can be made
invisible. We think it a lie to say that white is black; and black white; but
it is a more shameless assertion to affirm, that white is not, or black is not
at all; and yet more impudency to hold that a Man is a Horse; but most apparent
impudency to say, that a Man is no Man, or to be extenuated into such a
quantity, as thereby he may be invisible, and yet remain in life and health,
and that in the clear light of the day, even in the presence of them that are
not blind. But surely he that cannot make one hair white or black, whereof (on
the other side) not one falls from the head without Gods special Providence,
can never bring to pass, that the visible creature of God shall become nothing,
or lose the virtue and grace poured therein by God the Creator of all things.

If they say that the Devil covers them with a cloud or veil, Ezekiel. 8. and 9*
Isa. 6. and 26. and 30.
as M. Mal Bodin, and many other do affirm; yet (me thinks) we should either
see the cover, or the thing covered. And though perchance they say in their
hearts; Tush, the Lord sees not, who indeed has blinded them, so as seeing
they see not; yet they shall never be able to persuade the wise, but that both
God and man does see both them and their knavery in this behalf. I have heard
of a fool, who was made believe that he should go invisible and naked; while he
was well whipped by them, who (as he thought) could not see him. Into which
fools Paradise they say John Jaregni servant to Gasper Anastro both Spaniards.
Anno. dom. 1582. March. 18. after dinner upon a sunday this mischief was done.
Read the whole discourse hereof printed at London for Tho. Chard, and Will.
Brom, Booksellers.
he was brought, that enterprised to kill the Prince of Orange.

CHAP. XXXI.
A Comparison between Popish Exorcists and other Conjurors; a Popish
Conjuration published by a great Doctor of the Romish Church; his rules and
cautions.

I See no difference between these and Popish Conjurations; for they agree in
order, words, and matter, differing in no circumstance, but that the Papists do
it without shame openly, the other do it in hugger mugger secretly. The Papists
(I say) have Officers in this behalf, which are called Exorcists or Conjurors,
and they look narrowly to other cosenours, as having gotten the upper hand over
them. And because the Papists shall be without excuse in this behalf, and that
the world may see their cosenage, impiety, and folly to be as great as the
others, I will cite one Conjuration (of which sort I might cite a hundred)
published by Jacobus de Chusa, a great Doctor of the Romish Church, Jac de
Chusa in lib. de a^paritionib. quorundam spirituum.
which serves to find out the cause of noise and spiritual rumbling in Houses,
Churches, or Chapels, and to conjure walking Spirits; which evermore is
knavery and cosenage in the highest degree. Mark the cosening device hereof,
and confer the impiety with the others.

First (forsooth) he says it is expedient to fast three days, Observations for
the exorcising Priest.
and to celebrate a certain number of Masses, and to repeat the seven
Penitential Psalms; then four or five Priests must be called to the place where
the haunt or noise is, then a Candle hallowed on Candlemas day must be lighted,
and in the lighting thereof also must the seven Psalms be said, and the Gospel
of St. John. Then there must be a Cross and a Censer with Frankinsense, and
therewithal the place must be censed or perfumed, holy Water must be sprinkled,
and a holy Stoal must be used, and (after diverse other Ceremonies) a Prayer to
God must be made, in manner and form following.

O Lord Jesus Christ, the knower of all secrets, which always revealest all
wholesome and profitable things to thy faithful children, and which suffer a
Spirit to show himself in this place, we beseech thee for thy bitter Passion,
etc vouchsafe to command this spirit, to reveal and signify unto us thy
servants, without our terror or hurt, what he is, to thine honor, and to his
comfort; In Nomine Patris, etc. And then proceed in these words: We beseech
thee, for Christ's sake, O thou spirit, that if there be any of us, or among us,
whom thou would answer, name him, or else manifest him by some sign. Is it
Friar P. or Doctor D. or Doctor Burc. or sir Feats, or sir John, Memorandum
that he must be the veriest Knave or Fool in all the company.
or sir Robert? Et sic de caeteris circumstantibus. For it is well tried (says
the gloss) he will not answer every one. If the Spirit make any sound of voice,
or knocking at the naming of any one, he is the Cosenour (the Conjuror I would
say) that must have the charge of this Conjuration or Examination. And these
forsooth must be the interrogatories, to wit; Whose Soul art thou? Wherefore
came thou? What would thou have? Want thou any Suffrages, Masses, or
Alms? How many Masses will serve thy turn! three, six, ten, twenty, thirty,
etc? By what Priest? Must he be religious or secular? Will thou have any Fasts?
What? How many? How great? And by what persons? Among Hospitals, Lepers, or
Beggars? What shall be the sign of thy perfect deliverance? Wherefore lie
thou in Purgatory? and such like. This must be done in the night.

The spirits are not so cunning by day as by night.
If there appear no sign at this hour, it must be deferred until another hour.
Holy water must be left in the place. There is no fear (they say) that such a
Spirit will hurt the Conjuror; for he can sin no more, as being in the mean
state between good and evil, and as yet in the state of satisfaction. For so
they might be bewrayed.

For so the cosenage may be best handled.


If the Spirit do hurt, then it is a damned soul, and not an elect. Every man
may not be present hereat, specially such as be weak of complexion. They appear
in diverse manners, not always in body or bodily shape (as it is read in the
life of S. Martine, that the Devil did) but sometimes invisible, as only by
sound, voice, or noise. Thus far Jacobus de Chusa.

But because you shall see that these be not empty words, nor slanders; but
that in truth such things are commonly put in practice in the Romish Church, I
will here set down an instance, lately and truly, though lewdly performed; and
the same in effect as follows.

CHAP. XXXII.
A late Experiment or cosening Conjuration practiced at Orleance by the
Franciscan Friars, how it was detected, and the Judgment against the Authors
of that Comedy.

A cosening Conjuration. Of this order read noble stuff in a Book printed at
Frankeford under the title of Alcoran Franciscanorum.
IN the year of our Lord 1534. at Orleance in France, the Majors wife dyed,
willing and desiring to be buried without any pomp or noise, etc. Her husband,
who reverenced the memorial of her, did even as she had willed him. And because
she was buried in the Church of the Franciscans, besides her Father and
Grandfather, and gave them in reward only six Crowns, whereas they hoped for a
greater prey; shortly after it chanced, that as he felled certain Woods and
sold them, they desired to give them some part thereof freely without money,
which he flatly denied. This they took very grievously. And whereas before they
misliked him, now they conceived such displeasure as they devised this means to
be revenged; to wit, that his Wife was damned for ever. The chief workmen and
framers of this tragedy were Colimannus and Stephanus Aterbatensis, both
Doctors of Divinity; this Colimannus was a great Conjuror, and had all his
implements in a readiness, which he was wont to use in such business. Note how
the Franciscans cannot conjure without a confederate.
And thus they handle the matter. They place over the Arches of the Church a
young novice; who about midnight when they came to mumble their Prayers, as
they were wont to do, makes a great rumbling and noise. Out of hand the Monks
began to conjure and to charm, but he answered nothing. Then being requireed to
give a sign, whether he were a dum Spirit or no, he began to rumble again;
which thing they took as a certain sign. Having laid this foundation, they go
unto certain Citizens, chief men, and such as favored them, declaring that a
heavy chance had happened at home in their Monastery; not showing what the
matter was, but desiring them to come to their Mattens at midnight. O notorious
impudency! with such shameless faces to abuse so worshipful a company!
When these Citizens were come, and that Prayers were begun, the counterfeit
Spirit begins to make a mavelous noise in the top of the Church. And being
asked what he meant, and who he was, gave signs that it was not lawful for him
to speak. Therefore they commanded him to make answer by tokens and signs to
certain things they would demand of him. Now there was a hole made in the
Vault, through the which he might hear and understand the voice of a Conjuror.
And then had he in his hand a little board, which at every question he struck,
in such sort as he might easily be heard beneath. First they asked him, Whether
he were one of them that had been buried in the same place? Afterward they
reckoning many by name, which had been buried there, at the last also they name
the Majors wife, and there by and by the spirit gave a sign that he was her
soul. He was further asked, Whether he was damned or no; and if he were, for
what cause, for what desert or fault? whether for Covetousness, or wanton lust,
for Pride or want of Charity? or, whether it were for Heresy, or the Sect of
Luther newly sprang up? also, What he meant by that noise and stir he kept
there? whether it were to have the body now buried in holy ground to be dug
up again, and laid in some other place? To all which points he answered by
signs, as he was commanded, by the which he affirmed or denied any thing,
according as he struck the board twice or thrice together. And when he had thus
given them to understand, that the The confederate spirit was taught that
lesson before.
very cause of his damnation was Luthers Heresy, and that the body must needs
be dug up again: the Monks requested the Citizens, whose presence they had
used, or rather abused, that they would bear witness of those things which they
had seen with their eyes; and that they would subscribe to such things as were
done before. The Citizens taking good advice on the matter, lest they should
offend the Mayor, or bring themselves into trouble, refused so to do. But the
Monks notwithstanding take from thence the sweet bread, which they called the
host and and body of our Lord, with all the relics of Saints, and carry them
to another place, and there say their Mass. The Bishops substitute Judge (whom
they called Official) understanding that matter, comes thither, accompanied
with certain honest men, to the intent he might know the whole circumstance
more exactly; and therefore he commands them to make Conjuration in his
presence; and also he requires certain to be chosen to go up into the top of
the vault, and there to see whether any Ghost appeared or not. Stephanus
Aterbatensis stiffly denied that to be lawful, For so might the confederate be
found.
and marvellously persuading the contrary, affirmed that the Spirit in no wise
ought to be troubled. And albeit the Official urged them very much, that there
might be some Conjuring of the Spirit, yet could he nothing prevail.

Whilst these things were doing, the Mayor, when he had showed the other
Justices of the City, what he would have them to do, took his journey to the
King, and opened the whole matter unto him. And because the Monks refused
judgment upon plea of their own Laws and Liberties, the King choosing out
certain of the Aldermen of Paris, gives them absolute and full authority to
make enquiry of the matter. The like does the Chancellor Master Anthonius
Pratensis Cardinal and Legate for the Pope throughout France. Therefore when
they had no exception to allege, they were conveyed unto Paris, and there
constrained to make their answer. An obstinate and wilful persisting in the
denying or not confessing of a fault committed.
But yet could nothing be wrung out of them by confession, whereupon they were
put a part into diverse Prisons; the Novice being kept in the house of Master
Fumanus, one of the Aldermen, was oftentimes examined, and earnestly requested
to utter the truth, but would notwithstanding confess nothing, because he
feared that the Monks would afterward put him to death for staining their
order, and putting it to open shame. But when the Judges had made him sure
promise that he should escape punishment, and that he should never come into
their handling, he opened unto them the whole matter as it was done; and being
brought before his fellows, avouched the same to their faces. The Monks, albeit
they were convicted, and by these means almost taken tardy with the deed doing;
yet did they refuse the Judges, bragging and vaunting themselves on their
privileges, but all in vain: For sentence passed upon them, and they were
condemned to be carried back again to Orleance, and thereto be cast in Prison,
and so should finally be brought forth into the chief Church of the City
openly, and from thence to the place of execution, where they should make open
confession of their trespasses.

Surely this was most common among Monks and Friars, who maintained their
Religion, their Lust, their Liberties, their Pomp, their Wealth, their
Estimation and Knavery by such cosening practices.

A parecbasis or transition of the Author to matter further proposed.
Now I will show you more special orders of Popish Conjurations, that are so
shamelesly admitted into the Church of Rome, that they are not only suffered,
but commands to be used; not by night secretly, but by day impudently. And
these, forsooth, concerning the curing of bewitched persons, and such as are
possessed, to wit, such as have a Devil put into them by Witches Enchantments.
And herewithal I will set down certain rules delivered unto us by such Popish
Doctors as are of greatest reputation.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Who may he Conjurors in the Romish Church besides Priests; a ridiculous
definition of Superstition; what words are to be used and not used in
Exorcisms; rebaptism allowed; it is lawful to conjure any thing; differences
between Holy Water and Conjuration.

In 4. dict. 23. sent.
THomas Aquinas says, That any body, though he be of an inferior or superior
order, yea of none order at all, (and as Gulielmus Durandus glossator Raimundi,
affirms, A Woman, so she bless not the girdle, or the garment, but the person
of the bewitched) has power to exercise the order of an Exorcist or Conjuror,
even as well as any Priest may say Mass in an house unconsecrated. But that is
(says M. Mal.) rather through the goodness and license of the Pope, than
through the grace of the Sacrament. Nay, there are examples set down, where
some being bewitched were cured (as M. Mal. takes it) without any Conjuration
at all. Marry there were certain Pater Nosters, Aves, and Credoes said, and
Crosses made; but they are Charms, they say, and no Conjurations: For, they
say, that such Charms are lawful, because there is no Superstition in them, etc.

And it is worthy my labor to show you how Papists define Superstition, and
how they expound the difinition thereof. Et glos. super. illo ad coll. 2.
Superstition (say they) is a Religion observed beyond measure; a Religion
practiced with evil and unperfect circumstances. Also, whatsoever usurpeth the
name of Religion, through humane tradition, without the Popes authority, is
Superstitious: as to add or join any Hymns to the Mass, to interrupt any
Diriges, to abridge any part of the Creed in the singing thereof, or to sing
when the Organs go, and not when the Quire sings, not to have one to help the
Priest to Mass, and such like, etc.

Mendaces debent esse memores, multo magis astuti exorcistae.
These Popish Exorcists do many times forget their own Rules. For they should
not directly, in their Conjurations call upon the Devil (as they do) with
entreaty, but with authority and commandment. Neither should they have in
their Charms and Conjurations any unknown names. Neither should there be (as
always there is) any falsehood contained in the matter of the Charm of
Conjuration, as (say they) old Women have in theirs, when they say, the blessed
Virgin passed over Jordan, and then S. Steven met her and asked her, etc.
Neither should they have any other vain Characters, but the Cross (for those
are the words) and many other such cautions have they, which they observe not;
for they have made it lawful elsewhere.

Tho. Aquin. super. Marc ultim. Mark 16.17.
But Thomas their chief pillar proves their Conjuring and Charms lawful by S.
Mark, who says, Signa eos qui crediderunt; and, In nomine meo damonia
ejicient, etc. whereby he also proves that they may conjure Serpents: And
there he takes pains to prove, that the words of God are of as great holiness
as the relics of Saints; whereas (in such respect as they mean) they are both
alike, and indeed nothing worth. And I can tell them further, that so they may
be carried, as either of them may do a man much harm either in body or soul.

A trim consequent.
But they prove this by S. Augustine, saying, Non est minus verbum Dei, quam
corpus Christi: whereupon they conclude thus, By all men's opinions it is lawful
to carry about reverently the relics of Saints; Ergo, it is lawful against
evil Spirits, to invocate the name of God every way; by the Pater Noster, the
Ave, the Nativity, the Passion, the five Wounds, the title Triumphant, by the
seven words spoken on the Cross, by the nails, etc. and there may be hope
reposed in them. Yea, they say, Mal. Malef par. 2. quaest. 2.
it is lawful to conjure all things, because the Devil may have power in all
things. And first, always the person or thing, wherein the Devil is, must be
exorcised, and then the Devil must be conjured. Also they affirm, that it is as
expedient to consecrate and conjure Pottage and Meat, as Water and Salt, or
such like things.

The right order of Exorcism in Rebaptism of a person possessed or bewitched,
Rites, Ceremonies, and relics of exorcism in rebaptizing of the possessed or
bewitched.
requires that Exsufflation and Abrenunciation be done toward the West. Item,
there must be erection of Hands, Confession, Profession, Oration, Benediction,
Imposition of hands, Denudation and Unction, with holy Oil after Baptism,
Communion and Induition of the Surplis. But they say that this needs not,
where the bewitched is exorcised; but that the bewitched be first confessed,
and then to hold, a Candle in his hand, and in stead of a Surplis, to tie about
his bare body a holy Candle of the length of Christ, or of the Cross whereupon
he dyed, which for money may be had at Rome. Ergo (says M. Mal.) this may be
said, I conjure thee Peter or Barbara being sick, but regenerate in the holy
water of Baptism, by the living God, by the true God, by the holy God, by the
God which redeemed thee with his precious blood, that thou may be made a
conjured man, that every fantasy and wickedness of Diabolical deceit do avoid
and depart from thee, and that every unclean Spirit be conjured through him
that shall come to judge the quick and the dead, and the World by fire, Amen.
Oremus, etc. And this Conjuration with Oremus, and a Prayer, must be thrice
repeated, and at the end always must be said, Ergo maledicte diabole
recognosce sententiam tuam, etc. Therefore cursed Devil know thy sentence,
etc. Memorandum that this is for one bewitched.
And this order must always be followed: and finally, there must be diligent
search made, in every corner, and under every coverlet and pallet, and under
every threshold of the doors, for instruments of Witchcraft; and if any be
found, they must straightway be thrown into the fire. Also, they must change
all their bedding, their clothing, and their habitation; and if nothing be
found, the party that is to be exorcised or conjured, must come to the Church
rath in the morning; and the holier the day is, the better, specially our Lady
day. And the Priest, if he be shriven himself and in perfect state, shall do
the better therein: And let him that is exorcised, Note the Proviso.
hold a holy candle in his hand, etc. Always provided, that the holy water be
thrown upon him, and a stoal put about his neck, with Deus in adjutorium, and
the Letany, with invocation of Saints: and this order may continue twice a
week, so as (say they) through multiplication of Intercessors, or rather
intercessions, grace may be obtained, and favor procured.

There is also some question in the Romish Church, Whether the Sacrament of the
Altar is to be received before or after the Exorcism? Item, in shrift, the
Confessor must learn whether the Party be not Excommunicate, and so for want of
Absolution, endures this vexation. Tho. Aquin. supr. did. 6.
Thomas shows the difference between Holy Water and Conjuration, saying, That
Holy Water drives the Devil away from the external and outward parts; but
Conjurations from the internal and inward parts; and therefore unto the
bewitched party both are to be applied.

CHAP. XXXIV.
The seven Reasons, why some are not rid of the Devil with all their Popish
Conjurations; why there were no Conjurors in the Primitive Church; and why the
Devil is not so soon cast out of the bewitched as of the possessed.

THe reason why some are not remedied for all their Conjurations, the For that
the faith of the standers Secondly, For that theirs that present the party is
no Thirdly, Because of the sins of the bewitched: Fourthly, For the neglecting
Fifthly, For the reverence of virtues going out into others: For the Purgation:
Seventhly, For the merit of the party bewitched. And Matthew the 7. and Mark
the 4. when one presented his Son, Proper proofs of the seven reasons
and the multitude wanted faith, and the Father said, Lord help my incredulity,
or unbelief. Whereupon was said, Oh faithless and perverse generation, how long
shall I be with you? and where these words were written, And Jesus rebuked him,
etc. that is to say, say they, the possessed or bewitched for his sins: For by
the neglect of due remedies it appears that there were not with Christ good
and perfect men: For the pillars of the faith, to wit, Peter, James and John
were absent. Neither was there fasting and praying, without the which that kind
of Devils could not be cast out. For the fourth point, to wit, the fault of the
Exorcist in faith may appear, for that afterward the Disciples asked the cause
of their impotency therein: And Jesus answered, it was for their incredulity,
saying, Thut if they had as much faith as a grain of mustard seed, they should
move mountains, etc. The fifth is proved by Vitas Patrum, the lives of the
Fathers, where it appears that S. Anthony could not do that cure, when his
Scholar Paul could do it, and did it. For the proof of the sixth excuse it is
said, that though the fault be taken away thereby, yet it follows not that
always the punishment is released. Last of all, it is said, That it is
possible that the Devil was not conjured out of the party before Baptism by the
Exorcist; or the midwife has not baptized him well, but omitted some part of
the Sacrament. If any object, There was no Exorcist in the primitive Church;
Why there were no Conjurors in the Primitive Church, with other subtle points.
It is answered, That the Church cannot now err. And S. Gregory would never
have instituted it in vain. And it is a general rule, that who or whatsoever is
newly exorcised, must be rebaptized, as also such as walk or talk in their
sleep; for (say they) call them by their names, and presently they wake, or
fall if they climb; whereby it is gathered that they are not truly name in
Baptism. Item, they say, It is somewhat more difficult to conjure the Devil out
of one bewitched, then out of one possessed; because in the bewitched he is
double; in the other single. They have a hundred such beggarly, foolish and
frivolous notes in this behalf.

CHAP. XXXV.
Other gross absurdities of Witchmongers in this matter of Conjurations.

SUrely I cannot see what difference or distinction the Witchmongers do put
between the knowledge and power of God and the Devil; but that they think, if
they pray, or rather talk to God till their hearts ache, he never hears them;
but that the Devil does know every thought and imagination of their minds, and
both can and also will do any thing for them. For if any that means good
faith with the Devil, read certain conjurations, he comes up (they say) at a
trice. Marry if another that has no intent to raise him, read or pronounce the
words, A Conjuror then belike must not be timorous or fearful.
he will not stir. And yet, J. Bodin confesses, That he is afraid to read
such Conjurations as John Wierus recites, lest (belike) the Devil would come
up and scratch him with his foul long nails. In which sort, I wonder that the
Devil deals with none other then Witches and Conjurors. I for my part have
read a number of their Conjurations, but never could see any Devils of theirs,
Where a Witch cures by Incantation, and the Conjuror by Conjuration.
except it were in a Play. But the Devil (belike) knows my mind; to wit, that
I would be loath to come within the compass of his claws. But lo, what reason
such people have, Bodin, Bartholomeus, Spineus, Sprenger, and Institor, etc. do
constantly affirm, that Witches are to be punished with more extremity than
Conjurors, and sometimes with death, when the other are to be pardoned doing
the same offense; because (say they) the Witches make a league with the Devil,
and so do not Conjurors. Now if Conjurors make no league by their own
confession, and Devils indeed know not our cogitations (as I have sufficiently
proved) then would I weet of our Witchmongers the reason (if I read the
Conjuration and perform the Ceremony) why the Devil will not come at my call?
But oh absurd credulity! Even in this point many wise and learned men have been
and are abused: whereas, if they would make experience, or duly expend the
cause, they might be soon resolved; specially when the whole Art and
Circumstance is so contrary to Gods Word, as it must be false, if the other be
true. So as you may understand, that the Papists do not only by their doctrine,
in Books and Sermons, teach and publish Conjurations, and the order thereof,
whereby they may induce men to bestow, or rather cast away their money upon
Masses and Suffrages for their souls; but they make it also a parcel of their
Sacrament of orders (of the which number a Conjuror is one) and insert many
forms of Conjurations into their Divine Service; and not only into their
Pontificals, but into their Masse-books; yea, into the very Canon of the Mass.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Certain Conjurations taken out of the Pontifical, and out of the Missal.

BUt see yet a little more of Popish Conjurations, and confer them with the
other. In the Tit. de Eccl. de dicatione.
Pontifical you shall find this Conjuration, which the other Conjurours use as
solemnly as they; I conjure thee thou creature of Water, in the Name of the
Father, of the Son, and of the HolyGhost, that thou drive away the Devil from
the bounds of the just, that he remain not in the dark corners of this Church
and Altar. You shall find in the same title, these words following, to be used
at the hollowing of Churches. There must a cross of ashes be made upon the
pavement, from one end of the Church to the other, one handful broad; and one
of the Priests must write on the one side thereof the Greek Alphabet, and on
the other side the Latin Alphabet. Durandus yields this reason thereof, to
wit, It represents the union in faith of the Jews and Gentiles: And yet well
agreeing to himself, he says even there, That the Cross reaching from the one
end to the other; signifies, that the people, which were in the head, shall be
made the tail.

A Conjuration written in the Masse-book. Fol. 1.
I Conjure thee O creature of Salt, by God, by the God that lives, by the true
God, In Missal. fol. 1. The manner of conjuring Salt.
by the holy God, which by Elizacus the Prophet commanded, that thou should
be thrown into the Water, that it thereby might be made whole and sound, that
thou Salt [here let the Priest look upon the Salt] may be conjured for the
health of all believers, and that thou be to all that take thee, health both of
body and soul: and let all fantasies and wickedness, or Diabolical craft or
deceit, depart from the place whereon it is sprinkled; as also every unclean
Spirit, being conjured by him that judges both the quick and the dead by fire.
Resp. Amen.

Then follows a Prayer to be said, without Dominus vobiscum; but yet with
Oremus: as follows:

Oremus.
ALmighty and everlasting God, A Prayer to be applied to the former Exorcism.
we humbly desire thy clemency [here let the Priest look upon the Salt] that
thou would vouchsafe, through thy piety, to bless and sanctify this
creature of Salt, which thou have given for the use of mankind, that it may be
to all that receive it, health of mind and body; so as whatsoever shall be
touched thereby, or sprinkled therewith, may be void of all uncleanness, and
all resistance of spiritual iniquity, through our Lord. Amen.

What can be made but a Conjuration of these words also, which are written in
the Canon, or rather in the Saccaring of Mass? This holy commixtion of the
body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, let it be made to me, and to all the
receivers thereof, health of mind and body, and a wholesome preparative for the
deserving and receiving of everlasting life, through our Lord Jesus. Amen.

CHAP. XXXVII.
That Popish Priests leave nothing unconjured; a form of Exercism for Incense.

ALthough the Papists have many Conjurations, so as neither Water, nor Fire,
nor Bread, nor Wine, nor Wax, nor Tallow, nor Church, nor Churchyard, nor
Altar, nor Altar-cloth, nor Ashes, nor coals, nor Bells, nor Bell-ropes, nor
Copes, nor Vestments, nor Oil, nor Salt, nor Candle, nor Candlestick, nor Beds,
nor Bed-staves, etc. are without their form of Conjuration; A Conjuration of
Frankincense set forth in form.
yet I will, for brevity, let all pass, and end here with Incense, which they
do conjure in this sort. I conjure thee most filthy and horrible Spirit, and
every vision of our enemy, etc. that thou go and depart from out of this
creature of Frankincense, with all thy deceit and wickedness that this
creature may be sanctified; and in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ that all
they that taste, touch, or smell the same, may receive the virtue and
assistance of the holy Ghost, so as wheresoever this Incense or Frankincense
shall remain, that there thou in no wise be so bold as to approach or once
presume or attempt to hurt; but what unclean Spirit soever thou be, that thou
with all thy craft and subtilty avoid and depart, being conjured by the name of
God the Father Almighty, etc. And that wheresoever the fume or smoke thereof
shall come, every kind and sort of Devils may be driven away, and expelled; as
they were at the increase of the liver of fish, which the Archangel Raphael
male, etc.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Toe Rules and Laws of Popish Exorcists and other Conjurors all one; with a
confutation of their whole power: How S. Martin conjured the Devil.

Papists and Conjurors cosening compeers.
THe Papists, you see, have their certain general Rules and Laws, as to abstain
from sin, and to fast, as also otherwise to be clean from all pollutions, etc.
and even so likewise have the other Conjurors. Some will say that Papists use
Divine Service, and Prayers; even so do common Conjurors (as you see) even in
the same Papistical form, no whit swarving from theirs in faith and doctrine,
nor yet in ungodly and unreasonable kinds of petitions. Methinks it may be a
sufficient argument to overthrow the calling up and miraculous works of
Spirits, 1 Samuel 16.7. 1 Reg. 8.39. Jer. 17.10. Psalm. 44.21. Psalm. 72.18.
that it is written, God only knows and searches the hearts, and only
works great wonders. The which argument being prosecuted to the end, can
never be answered; in so much as that Divine power is required in that action.

And if it be said, That in this Conjuration we speak to the Spirits, and they
hear us, and therefore need not know our thoughts and imaginations: I first ask
them, Whether King Bael, or Amaymon, which are Spirits reigning in the furthest
regions of the East (as they say) may hear a Conjurors voice, which calls for
them, being in the extremest parts of the West; there being such noises
interposed, where perhaps also they may be busy, and set to work on the like
affairs? Secondly, Whether those Spirits be of the same power that God is, who
is everywhere, filling all places, and able to hear all men at one instant?
etc. Thirdly, Whence comes the force of such words as raise the dead, and
command Devils? If sounds do it, then may it be done by a taber and a pipe, or
any other instrument that has no life: If the voice do it, then may it be done
by any Beasts or Birds: If words, then a Parret may do it: if in man's words
only, where is the force, in the first, second, or third syllable? If in
syllables, then not in words: If in imaginations, then the Devil knows our
thoughts. But all this stuff is vain and fabulous.

It is written, All the generations of the earth were healthful, Sap. 1.14.
Eccl. 9. Genesis 1.31. Act. 19.14.
and there is no poison of destruction in them. Why then do they conjure
wholesome creatures, as Salt, Water, etc. where no Devils are? God looked upon
all his works, and saw they were all good. What effect (I pray you) had the
seven sons of Sceva, which is the great objection of Witchmongers? They would
needs take upon them to conjure Devils out of the possessed. But what brought
they to pass? Yet that was in the time whilst God suffered miracles commonly
to be wrought. By that you may see what Conjurors can do.

Where is such a promise to Conjurors or Witches, as is made in the Gospel to
the faithful? where it is written, In my name they shall cast out Devils, Mark
16.17, 18.
speak with new tongues; if they shall drink any deadly thing, it shall not
hurt them; they shall take away Serpents, they shall lay hands on the sick, and
they shall recover. According to the promise, this grant of miraculous working
was performed in the primitive Church, for the confirmation of Christ's doctrine,
and the establishing of the Gospel.

But as in another place I have proved, the gift thereof was but for a time,
and is now ceased; neither was it ever made to Papist, Witch, or Conjuror. They
take upon them to call up and cast out Devils; and to undo with one Devil, that
which another Devil has done. If one Devil could cast out another, it were a
Kingdom divided, and could not stand. Which argument Christ himself makes; and
therefore I may the more boldly say, even with Christ, That they have no such
power: For, Isa. 43.11.
besides him there is no Savior; Verse. 13. Chap. 44.7, 25. Chap. 46.10. Chap.
47.12, 13, etc. Luke 11.20. Mat. 12.28.
none can deliver out of his hand. Who but he can declare, set in order,
appoint, and tell what is to come? He destroys the tokens of Soothsayers, and
makes the Conjecturers fools, etc. He declares things to come; and so cannot
Witches.

There is no help in Inchanters and Soothsayers, and other such vain sciences:
For, Devils are cast out by the finger of God; which Matthew calls, the
Spirit of God; which is, the mighty power of God, and not by the virtue of the
bare name only, being spoken or pronounced; Act. 8.18, 19.
for then might every wicked man do it. And Simon Magus needed not then to have
proffered money to have bought the power to do Miracles and Wonders; for he
could speak and pronounce the name of God, as well as the Apostles. Indeed they
may soon throw out all the Devils that are in Frankincense, and such like
creatures, wherein no Devils are: but neither they, nor all their holy water,
can indeed cure a man possessed with a Devil, either in body or mind, as Christ
did. Nay, why do they not cast out the Devil that possesses their own souls?

Let me hear any of them all speak with new tongues; let them drink but one
dram of a potion which I will prepare for them; let them cure the sick by
laying on of hands (though Witches take it upon them, and Witchmongers believe
it) and then I will subscribe unto them. But if they which repose such
certainty in the actions of Witches and Conjurors, would diligently note their
deceit, Money is the mark whereat all Witches and Conjurors do aim.
and how the scope whereat they shoot is Money (I mean not such Witches as are
falsely accused, but such as take upon them to give answers, etc. as mother
Bungie did) they should apparently see the Cosenage: For they are abused, as
are many beholders of Juglers, which suppose they do miraculously, that which
is done by sleight and subtilty.

But in this matter of Witchcrafts and Conjurations, if men would rather trust
their own eyes, then old Wives tales and lies, I dare undertake this matter
would soon be a ta perfect point; as being easier to be perceived than Juggling.
But I must needs confess, that it is no great marvel, though the simple be
abused therein, when such lies concerning those matters are maintained by such
persons of account, and thrust into their Divine Service. As for example:

S. Martins. Conjuration: In die sancti Martini. lect. 1.
It is written, That S. Martin thrust his fingers into ones mouth that had a
Devil within him, and used to bite folk; and then did bid him devour them if he
could: And because the Devil could not get out at his mouth, being stopped with
S. Martins fingers, he was fain to run out at his fundament. O stinking lie!

CHAP. XXXIX.
That it is ashame for Papists to believe other Conjurors doings, their own
being of so little force. Hippocrates his opinion herein.

ANd still methinks Papists (of all others) which indeed are most credulous,
and do most maintain the force of Witches Charms, and of Conjurors Cosenages,
should perceive and judge Conjurors doings to be void of effect: For when they
see their own stuff, as Holy Water, Salt, Candles, etc. conjured by their holy
Bishop and Priests, and that in the words of Consecration or Conjuration (for
so To wit, Vincent Dominica in albis, in octa pasch. sermon 25. Durand. de
exorcist.
their own Doctors term them) they adjure the water, etc. to heal, not only the
souls infirmity, but also every malady, hurt, or ach of the body; and do also
command the Candles, with the force of their authority and power, and by the
effect of all their holy words, not to consume; and yet neither soul nor body
any thing recover, nor the Candles last one minute the longer: with what face
can they defend the others miraculous works, as though the Witches and
Conjurors actions were more effectual then their own? Hippocrates being but a
Heathen, and not having the perfect knowledge of God, could see and perceive
their cosenage and knavery well enough, who says, They which boast so, that
they can remove or help the infections of diseases, with Sacrifices,
conjurations, or other Magical Instruments or means, are but needy fellows,
wanting living; and therefore refer their words to the Devil, because they
would seem to know somewhat more than the common people. It is marvel that
Papists do affirm, that their Holy Water, Crosses, or Bugswords have such
virtue and violence, as to drive away Devils; so as they dare not approach to
any place or person besmeared with such stuff; when as it appears in the
Gospel, That the Devil presumed to assault and tempt Christ himself: For the
Devil indeed most earnestly busieth himself to seduce the godly; as for the
Wicked, he makes reckoning and just account of them as of his own already. But
let us go on forward in our Refutation.

CHAP. XL.
How Conjurors have beguiled Witches; what books they carry about to procure
credit to their Art; wicked assertions against Moses and Joseph.

THus you see that Conjurors are no small fools: For whereas Witches being poor
and needy, go from door to door for relief, have they never so many Toads or
Cats at home, or never so much Hogs-dung and Charvil about them, or never so
many Charms in stone; these Conjurors (I say) have gotten them offices in the
Church of Rome, whereby they have obtained authority and great estimation. A
soul offense to backbite the absent, and to belie the dead.
And further to add credit to that Art, these Conjurors carry about at this
day, books entitled under the names of Adam, Abel, Toby, and Enoch; which
Enoch they repute the most divine fellow in such matters. They have also among
them books of Zachary, Paul, Honorius, Cyprian, Jerome, Jeremy, Albert, and
Thomas: also, of the Angels, Riziel, Razael, and Raphael; and doubtless these
were such books as were said to have been burnt in the lesser Asia. Act. 19.19.
And for their further credit they boast, that they must be and are skilful and
learned in these Arts, to wit, ars Almadel, ars Notoria, ars Bulaphiae, ars
Arthephii, ars Pomena, ars Revelationis, etc. Yea, these Conjurors in corners
stick (with Justine) to report and affirm, Just. lib. 16.
That Joseph who was a true figure of Christ that delivered and redeemed us,
was learned in these arts, and thereby prophesied and expounded Dreams; and
that those arts came to him from Moses, and finally from Moses to them: Plin.
lib. 30. c 2. Strab. lib. 16.
which thing both Pliny and Tacitus affirm of Moses. Also Strabo in his
Cosmographie makes the very like blasphemous report; and likewise Apollonius
Molon, Possidonius, Lysimachus and Appian term Moses both a Magician and a
Conjuror, whom Eusebius confuteth with many notable arguments: For Moses
differed as much from a Magician, as truth from falsehood, and piety from
vanity; for in truth, he confounded all Magic, and made the world see, and the
cunningest Magicians of the earth confess, That their own doings were but
illusions, and that his miracles where wrought by the finger of God. But that
the poor old Witches knowledge reaches thus far, (as Danaus affirms it does)
is untrue; Dan. in dialog. de sortiariis.
for their furthest fetches that I can comprehend, are but to fetch a pot of
milk, etc. from their neighbors house, half a mile distant from them.

CHAP. XLI.
All Magical Arts confuted by an argument concerning Nero; what Cornelius
Agrippa and Carolus Gallus have written thereof, and proved by experience.

SUrely Nero proved all these Magical Arts to be vain and fabulous lies, and
nothing but Cosenage and Knavery. He was a notable Prince, having gifts of
nature enough to have conceived such matters, treasure enough to have employed
in the search thereof, he made no conscience therein, he had singular
conferences thereabout, he offered, and would have given half his Kingdom to
have learned those things which he heard might be wrought by Magicians; he
procured all the cunning Magicians in the world to come to Rome, he searched
for books also, and all other things necessary for a Magician; and never could
find any thing in it but Cosenage and Legierdemain. At length he met with one
Tiridates, the great Magician, Tiridates the great Magician bids the Emperor
Nero to a Banquet, etc.
who having with him all his companions, and fellow Magicians, Witches,
Conjurors and Coseners, invited Nero to certain Magical Banquets and Exercises;
Which when Nero required to learn, he (to hide his cosenage) answered that he
would not, nor could not teach him, though he would have given him his Kingdom.
The matter of his refusal (I say) was, least Nero should espy the cosening
devices thereof. Nero made laws against Conjurors and Conjuratons.
Which when Nero conceived, and saw the same, and all the residue of that Art
to be vain, lying and ridiculous, having only shadows of truth, and that their
Arts were only venefical, he prohibited the same utterly, and made good and
strong laws against the use and practices thereof, as Pliny and others do
report. It is marvel that any man can be so much abused, as to suppose that
Satan may be commanded, compelled, or tied to the power of man; as though the
Devil would yield to man, beyond nature, that will not yield to God his
Creator, according to the rules of Nature. And in so much as there be (as they
confess) good Angels as well as bad, I would know why they call up the Angels
of Hell, and not call down the Angels of Heaven. C. Agrip. lib. de vanitat.
scient.
But this they answer (as Agrippa says) Good Angels (forsooth) do hardly
appear, and the other are ready at hand. Here I may not omit to tell you how
Cornelius Agrippa bewrays, detecteth, and defaceth this Art of Conjuration,
who in his youth traveled into the bottom of all these Magical Sciences, and
was not only a great Conjuror and Practiser thereof, but also wrote cunningly
De occulta Philosophia. Howbeit afterward in wiser age, he recanteth his
opinions, and lamenteth his follies in that behalf, and discovers the impiety
and vanities of Magicians, and Inchanters, which boast they can do Miracles;
which action is now ceased (says he) and he assigns them a place with Jannes
and Jambres, affirming, That this Art teaches nothing but vain toys for a
show. Carolus Gallus also says, I have tried oftentimes, by the Witches and
Conjurers themselves, that their Arts, (especially those which do consist of
Charms, Impossibilities, Conjurations, and Witchcrafts, whereof they were wont
to boast) to be mere foolishness, doting lies and dreams. I for my part can say
as much, but I delight not to allege mine own proofs and authorities; for
that mine adversaries will say they are partial, and not indifferent.

CHAP. XLII.
Of Solomon's Conjurations, and of the Opinion conceived of his cunning and
practice therein.

IT is affirmed by sundry Authors, that Solomon was the first inventer of those
Conjurations; and thereof Josephus is the first reporter, who in his first Book
De Judaeorum antiquitatibus, cap. 22. rehearses soberly this story following;
which Polydore Virgil, and many other repeat verbatim, in this wise, and seem
to credit the fable, whereof there is scant a true word.

Solomon was the greatest Philosopher, and did, Philosophize about all things,
and had the full and perfect knowledge of all their properties: but he had that
gift given from above to him, for the profit and health of mankind; which is
effectual against Devils. He made also Enchantments wherewith diseases are
driven away; and left diverse manners of Conjurations written, whereunto the
Devils giving place are so driven away, Probatum est, upon a patient before
witness; Ergo, no lie.
that they never return. And this kind of healing is very common among my
Countrymen; for I saw a neighbor of mine, one Eleazer, that in the presence
of Vespasian and his Sons, and the rest of the Soldiers, cured many that were
possessed with Spirits. The manner and order of his cure was this. He did put
unto the nose of the possessed a Ring, under the seal whereof was enclosed a
kind of root, whose virtue Solomon declared, and the savor thereof drew the
Devil out at his nose; so as down fell the man, and then Eleazer conjured the
Devil to depart, and to return no more to him. In the mean time he made mention
of Solomon, reciting incantations of Solomon's own making. And then Eleazer
being willing to show the standers by his cunning, and the wonderful efficacy
of his Art, did set not far from thence, a Pot or Basin full of Water, and
commended the Devil that went out of the man, that by the overthrowing thereof,
he would give a sign to the beholders, that he had utterly forsaken and left
the man. Which thing being done, none there doubted how great Solomon's
knowledge and wisdom was. Wherein a juggling knack was produced, to confirm a
cogging cast of knavery or cosenage.

Another story of Solomon's Conjuration I find cited in the sixth lesson, read in
the Church of Rome upon S. Margarets day, far more ridiculous than this. Also
Peter Lombarb, Lib. 4. did. 14. Decret. aureum. did. 21. Rub. de exorcist.
Master of the Sentences, and Gratian his Brother, the Compiler of the Golden
Decrees; and Durandus in his Rationale Divinorum, do all soberly affirm
Solomon's cunning in this behalf; and specially this tale; to wit, That Solomon
enclosed certain thousand Devils in a brazen Bowl, and left it in a deep hole
or lake, so as afterward the Babylonians found it, and supposing there had
been gold or silver therein, brake it, and out flew all the Devils, etc. And
that this fable is of credit, you shall perceive, in that it is thought worthy
to be read in the Romish Church, Lect 5. and 6.
as parcel of their Divine Service. Look in the Lessons of the day of S.
Margaret the Virgin, and you shall find these words Verbatim; which I the
rather recite, because it serves me for diverse turns; to wit, for Solomon's
Conjurations; for the tale of the Brazen Vessel, and for the Popes
Conjurations, which extended both to Faith and Doctrine, and to show of what
credit their Religion is, that so shamefully is stained with lies and fables.

CHAP. XLIII.
Lessons read in all Churches, where the Pope has authority, on S. Margarets
day, translated into English, word for word.

HOly Margaret required of God, Lect. in die sanctissimae Marg. ver. 5.
that she might have a conflict face to face with her secret enemy the Devil;
and rising from prayer, she saw a terrible Dragon, that would have devoured
her, but she made the sign of the Cross, and the Dragon burst in the midst.

Afterward, she saw another man sitting like a Niger, Lect. 6.
having his hands bound fast to his knees, she taking him by the hair of the
head, threw him to the ground, and set her foot on his head; and her prayers
being made, a light shined from heaven into the prison where she was, and the
Cross of Christ was seen in Heaven, with a Dove sitting thereon, who said,
Blessed art thou O Margaret, the gates of Paradise attend thy coming. Then she
giving thanks to God, said to the Devil, Declare to me thy name. The Devil
said, Take away thy foot from my head, that I may be able to speak, and tell
thee: which being done, the Devil said, I am Veltis, Look in the word Iiodoni,
page 232.
one of them whom Solomon shut in the Brazen Vessel, and the Babylonians
coming, and supposing there had been gold therein, brake the Vessel, and then
we flew out, ever since lying in wait to annoy the just. But seeing I have
recited a part other story, you shall also have the end thereof; for at the
time of her execution this was her prayer following:

Grant therefore O Father, that whosoever writes, reads, or hears my
passion, or makes memorial of me, may deserve pardon for all his sins:
whosoever calls on me, being at the point of death, deliver him out of the
hands of his adversaries. And I also require, O Lord, that whosoever shall
build a Church in the honor of me, or ministers unto me any Candles For the
Priests profit, I warrant you.
of his just labor, let him obtain whatsoever he asks for his health.
Deliver all Women in travel that call upon me, from the danger thereof.

Her prayer ended, there were many great thunderclaps, This is common (they
say) when a Witch or Conjuror dies.
and a Dove came down from heaven, saying, Blessed art thou O Margaret the
Spouse of Christ: Such things as thou have asked, are granted unto thee;
therefore come thou into everlasting rest, etc. Then the hangman (though she
did bid him) refused to cut off her head: to whom she said, Except thou do it,
thou can have no part with me; and then lo he did it, etc. But sithence I
have been, and must be tedious, I thought good to refresh my Reader with a
lamentable story, depending upon the matter precedent, reported by many grave
Authors, word for word, in manner and form following.

CHAP. XLIV.
A delicate story of a Lombard, who by S. Margarets example would needs fight
with a real Devil.

THere was (after a Sermon made, wherein this Story of S. Margaret was recited,
for in such stuff consisted not only their Service, but also their Sermons in
the blind time of Popery;) there was, I say, a certain young man being a
Lombard, whose simplicity was such, as he had no respect unto the commodity of
worldly things, but did altogether affect the salvation of his soul, who
hearing how great S. Margarets triumph was, Kacozelia.
began to consider with himself, how full of sleights the Devil was. And among
other things thus he said, O that God would suffer, that the Devil might fight
with me hand to hand in visible form! I would then surely in like manner
overthrow him, and would fight with him till I had the victory. And therefore
about the twelf hour he went out of the Town, and finding a convenient place
where to pray, secretly kneeling on his knees, he prayed among other things,
That God would suffer the Devil to appear unto him in visible form, that
according to the example of S. Margaret, he might overcome him in battle. And
as he was in the midst of his prayers, there came into that place a Woman with
a hook in her hand, to gather certain herbs which grew there, Mutual error by
means of sudden sight.
who was dumb born. And when she came into the place, and saw the young man
among the herbs, on his knees, she was afraid and waxed pale, and going back
she roared in such sort, as her voice could not be understood, and with her
head and fists made threatening signs unto him. The young man seeing such an
ill-favored foul queen, that was for age decrepit and full of wrinkles, with a
long body, lean of face, pale of color, with ragged clothes, crying very
loud, and having a voice not understandable, threatening him with the hook which
she carried in her hand; he thought surely it had been no Woman, but a Devil
appearing unto him in the shape of a Woman, and thought God had heard his
prayers. For the which causes he fell upon her lustily, and at length threw her
down to the ground, saying, Art thou come thou cursed Devil, art thou come? No,
no, thou shall not overthrow me in visible fight, whom thou have often overcome
in visible temptations.

And as he spoke these words, he caught her by the hair, and drew her about,
beating her sometimes with his hands, sometimes with his heels, and sometimes
with the hook so long, and wounded her so sore, that he left her a dying. At
the noise whereof, many people came running unto them, and seeing what was
done, they apprehended the young man, and thrust him into a vile prison. S.
Vincent raises the dead woman to life.
S. Vincent, by virtue of his holiness, understanding all this matter, caused
the body that seemed dead to be brought unto him, and thereupon (according to
his manner) he laid his hand upon her, who immediately revived, and he called
one of his Chaplains to hear her confession. But they that were present, said
to the man of God, That it were altogether in vain so to do, for that she had
been from her nativity dumb, and could neither hear nor understand the Priest,
S. Vincent makes the dumb to speak.
neither could in words confess her sins. Notwithstanding, S. Vincent bad the
Priest hear her Confession, affirming, that she should very distinctly speak
all things unto him. And therefore, whatsoever the man of God commanded, the
Priest did confidently accomplish and obey; and as soon as the Priest
approached unto her, to hear her Confession, she, whom all Cathalonia knew to
be dumb born, spoke and confessed her self, pronouncing every word as
distinctly, as though she had never been dumb. After her Confession, she
required the Eucharist, and extreme Unction to be ministered unto her, and at
length she commended her self to God; and in the presence of all that came to
see that miracle, she spak as long as she had any breath in her body. The young
man that killed her being saved from the gallows by S. Vincents means, and at
his intercession, departed home into Italy. This story last rehearsed is found
in Speculo exemplorum, Did. 8. exepml. 17. sermon. 59. cap. 20.
and repeated also by Robert Carocul Bishop of Aquinas, and many others, and
preached publicly in the Church of Rome.

CHAP. XLV.
The Story of Saint Margaret proved to be both ridiculous and impious in every
point.

FIrst, that the story of S. Margaret is a fable, may be proved by the
incredible, impossible, foolish, impious, and blasphemous matters contained
therein, and by the ridiculous circumstance thereof. Though it were cruelly
done of her to beat the Devil, when his hands was bound; yet it was courteously
done of her, to pull away her foot at his desire. He could not speak so long as
she trod on his head, and yet he said, Tread off, that I may tell you what I
am. She saw the Heavens open, and yet she was in a close Prison. But her sight
was very clear, that could see a little Dove sitting upon a Cross so far off.
For Heaven is higher than the Sun, and the Sun when it is nearest to us, is
3966000. miles from us. Secundam Bord^num Corrigens Quae sit. M^tth tract. 1.
sect. 77.
And she had a good pair of ears that could hear a Dove speak so far off. And
she had good luck, that S. Peter, who (they say) is Porter, or else the Pope,
who has more doings than Peter, had such before as to stay at the gates so
long for her. Solomon provided no good place, neither took good order with his
brazen bowl. I marvel how they escaped that let out the Devils. It is marvel
also that they melted it not with their breath long before; for the Devils
carry Hell and Hell fire about with them always: in so much as (they say) they
leave ashes evermore where they stand. Psellus de operatione Daemonam.
Surely she made in her Prayer an unreasonable request, but the date of her
Patent is out; for I believe that whosoever at this day shall burn a pound of
good Candles before her, shall be never the better, but three pence the worse.
But now we may find in St. Margarets life, who it is that is Christ's wife;
whereby we are so much wiser than we were before. But look in the life of S.
Katherine, in the golden Legend, and you shall find that he was also married to
S. Katherine, and that our Lady made the marriage, etc. An execellent authority
for Bigamie. Here I will also cite another of their notable stories, or
miracles of authority, and so leave shaming of them, or rather troubling you
the Readers thereof. Neither would I have written these fables, but that they
are authentic among the Papists, and that we that are Protestants may be
satisfied, as well of Conjurors and Witches miracles, as of others; for the one
is as gross as the other.

CHAP. XLVI.
A pleasant Miracle wrought by a Popish Priest.

WHat time the Waldenses Heresies began to spring, In speculo exemplorum, did.
6. ex lib exemplorum, Caesaris, exempi. 69. Memoramdum it is confessed in
Popery that true Miracles cannot be joined with false Doctrine; Ergo, neither
Papist, Witch, nor Conjuror can work miracles.
certain wicked men, being upheld and maintained by Diabolical virtue, showed
certain signs and wonders, whereby they strengthened and confirmed their
Heresies, and perverted in Faith many faithful men; for they walked on the
water and were not drowned. But a certain Catholic Priest seeing the same, and
knowing that true signs could not be joined with false doctrine, brought the
body of our Lord, with the Pix, to the Water, where they showed their power and
virtue to the people, and said, in the hearing of all that were present, I
conjure thee O Devil, by him, whom I carry in my hands, that thou exercise not
these great Visions and Fantasies by these men, to the drowning of this
people. Notwithstanding these words, when they walked still on the water, as
they did before, the Priest in a rage threw the body of our Lord, with the Pix,
into the River, and by and by; so soon as the Sacrament touched the Element,
the Fantasy gave place to the Verity; and they being proved and made false,
did sink like lead to the bottom, and were drowned; the Pix with the Sacrament
immediately was taken away by an Angel. The Priest seeing all these things, was
very glad of the Miracle, but for the loss of the Sacrament he was very
pensive, passing away the whole night in tears and mourning: in the morning he
found the Pix with the Sacrament upon the Altar.

CHAP. XLVII.
The former Miracle confuted, with a strange story of St. Lucy.

HOw glad Sir John was now, it were folly for me to say. How would he have
plagued the Devil that threw his God in the River to be drowned? But if other
had had no more power to destroy the Waldenses with Sword and Fire, than this
Priest had to drown them with his conjuring Box and cosening Sacraments, there
should have been many a life saved. But I may not omit one fable, which is of
authority, wherein though there be no Conjuration expressed, yet I warrant you
there was cosenage both in the doing and telling thereof. Lact. in die sanctae
Luc. 7. and 8.
You shall read in the lesson on Saint Lucies days, that she being condemned,
could not be removed from the place with a teem of Oxen, neither could any fire
burn her, insomuch as one was fain to cut off her head with a Sword, and yet
she could speak afterward as long as she list. And this passes all other
miracles, except it be that which Bodin and M. Mal. recite out of Nider, of a
Witch that could not be burned, till a scroll was taken away from where she hid
it, betwixt her skin and flesh.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Of Visions, Noises, Apparitions, and imagined Sounds, and of other Illusions
of wandering Souls, with a confutation thereof.

MAny through Melancholy do imagine, that they see or hear Visions, Spirits,
Ghosts, strange Noises, etc. as I have already proved before, at large. Many
again through fear proceeding from a cowardly nature and complexion, or from an
effeminate and fond bringing up, are timorous and afraid of Spirits, and bugs,
etc. Some through imperfection of sight also are afraid of their own shadows,
and (as Aristotle says) see themselves sometime as it were in a Glass. And
some through weakness of body have such imperfect imaginations. Drunken men
also sometimes suppose they see trees walk, etc. according to that which
Solomon says to the drunkards, Thine eyes shall see strange visions, and
mavelous appearances.

Against the counterfeit visions of Popish Priests, and other cosening devices.
In all ages Monks and Priests have abused and bewitched the world with
counterfeit Visions; which proceeded through idleness, and restraint of
marriage, whereby they grew hot and lecherous, and therefore devised such means
to compass and obtain their loves. And the simple people being then so
superstitious, would never seem to mistrust, that such holy men would make them
Cuckholds, but forsook their beds in that case, and gave room to the Clergy.
Item, little children have been so scared with their mothers maids, that they
could never after endure to be in the dark alone, for fear of bugs. Many are
deceived by Glasses through Art Perspective. Many hearkening unto false
reports, conceive and believe that which is nothing so. Many give credit to
that which they read in Authors. But how many Stories and Books are written of
walking Spirits and Souls of men, contrary to the Word of God, a reasonable
volum cannot contain. How common an opinion was it among the Papists, that all
souls walked on the earth, after they departed from their bodies? In so much as
it was in the time of Popery a usual matter, to desire sick people on their
deathbeds, to appear to them after their death, and to reveal their estate. The
Fathers and ancient Doctors of the Church were too credulous herein, etc.
Therefore no marvel though the common simple sort of men, and least of all,
that women be deceived herein. God in times past did send down visible Angels
and Appearances to men; but now he does not so. Through ignorance of late in
Religion, it was thought that every Churchyard swarmed with souls and Spirits:
but now the Word of God being more free, open, and known, those conceits and
illusions are made more manifest and apparent; etc.

The Doctors, Councels, and Popes, which (they say) cannot err, have confirmed
the walking, appearing, and raising of Souls. But where find they in Scriptures
any such doctrine; And who certified them, that those appearances were true?
Truly all they cannot bring to pass, that the lies which have been spread
abroad herein, should now begin to be true, though the Pope himself subscribe,
seal, and swear thereunto never so much. Where are the souls that swarmed in
times past? Where are the Spirits? Who hears their noises? Who sees their
Visions? Where are the Souls that made such moan for Trentals, whereby to be
eased of the pains in Purgatory? Are they all gone into Italy, because Masses
are grown dear here in England? Mark well this illusion, and see how contrary
it is unto the Word of God. Consider how all Papists believe this illusion to
be true, and how all Protestants are driven to say it is and was Popish
illusion. Where be the Spirits that wandered to have burial for their bodies?
For many of those walking Souls went about their business. This doctrine was
not only preached, but also proved; note the particular instances following.
Do you not think, that the Papists show not themselves godly Divines, to
preach and teach the people such doctrine; and to insert into their Divine
Service such fables as are read in the Romish Church, all Scripture giving
place thereto for the time? You shall see in the lessons read there upon S.
Stevens day, that Gamaliel Nicodemus his kinsman, and Abdias his son, with his
friend S. Steven, appeared to a certain Priest, called Sir Lucian, requesting
him to remove their bodies, and to bury them, in some better place (for they
had lien from the time of their death, until then, being in the reign of
Honorius the Emperor; to wit, four hundred years buried in the field of
Gamaliel) who in that respect said to Sir Lucian; Non mei solummodo causa
solicitus sum, sed potius pro illis qui mecum sunt; that is, I am not only
careful for my self, but chiefly for those my friends that are with me. Whereby
the whole course may be perceived to be a false practice, and a counterfeit
vision, or rather a lewd invention. For in Heaven men's souls remain not in
sorrow and care; neither study they there how to compass and get a worshipful
burial here in earth. If they did, they would not have foreslowed it so long;
Now therefore let us not suffer our selves to be abused any longer, either with
Conjuring Priests, or Melancholical Witches; but be thankful to God that he
has delivered us from such blindness and error.

CHAP. XLIX. Cardanus
Opinion of strange Noises, how counterfeit Visions grow to be credited; of
Popish Appearances; of Pope Boniface.

CArdanus speaking of Noises, among other things, says thus; H. Card. lib. de
var. rer. lib. 15. c. 92.
a noise is heard in your house; it may be a Mouse, a Cat, or a Dog among
dishes; it may be a counterfeit, or a theif indeed, or the fault may be in your
ears. I could recite a great number of Tales, how men have even forsaken their
houses, because of such apparitions and noises: and all has been by mere and
rank knavery. And wheresoever you shall hear, that there is in the night season
such rumbling and fearful noises, be you well assured that it is flat knavery,
performed by some that seems most to complain, and is least mistrusted. And
hereof there is a very Art, which for some respects I will not discover. The
Devil seeks daily as well as nightly whom he may devour, and can do his feats
as well by day as night, or else he is a young Devil, and a very bungler. But
of all other coseners, these Conjurers are in the highest degree, and are most
worthy of death for their blasphemous impiety. But that these Popish Visions
and Conjurations used as well by Papists, as by the Popes themselves, were mere
cosenages; and that the tales of the Popes recited by Bruno and Platina, of
their magical devices, Pope Celestinus cosened of his Popedom by Pope Boniface.
were but plain cosenages and knaveries, may appear by the History of
Bonifacius the eight, who used this kind of enchantment, to get away the
Popedom from his predecessor Coelestinus. He counterfeited a voice through a
Cane-reed, as though it had come from Heaven, persuading him to yield up his
Authority of Popeship, and to institute therein and Bonifacius, a worthy man:
otherwise he threatened him with damnation, and therefore the fool yielded it up
accordingly to the said Bonifacius, An. 1264. of whom it was said; He came in
like a Fox, lived like a Woolf, and dyed like a Dog.

There be innumerable examples of such Visions, which when they are not
detected, go for true stories: and therefore when it is answered that some are
true tales, and some are false, until they be able to show forth before your
eyes one matter of truth, Visions distinguished.
you may reply upon them with this distinction; to wit, visions tried are false
visions, undecided and untryed are true.

CHAP. L.
Of the noise or sound of Echo, of one that narrowly escaped drowning thereby,
etc.

ALas! how many natural things are there so strange, as to many seem
miraculous; H. Card. lib. de subtilitat. 18.
and how many counterfeit matters are there, that to the simple seem yet more
wonderful! Cardane tells of one Comansis, who coming late to a Rivers side,
not knowing where to pass over, cried out alowd for some body to show him the
Foord: who hearing an Echo to answer according to his last word, supposing it
to be a man that answered him and informed him of the way, he passed through a
River, even there where was a deep whirlpool, Idem. ibid.
so as he hardly escaped with his life; and told his friends, that the Devil
had almost persuaded him to drown himself. And in some places these noises of
echo are far more strange than other, specially at Ticinum in Italy, in the
great hall, where it rendereth sundry and manifold noises or voices, which seem
to end so lamentably, as it were a man that lay a dying: so as few can be
persuaded that it is the echo, but a a Spirit that answers.

Of Winchester noise.
The noise at Winchester was said to be a very miracle, and much wondering was
there at it, about the year 1569. though indeed a mere natural noise ingendered
of the wind, the concavity of the place, and other instrumental matters helping
the sound to seem strange to the hearers; specially to such as would add new
reports to the augmentation of the wonder.

CHAP. LI.
Of Theurgie, with a Confutation thereof; a Letter sent to me concerning these
matters.

THere is yet another Art professed by these cosening Conjurors, which some
fond Divines affirm to be more honest and lawful than Necromancy, which is
called Theurgie; wherein they work by good Angels. Howbeit, their Ceremonies
are altogether Papistical and Superstitious, consisting in cleanliness partly
of the mind, partly of the body, and partly of things about and belonging to
the body; as in the skin, in the apparel, in the house, in the vessel and
housholdstuffe, in Oblations and Sacrifices; the cleanliness whereof they say,
does dispose men to the contemplation of heavenly things. They cite these words
of Esaias for their authority; to wit: Wash your selves and be clean, etc. In so
much as I have known diverse superstitious persons of good account, which
usually washed all their Apparel upon conceits ridiculously. For uncleanliness
(they say) corrupts the air, infecteth man, and chaseth away clean sprits.
Hereunto belongs the Art of Almadel, the Art of Paul, Appendents unto the
supposed divine Art of Theurgie.
the Art of Revelations, and the Art of Notary, But (as Agrippa says) the more
divine these Arts seem to the ignorant, the more damnable they be. But their
false assertions, their presumptions to work miracles, their characters, their
strange names, their diffuse phrases, their counterfeit holiness, their Popish
ceremonies, their foolish words mingled with impiety, their barbarous and
unlearned order of construction, their shameless practices, their paltery
stuff, their secret dealing, their beggarly life, their bargaining with fools,
their cosening of the simple, their scope and drift for money, does bewray all
their Art to be counterfeit cosenage. And the more thoroughly to satisfy you
herein, I thought good in this place to insert a Letter, upon occasion sent
unto me, by one which at this present time lies as a prisoner condemned for
this very matter in the King's Bench, and reprieved by her Majesty's mercy,
through the good mediation of a most noble and virtuous personage, whose
honorable and godly disposition at this time I will forbear to commend as I
ought. The person truly that wrote this letter seems unto me a good body,
well reformed, and penitent, nor expecting any gains at my hands, but rather
fearing to speak that which he knowetn further in this matter, lest displeasure
might ensue and follow.

The Copy of a Letter sent unto me R. S. by T. E. Master of Arts, and practiser
both of Physic, and also in times past, of certain vain Sciences; now
condemned to die for the same: wherein he opens the truth touching these
deceits.
Master R. Scot,
according to your request, Mark the sum and scope of this Letter.
I have drawn out certain abuses worth the noting, touching the work you have
in hand; things which I my self have seen within these xxvi. years, among those
which were counted famous and skilful in those Sciences. And because the whole
discourse cannot be set down, without nominating certain persons, of whom some
are dead and some living, whose friends remain yet of great credit: in respect
thereof, I knowing that mine Enemies do already in number exceed my friends; I
have considered with my self, that it is better for me to stay my hand, than to
commit that to the world, which may increase my misery more than relieve the
same. Notwithstanding, because I am noted above a great many others to have had
some dealings in those vain Arts and wicked practices; I am therefore to
signify unto you, and I speak it in the presence of God, that among all those
famous and noted practisers, that I have been conversant withal these xxvi.
years, I could never see any matter of truth to be done in those wicked
Sciences, but only mere cosenings and illusions. And they whom I thought to be
most skilful therein, sought to see some things at my hands, who had spent my
time a dozen or fourteen years, to my great loss and hindrance, and could never
at any time see any one truth, nor sparkle of truth therein. Yet at this
present I stand worthily condemned for the same; for that contrary to my
Princes Laws, and the Law of God, and also to mine own Conscience, I did spend
my time in such vain and wicked studies and practices: being made and remaining
a spectacle for all others to receive warning by. The Lord grant I may be the
last (I speak it from my heart) and I wish it, not only in my native Country,
but also through the whole face of the earth, specially among Christians. For
mine own part, I lament my time lost, and have repented me five years past: at
which time I saw a Book, written in the old Saxon tongue, Sir John Malbornes
Book detecting the devices of conjuration, etc.
by one Sir John Malborn a Divine of Oxonford, three hundred years past,
wherein he opens all the illusions and inventions of those Arts and Sciences:
a thing most worthy the noting. I left the Book with the Parson of Slangham in
Sussex, where if you send for it in my name, yon may have it. You shall think,
your labor well bestowed, and it shall greatly further the good enterprise you
have in hand, and there shall you see the whole Science thoroughly discussed,
and all their illusions and cosenages deciphered at large. Thus craving pardon
at your hands for that I promised you, being very fearful, doubtful, and loath
to set my hand or name under any thing that may be offensive to the world, or
hurtful to my self, considering my case, except I had the better warrant from
my L. of Leicester, who is my very good Lord, and by whom next under God (her
Majesty only excepted) I have been preserved; and therefore loath to do any
thing that may offend his Lordship ears. And so I leave you Worship to the Lord
keeping, who bring you and all your actions to good end and purpose, to Gods
glory, and to the profit of all Christians. From the Bench this 8. of March,
1582.

Your Worships poor and desolate friend and servant, T.E.


I sent for this Book of purpose, to the Parson of Slangham, and procured his
best friends, men of great worship and credit, to deal with him, that I might
borrow it for a time. But such is his folly and superstition, that although he
confessed he had it, yet he would not lend it: albeit a friend of mine, being
Knight of the Shire, would have given his word for the restitution of the same
safe and sound.

The Author his Conclusion.
The conclusion therefore shall be this, whatsoever heretofore has gone for
current, touching all these fallible Arts, whereof hitherto I have written in
ample sort, be now counted counterfeit, and therefore not to be allowed, no not
by common sense, much less by reason, which should sift such cloaked and
pretended practices, turning them out of their rags and patched clowts, that
they may appear discovered, and show themselves in their nakedness. Which will
be the end of every secret intent, privy purpose, hidden practice, and close
device, have they never such shrowds and shelters for the time: and be they
with never so much cautelousness and subtle circumspection clouded and
shadowed, yet will they at length be manifestly detected by the light,
according to that old rimed verse.

Andreas Gartnerus Mariemontanus.
Quicquid nix celat, solis calor omne revelat. Englished by Abraham Fleming:
What thing soever Snow does hide,
Heat of the Sun does make it spide.


And according to the verdict of Christ, the true Nazarite, who never told
untruth, but who is the substance and groundwork of truth it self, saying,
Nihil est tam occultum quod non sit detegendum, Mat. 10.26. Mark. 4.22. Luke
8.17. and 12.2.
Nothing is so secret, but it shall be known and revealed.

BOOK XVI.
CHAP. I.
A Conclusion, in manner of an Epilogue, repeating many of the former
Absurdities of Witchmongers Conciets, Confutation thereof, and of the Authority
of James Sprenger, and Henry Institor, Inquisitors and Compilers of M. Mal.

HItherto you have had delivered unto you, that which I have conceived and
gathered of this matter. In the substance and principal parts whereof I can see
no difference among the Writers hereupon, of what Country, Condition, Estate,
or Religion soever they be; but I find almost all of them to agree unconstancy,
fables, and impossibilities; scratching out of M. Mal. the substance of all
their arguments: so as their Authors being disapproved, they must coin new
stuff, or go to their Grandams maids to learn more old wives Tales, whereof
this Art of Witchcraft is contrived. But you must know that James Sprenger, and
Henry Institor, whom I have bad occasion to allege many times, were
copartners in the composition of that profound and learned Book called Malleus
Maleficarum, The compilers or markers of the Book called, A Mallet to brain
Witches.
and were the greatest Doctors of that Art: out of whom I have gathered matter
and absurdity enough, to confound the opinions conceived of Witchcraft;
although they were allowed Inquisitors, and assigned by the Pope, with the
authority and commendation of all the Doctors of the University of Collen, etc.
to call before them, to imprison, to condemn, and to execute Witches; and
finally to seize and confiscate their goods.

These two Doctors, to maintain their credit, and to cover their injuries, have
published those same monstrous lies, which have abused all Christendom, being
spread abroad with such authority, as it will be hard to suppress the credit to
their Writings, be they never so ridiculous and false. Which although they
maintain and stir up with their own praises; yet men are so bewitched, as to
give credit unto them. For proof whereof I remember they write in one place of
their said Book, No marvel that they were so opinionative herein, for God gave
them over unto strong delusions.
that by reason of their severe proceedings against Witches, they suffered
intolerable assaults, specially in the night, many times finding Needles,
sticking in their Biggens, which were thither conveyed by Witches charms: and
through their innocence and holiness (they say) they were ever miraculously
preserved from hurt. Howbeit they affirm that they will not tell all, that
might make to the manifestation of their holiness: for then should their own
praise stink in their own mouths. And yet God knows their whole Book
contains nothing but stinking lies and Popery. Which groundwork and
foundation how weak and wavering it is, how unlike to continue, and how
slenderly laid, a child may soon discern and perceive.

CHAP. II
By what means the Common People have been made believe in the Miraculous Works
of Witches; a definition of Witchcraft, and a description thereof.

THe common people have been so assorted and bewitched, with whatsoever Poets
have feigned of Witchcraft, either in earnest, in jest, or else in derision;
and with whatsoever loud liers and coseners for their pleasures herein have
invented, and with whatsoever tales they have heard from old doting women, or
from their mothers maids, and with whatsoever the Grandfool their ghostly
Father, or any other Morrow-Mass Priest had informed them; and finally with
whatsoever they have swallowed up through tract of time, or through their own
timorous nature or ignorant conceit, concerning these matters of Hags and
Witches: as they have so settled their opinion and credit thereupon, that they
think it Heresy to doubt in any part of the matter; specially because they
find this word Witchcraft expressed in the Scriptures; which is as to defend
praying to Saints, because Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus is written, in Te Deum.

The definition or description of Witchcraft.
And now to come to the definition of Witchcraft, which hitherto I did defer and
put off purposely, that you might perceive the true nature thereof, by the
circumstances, and therefore the rather to allow of the same, seeing the
variety of other Writers. Witchcraft is in truth a cosening Art, wherein the
Name of God is abused, profaned, and blasphemed, and his power attributed to a
vile creature. In estimation of the vulgar people, it is a supernatural work,
contrived between a corporal old Woman, and a spiritual Devil. The manner
thereof is so secret, The formal cause.
mystical, and strange, that to this day there has never been any credible
witness thereof. It is incomprehensible to the wise, learned or faithful, a
probable matter to children, fools, melancholic persons and Papists. The trade
is thought to be impious. The final cause.
The effect and end thereof to be sometimes evil, as when thereby Man or Beast,
Grass, Trees, or Corn, etc. is hurt; sometimes good; as whereby sick folks are
healed, Thieves bewrayed, and true men come to their Goods, The material cause.
etc. The matter and instruments wherewith it is accomplished, are words,
charms, signs, images, characters, etc. The which words although any other
creature do pronounce, in manner and form as they do, leaving out no
circumstance requisite or usual for that action, yet none is said to have the
grace or gift to perform the matter, except she be a Witch, and so taken,
either by her own consent, or by others imputation.

CHAP. III.
Reasons to prove that words and Characters are but Bables, and that Witches
cannot do such things as the multitude supposes they can; their greatest
wonders proved trifles; of a young Gentleman cosened.

THat Words, Characters, Images, and such other trinkets, which are thought so
necessary Instruments for Witchcraft (as without the which no such thing can be
accomplished) are but bables devised by coseners, to abuse the people withal, I
trust I have sufficiently proved. And the same may be further and more plainly
perceived by these short and compendious reasons following.

A necessary sequel.
First, In that the Turks and Infidels, in their Witchcraft, use both other
words, and other characters than our Witches do, and also such as are most
contrary. In so much as, if ours be bad, in reason theirs should be good. If
their Witches can do any thing, ours can do nothing. For as our Witches are
said to renounce Christ, and despise his Sacraments; so do the other forsake
Mahomet and his Laws, which is one large stepped to Christianity.

It is also to be thought, that all Witches are Coseners; when Mother Bungie,
Probatum est, by Mother Bungies confession that all Witches are coseners.
a principal Witch, so reputed, tried, and condemned of all men, and continuing
in that exercise and estimation many years (having cosened and abused the whole
Realm, in so much as there came to her, Witchmongers from all the furthest
parts of the Land, she being in diverse Books set out with authority, registered
and chronicled by the name of the great Witch of Rochester, and reputed among
all men for the chief ringleader of all other Witches) by good proof is found
to be a mere cosener; confessing in her deathbed freely, without compulsion or
inforcement, that her cunning consisted only in deluding and deceiving the
people: saving that she had (toward the maintenance of her credit in that
cosening trade) some sight in Physic and Surgery, and the assistance of a
friend of hers, called Heron, a professor thereof. And this I know, partly of
mine own knowledge, and partly by the testimony of her husband, and others of
credit, to whom (I say) in her deathbed, and at sundry other times she
protested these things; and also that she never had indeed any material Spirit
or Devil (as the voice went) nor yet knew how to work any supernatural matter,
as she in her life time made men believe she had and could do.

The like many be said of one T. of Canterbury, whose name I will not literally
discover, who wonderfully abused many in these parts, making them think he
could tell where any thing lost became, with diverse other such practices,
whereby his fame was far beyond the others. And yet on his deathbed he
confessed, that he knew nothing more then any other, but by sleight and
devices, without the assistance of any Devil or Spirit, saving the Spirit of
cosenage: and this did he (I say) protest before many of great honesty, credit,
and wisdom, who can witness the same, and also gave him good commendations for
his godly and honest end.

Again, who will maintain, that common Witchcrafts are not Cosenages, when the
great and famous Witchcrafts, which had stolen credit not only from all the
common people, but from men of great wisdom and authority, are discovered to be
beggarly sleights of cosening varlots: Which otherwise might and would have
remained a perpetual objection against me. Were there not J. Bodin. in the
Preface before his Book of Daemonomania reports this by a Conjuring Priest
late curate of Islington: he also shows to what end; read the place you that
understand Latin.
three images of late years found in a dunghill, to the terror and astonishment
of many thousands? In so much as great matters were thought to have been
pretended to be done by Witchcraft. But if the Lord preserve those person;
(whose destruction was doubted to have been intended thereby) from all other
the lewd practices and attempts of their enemies, I fear not, but they shall
easily withstand these and such like devices, although they should indeed be
practiced against them. But no doubt, if such bables could have brought those
matters of mischief to pass, by the hands of Traitors, Witches, it Papists we
should long since have been deprived of the most excellent jewel and comfort
that we enjoy in this world. Howbeit, I confess, that the fear, conceit, and
doubt of such mischievous pretenses may breed inconvenience to them that stand
in aw of the same. And I wish, that even for such practices, though they never
can or do take effect, the practisers be punished with all extremity; because
therein is manifested a traitorous heart to the Queen, and a presumption
against God.

But to return to the discovery of the foresaid Knavery and Witchcraft. Note
this device of the waxen images found of late near London.
So it was that one old Cosenor wanting money, devised or rather practiced (for
it is a stale device) to supply his want, by promising a young Gentleman, whose
humor he thought would that way be well served, that for the sum of forty
pounds he would not fail by his cunning in that Art of Witchcraft, to procure
unto him the love of any three women whom he would name, and of whom he should
make choice at his pleasure. The young Gentleman being abused with his cunning
devices, and too hastily yielding to that motion, satisfied this cunning man's
demand of money. Which, because he had it not presently to disburse, provided
for him at the hands of a friend of his. Finally, this Cunning man made the
three puppets of Wax. etc. leaving nothing undone that appertained to the
cosenage, until he had buried them, as you have heard. But I omit to tell what
ado was made hereof, and also what reports and lies were bruited; as what white
Dogs and black Dogs there were seen in the night season passing through the
watch, maugre all their force and preparation against them! etc. But the young
Gentleman, who for a little space remained in hope mixed with joy and love, now
through tract of time has those his felicities powdered with doubt and despair.
For instead of atcheiving his love, he would gladly have obtained his money.
But because he could by no means get either the one or the other (his money
being in hucksters handling, and his suit in no better forwardness) he revealed
the whole matter, hoping by that means to recover his money; which he neither
can yet get again, nor has paid it where he borrowed. But till trial was had
of his simplicity, or rather folly herein, he received some trouble himself
hereabout, though now dismissed.

CHAP. IV.
Of one that was so bewitched that he could read no Scriptures but Canonical,
of a Devil that could speak Latin, a proof that Witchcraft is flat Cosenage.

A strange miracle, if it were true.
HEre I may aptly insert another miracle of importance, that happened within the
compass of a child's remembrance, which may induce any reasonable body to
conceive, that these supernatural actions are but fables and cosenages. There
was one, whom for some respects I name not, that was taken blind, deaf, and
dumb, so as no Physician could help him. That man (forsooth) though he was (as
is said) both blind, dumb, and deaf, yet could he read any Canonical
Scriptures; but as for Apocrypha, he could read none: wherein a Gods Name
consisted the miracle? There the hypocrite was over match for all his
dissembled gravity.
But a leaf of Apocrypha being extraordinarily inserted among the Canonical
Scriptures, he read the same as Authentic; wherein his knavery was bewrayed.
Another had a Devil, that answered men to all questions. Marry her Devil could
understand no Latin, and so was she (and by such means all the rest may be)
bewrayed. Indeed our witching Writers say, that certain Devils spaek only the
language of that Country where they are resiant, as French, or English, etc.

Furthermore in my conceit, nothing proves more apparently that Witchcraft is
cosenage, and that Witches Instrument are but ridiculous Bables, and altogether
void of effect; than when learned and godly Divines in their serious writings,
produce experiments as wrought by Witches, and by Devils at Witches
commandments: which they expound by miracles, although indeed mere trifles.
Whereof they conceive amiss, being overtaken with credulity.

CHAP. V.
Of the Divination of the Sive and Sheers, and by the Book and Key, Hemingius
his opinion thereof confuted; a Babble to know what is a clock; of certain
Juggling knacks; manifold reasons for the overthrow of Witches and Conjurors,
and their cosenages; of the Devils transformations of Ferrum candens, etc.

Heming. in lib. de superst. magicis.
TO pass over all the fables, which are vouched by the Popish Doctors, you shall
hear the words of N. Heminguis, whose zeal and learning otherwise I might
justly commend: howbeit I am sorry and ashamed to see his ignorance and folly
in this behalf. Neither would I have bewrayed it, but that he himself, among
other absurdities concerning the maintenance of Witches Omnipotency, has
published it to his great discredit. Popish Priests (says he) as the
Chaldaeans used the Divination by Sive and Sheers for the detection of theft,
do practice with a Psalter and a Key fastened upon the 49. Psalm, to discover a
Thief, and when the names of the suspected persons are orderly put into the
Pipe of the Key, at the reading of these words of the Psalm [If thou suwest a
Thief, thou did consent unto him] the Book will wagge and fall out of the
fingers of them that hold it, and he whose name remains in the Key must be
the thief. Hereupon Hemingius infers, that although conjuring Priests and
Witches bring not this to pass by the absolute words of the Psalm, The greatest
Clarks are not the wisest men.
which tend to a far other scope; yet Satan does nimbly, with his invisible
hand, give such a twitch to the Book, as also in the other case, to the Sive
and the Sheers, that down falls the Book and Key, Sive and Sheers, upstarts the
Thief, and away runs the Devil laughing, etc.

But alas, Hemingius is deceived, as not perceiving the conceit, or rather the
deceit thereof. For where he supposes those actions to be miraculous, and done
by a Devil, they are in truth mere bables wherein consists not so much as
Legierdemain. For every Carter may conceive the slight hereof; A natural
reason of the former knack.
because the Book and Key, Sive and Sheers, being stayed up in that order, by
natural course of necessity must within that space (by means of the air, and
the pulse beating at the singers end) turn and fall down. Which experience
being known to the Witch and Conjuror, she or he do form and frame their
prophesse accordingly; as whosoever makes proof thereof shall manifestly
perceive it. By this art, practice, or experience, you shall know what it is a
clock, if you hold between your finger and your thumb a thread of six or seven
inches long, unto the other end whereof is tied a gold Ring, or some such like
thing; in such sort as upon the beating of your Pul^^, and the moving of the
Ring, the same may strike upon either side of a Goblet or Glass. These things
are (I confess) Witchcraft, because the effect or event proceeds not of that
cause which such coseners say, and others believe they do. As when they lay a
medicine for the Ague, etc. to a child's wrists, they also pronounce certain
words or charms, by virtue whereof (they say) the child is healed; whereas
indeed the medicine only does the feat. And this is also a silly Jugglers
knack, which wants legier demain, whom you shall see to thrust a pin, or
small knife, through the head and brain of a Chicken or Pullet, and with
certain mystical words seem to cure him; whereas, though no such words were
spoken, the Chicken would live, and do well enough, as experience teaches and
declares.

Again, When such as have maintained the Art and Profession of Conjuring, and
have written thereupon most cunningly, have published recantations, and
confessed the deceits thereof, as Cornelius Agrippa did, why should we defend
it? Also, when Heathen Princes, of great renown, authority and learning, C.
Agrip. in lib. de vanit scicut. and in epistola ante librum de occult.
Philosophia. Plin. lib natural. hist. 30. c. 1. Pet. Mart. in locis communibus.
have searched with much industry and charge, the knowledge and secrecy of
Conjuration and Witchcraft, and finally found by experience all to be false and
vain that is reported of them, as Nero, Julianus Apostata, and Valence did; why
should we seek for further trial, to prove Witchcraft and Conjuration to be
cosenage?

Also, when the miracles imputed unto them, exceed in quantity, quality and
number, all the miracles that Christ wrought here upon earth, for the
establishing of his Gospel, for the confirmation of our faith, and for the
advancement of his glorious Name; what good Christian will believe them to be
true? And when Christ himself says; The works that I do, no man else can
accomplish; why should we think that a foolish old Woman can do them all, and
many more?

Also, when Christ knew not these Witches, nor spoke one word of them in all
time of his being here upon earth, having such necessary occasion (if at least
wise they with their familiars could do as he did by the Spirit of God, as is
constantly affirmed) why should we suppose that they can do as they say, but
rather that they are deceivers? When they are fain to say, that Witches wrought
not in that Art, all those thirty three years that Christ lived, and that there
were none in Jobs time, and that the cosening Oracles are now ceased; who sees
not they are witless, and mad fools that maintain it? When all the mischiefs
are accomplished by poisons and natural means, which they affirm to be brought
to pass by words, Note that during all Christ's time upon earth, which was 33.
years, Witches were put to silence, etc.
it manifests to the world their cosenage. When all the places of Scripture,
which Witchmongers allow for the proof of such Witches, are proved to make
nothing for their purpose, their own fables and lies deserve small credit. When
one of the chief points in controversy; to wit, execution of Witches, is
grounded upon a false translation; namely, You shall not suffer a Witch to
live, (which is in Latin Veneficam non retinelitis in vita) where the word in
every man's ear sounds to be a Poysoner, rather than a worker of Miracles, and
so interpreted by the seventy Interpreters, Josephus, and almost all the
Rabbis which were Hebrews born: Why should any of their Interpretations or
Allegations be trusted, or well accounted of? When working of Miracles is
ceased, and the gift of Prophecy also; so as the godly through invocation of
the Holy Spirit, cannot perform such wonderful things, as these Witches and
Conjurors by the invocation of Devils and wicked Spirits undertake, and are
said to do; what man that knows and honors God, will be so infatuate as to
believe these lies, and so prefer the power of Witches and Devils, before the
godly endued with God Holy Spirit? When many printed Books are published, even
with Authority, in confirmation of such Miracles wrought by those coseners, for
the detection of Witchcraft; and in fine, all is not only found false, and to
have been accomplished by cosenage, but that there has been therein a set
purpose to defame honest Matrons, as to make them be thought to be Witches: why
should we believe Bodin, M. Mal. etc in their cosening tales and fables? When
they say, that Witches can fly in the air, and come^^n at a little coan, or a
hole in a Glass-window, and steal away sucking Children, and hurt their
Mothers; and yet when they are brought into Prison, they cannot escape out of
the grate, which is far bigger; who will not condemn such accusations or
confessions to be frivolous, etc? When (if their assertions were true)
concerning the Devils usual taking of shapes, But Christ's argument was
undoubted; Ergo, etc.
and walking, talking, conferring, hurting, and all manner of dealing with
mortal creatures, Christ's argument to Thomas had been weak and easily answered;
yea the one half, or all the whole world might be inhabited by Devils; every
poor man's house might be hired over his head by a Devil, he might take the
shape and favor of an honest woman, and play the Witch; or of an honest man,
and play the Thief; and so bring them both, or whom he list to the gallows: who
sees not the vanity of such assertions? For then the Devil might, in the
likeness of an honest man commit any criminal offense; as Lavater in his
nineteenth Chapter Do spectris, reports of a grave wise Magistrate in the
Territory of Tigurie, who affirmed, That as he and his servant went through
certain pastures, he espied in the morning, the Devil in likeness of one whom
he knew very well, I marvel for what purpose that Magistrate went to that
fellows house.

Albertus Crantzius in lib. 4. mertopolis. cap. 4


wickedly dealing with a Mare. Upon the sight whereof he immediately went to
that fellows house, and certainly learned there, that the same person went not
out of his chamber that day. And if he had not wisely bolted out the matter,
the good honest man (says he) had surely been cast into Prison, and put on the
rack, etc.

The like story we read of one Canegunda, wife to Henry the second Emperor of
that name, in whose Chamber the Devil (in the likeness of a young man, with
whom she was suspected to be too familiar in Court) was often seen coming in
and out. Howbeit she was purged by the trial Candentis Ferri, and proved
innocent; Prove. 6.27, 28.
for she went upon glowing iron unhurt, etc. And yet Solomon says, May a man
carry fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burned? Or can a man go upon
coals, and his feet net be scorched? And thus might the Devil get him up into
the Pulpit, and spread Heresies, as I doubt not but he does in the mouth of
wicked Preachers, though not so grossly as is imagined and reported by the
Papist and Witchmongers. And because it shall not be said that I belie them, I
will cite a story credibly reported by their chiefest Doctors, namely, James
Sprenger, and Henry Institor, Mal malef. par. 2. quaest. 1. cap. 9.
who say as follows, even word for word.

CHAP. VI.
How the Devil preached good Doctrine in the shape of a Priest, how he was
discovered, and that it is a shame (after Confutation of the greater
Witchcrafts) for any man to give credit to the lesser points thereof.

ON a time the Devil went up into a Pulpit, and there made a very Catholic
Sermon: but a holy Priest coming to the good speed, by his holiness perceived
that it was the Devil. So he gave good ear unto him, He should rather have
asked who gave him Orders and License to Preach.
but could find no fault with his Doctrine. And therefore so soon as the Sermon
was done, he called the Devil unto him, demanding the cause of his sincere
preaching; who answered: Behold, I speak the truth, knowing that while men be
hearers of the Word, and not followers, God is the more offended, and my
Kingdom the more enlarged. And this was the strangest device (I think) that
ever any Devil used: for the Apostles themselves could have done no more.
Again, when with all their familiars, their Ointments, etc. whereby they ride
Invisibly, nor with all their charms, they can neither convey themselves from
the hands of such as lay wait for them; nor can get out of Prison, that
otherwise can go in and out at a Mouse-hole; nor finally cap save themselves
from the gallows, that can transubstantiate their own and other bodies into
Flies or Fleas, etc. who sees not, that either they lie, or are belyed in
their miracles? when they are said to transfer their neighbors Corn into their
own ground, and yet are perpetual beggars, and cannot enrich themselves, either
with Money or otherwise: who is so foolish as to remain longer in doubt of
their supernatural power? When never any yet from the beginning of the world
till this day, has openly showed any other trick, conceit, or cunning point of
Witchcraft, than Legierdemain or cosenage, who will tarry any longer for
further trial? when both the common Law and also the injunctions do condemn
prophesying, and likewise false miracles, and such as believe them in these
days, who will not be afraid to give credit to those knaveries? When hereby
they make the Devil to be a God that hears the Prayers, and understands the
minds of men: who will not be ashamed, being a Christian, to be so abused by
them? When they that do write most frankly of these matters, except lying
Sprenger and Institor, have never seen any thing herein; insomuch that the most
credible proof that Bodin brings of his wonderful tales of Witchcraft, Joan.
Bodin.
is the report of his Host at an Alehouse where he baited: who will give
further ear unto these incredible fables? When in all the New Testament, we are
not warned of these bodily appearances of Devils, as we are of his other
subtilties, etc. who will be afraid of their bugs? When no such bargain is
mentioned in the Scriptures, why should we believe so incredible and impossible
Covenants, Yet many that bear the show of honest men are very credulous herein.
being the ground of all Witchmongers Religion, without the which they have no
probability in the rest of their foolish assertions? When as, if any honest
man's conscience be appealed unto, he must confess he never saw trial of such
Witchcraft or Conjuration to take effect, as is now so certainly affirmed: what
Conscience can condemn poor souls that are accused wrongfully, or believe them
that take upon them impiously to do or work those impossible things? When the
whose course of the Scripture is utterly tepugnant to these impossible
opinions, saving a few sentences, which nevertheless rightly understood,
relieve them nothing at all: who will be seduced by their fond arguments? When
as now that men have spied the knavary of Oracles, and such pelf, and that
there is not one Oracle in the world remaining; who cannot perceive that all
the residue heretofore of those devices, have been cosenages, knaveries, and
lies? When the power of God is so impudently transferred to a base creature,
what good Christian can abide to yield unto such miracles wrought by fools?
When the old women accused of Witchcraft, are utterly insensible, and unable to
say for themselves; and much less to bring such matters to pass, as they are
accused of: who will not lament to see we extremity used against them? When the
foolisher sort of people are always most mistrustful of hurt by Witchcraft, and
the simplest and dotingest people mistrusted to do the hurt: what wise man will
not conceive all to be but folly? When it were an easy matter for the Devil,
if he can do as they affirm, to give them great store of money, and make them
rich, Witches are commonly very Beggars.
and does it not; being a thing which would procure him more Disciples than any
other thing in the world; the wise must needs condemn the Devil of folly, and
the Witches of peevishness, that take such pains, and give their souls to Devil
to be tormented in Hell fire, and their bodies to the Hangmen to be trussed on
the Gallows, for nichels in a bag.

CHAP. VII.
A conclusion against Witchcraft, in manner and form of an Induction.

A general conclusion against them whom the subject of this Book concerns.
BY this time all kentish-men know (a few fools excepted) that Robin-Goodfellow
is a Knave. All wisemen understand that Witches miraculous enterprises, being
contrary to nature, probability and reason, are void of truth or possibility.
All Protestants perceive, that Popish Charms, Conjuration, Execrations, and
Benedictions are not effectual, but be toys and devices only to keep the people
blind, and to enrich the Clergy. All Christians see, that to confess Witches
do as they say, were to attribute to a Creature the power of the Creator. All
children well brought up conceive and spy, or at the least are taught, that
Juglers Miracles do consist of Legierdemain and Confederacy. The very Heathen
people are driven to confess, that there can be no such conference between a
spiritual Devil and a corporal Witch, as is supposed; for no doubt, all the
Heathen would then have every one his familiar Devil; for they, would make no
Conscience to acquaint themselves with a Devil, that are not acquainted with
God.

I have dealt, and conferred with many (marry I must confess Papists for the
most part) that maintain every point of these absurdities. And surely I allow
better of their judgments, than of others, unto whom some part of these
cosenages are discovered and seen: and yet concerning the residue, they remain
as they were before, specially being satisfied in the highest and greatest
parts of conjuring and cosening; to wit, in Popery, and yet will be abused with
beggarly Juggling and Witchcraft.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Natural Witchcraft or Fascination.

But because I am loath to oppose my self against all the Writers herein, or
altogether to discredit their stories, or wholly to deface their reports,
touching the effects of Fascination or Witchcraft; I will how set down certain
parts thereof, which although I my self cannot admit, without some doubts,
difficulties and exceptions, yet will I give free liberty to others to believe
them, if they list; for that they do not directly oppugn my purpose.

Many great and grave Authors write, and many fond Writers also affirm, that
there are certain families In Africa, (...) adorus. (...), etc. (...) ^^^dinus.
(...) Malef.
which with their voices bewitch whatsoever they praise, Insomuch as, if they
commend either, Plant, Corn, Infant, Horse, or any other Beast, the same
presently withers, decays and dies. This mystery of Witchraft is not
unknown or neglected of out Witchmongers, and superstitious fools here in
Europe. But to show you examples near home here in England, as though our voice
had the like operation; you shall not hear a Butcher of Horse-courser cheapen a
Bullock or a Jade, but if he buy him not, he says, God save him; if he do
forget it, and the Horse or Bullock chance to dye, the fault is imputed to the
chapman. Certainly the sentence is godly, if it do proceed from a faithful and
godly mind; but if it be spoken as a superstitious charm, by those words and
syllables to compound with the fascination and misadventure of unfortunate
words, the phrase is wicked and superstitious, though there were far greater
show of godliness than appears therein

CHAP. IX.
Of Enchanting or Bewitching Eyes.

MAny Writers agree with Virgil and Theocritus in the effect of bewitching
eyes, affirming that in Scythia there are women called Bithiae, With the like
porperty, were the old Illyric^ people endued, if we will credit the words of
Sabinus grounded upon the report of Aul. Gell.
having two bals or rather blacks in the apple of their eyes. And as Didymus,
reports, some have in the one eye two such bals, and in the other the image
of a Horse. These (forsooth) with their angry looks do bewitch and hurt not
only young Lambs, but young Children. There be other that retain such venom in
their Eyes, and send it forth by beams and streams so violently, that therewith
they annoy not only them with whom they are conversant continually; but also
all other whose company they frequent, of what age, strength or complexion
soever they be, as Cicero, Plutarch, Philarchus, and many others give out in
their writings.

This Fascination (says John Baptista Porta Neapolitanus) though it begin by
touching or breathing, is always accomplished and finished by the Eye, J. Bap.
Neapol. in lib. de naturali magia.
as an extermination or expulsion of the Spirits through the Eyes, approaching
to the heart of the bewitched, and infecting the same, etc. Whereby is comes
to pass, that a child, or a young man endued with a clear, whole, subtle and
sweet blood, yields the like spirits, breath, and vapors springing from the
purer blood of the heart. And the lightest and finest spirits, ascending into
the highest parts of the head, do fall into the Eyes, and so are from thence
sent forth, as being of all other parts of the body the most clear, and fullest
of veins and pores, and with the very spirit or vapor proceeding thence, is
conveyed out as it were by beams and streams a certain fiery force; whereof he
that beholds sore Eyes shall have good experience. For the poison and disease
in the Eye infecteth the air next unto it, and the same proceeds further,
This is held of some for truth.
carrying with it the vapor and infection of the corrupted blood, with the
contagion whereof the Eyes of the beholders are most apt to be infected. By
this same means it is thought that the Cockatrice depriveth the life, and a
Wolf takes away the voice of such as they suddenly meet withal and beholds.

Old women, in whom the ordinary course of nature fails in the office of
purging their natural monthly humors, show also some proof hereof. For (as the
said J. B.P.N. reports, alleging Aristotle for his Author) they leave in a
Looking-glass a certain froth, by means of the gross vapors proceeding out of
their Eyes, which comes so to pass, because those vapors or spirits, which so
abundantly come from their Eyes, cannot pierce and enter into the Glass, which
is hard and without pores, and therefore resists: but the beams which are
carried in the chariot of conveyance of the spirits, from the Eyes of one body
to another, Non est in speculo res ^uae speculntur in illo.
do pierce to the inward parts, and there breed infection, whilst they search
and seek for their proper region. And as these beams and vapors do proceed
from the heart of the one, so are they turned into blood about the heart of the
other, which blood disagreeing with the nature of the bewitched party,
infeebleth the rest of his body, and makes him sick; the contagion whereof so
long continues as the distempered blood has force in the members. And because
the infection is of blood, the fever or sickness will be continual; whereas if
it were of choler, or phlegm, it would be intermittent or alterable.

CHAP. X.
Of Natural Witchcraft for Love, etc.

Nescio quis oculus teneros mihi fascinat agnos, says Virgil; and thus
Englished by Abraaham Fleming.

I wot not I What witching eye, Does use to hint My tender Lamb Sucking their
Dam^ And them inc^^nt.


BUt as there is Fascination and Witchcraft by malicious and angry eyes unto
displeasure; so are there witching Aspects, tending contrariwise to Love, or at
the least, to the procuring of good will and liking. For if the Fascination or
Witchcraft be brought to pass or provoked by the desire, by the wishing and
coveting any beautiful shape or favor, the venom is strained through the eyes,
though it be from a far, and the imagination of a beautiful form rests in the
heart of the Lover, and kindles the fire where it is afflicted. And because
the most delicate, sweet, and tender blood of the beloved does there wander,
his countenance is there represented shining in his own blood and cannot there
be quiet; and is so haled from thence, that the blood of him that is wounded,
reboundeth and slippeth into the wounder, according to the saying of Lucretius
the Poet to the like purpose and meaning in these verses; Idque petit corpus,
men's unda est saucia amore,
Namque omnes plerunque cadunt in vulnus, and illam
Emicat in patem sanguis, unde icimur ictu;
Et si comminus est, os tum ruber occupat humor.
Englished by Abraham Fleming, And to that body it is rebounded,
From whence the mind by Love is wounded,
For in a manner all and some,
Into that wound of Love do come,
And to that part the blood does flee
From whence with stroke we stricken be;
If hard at hand, and near in place,
Then ruddy color fills the face.


Thus much may seem sufficient touching this matter of Natural Magic;
whereunto though much more may be annexed, yet for the avoiding of tediousness,
and for speedier passage to that which remains, I will break off this present
Treatise. And now somewhat shall be said concerning Devils and Spirits in the
discourse following.

The Contents of the Chapters in the Sixteen Foregoing BOOKS.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. AN Impeachment of Witches power in Meteors and Elementary Bodies,
tending to the rebuke of such as attribute too much unto them. Page. 1 CHAP.
II. The inconvenience growing by men's credulity herein, with a reproof of some
Churchmen, which are inclined to the common conceived opinion of Witches
omnipotency, and a familiar example thereof. Page. 3 CHAP. III. Who they be
that are called Witches, with a manifest declaration of the cause that moves
men so commonly to think, and Witches themselves to believe that they can hurt
Children, Cattle, etc. with words and imaginnations: and of cosening Witches.
Page. 4. CHAP. IV. What miraculous actions are imputed to Witches by
Witchmongers, Papists, and Poets, Page. 5 CHAP. V. A Confutation of the common
conceived opinion of Witches and Witchcraft, and how detestable a sin it is to
repair to them for counsel or help in time of affliction. Page. 7 CHAP. VI. A
further confutation of Witches miraculous and omnipotent power, by invincible
Reasons and Authorities, with disswasions from such fond credulity. ibid. CHAP.
VII. By what means the name of Witches becomes so famous, and how diverssly
people be opinioned concerning them and their actions. Page. 8 CHAP. VIII.
Causes that move as well Witches themselves, as others, to think that they can
work impossibilities, with answers to certain objections: where also their
punishment by law is touched. Page. 9 CHAP. IX. A conclusion of the first Book,
wherein is foreshewed the tyrannical cruelty of Witchmongers and Inquisitors,
with a request to the Reader to peruse the same. Page. 10
BOOK II.
CHAP. I. WHat Testimonies and Witnesses are allowed to give evidence against
reputed Witches, by the report and allowance of the Inquisitors themselves, and
such as are special writers herein. Page. 11 CHAP. II. The order of Examination
of Witches by the Inquisitors. ibid. CHAP. III. Matters of evidence against
Witches. Page. 13 CHAP. IV. Confessions of Witches, whereby they are condemned.
Page. 14 CHAP. V. Presumptions, whereby Witches are condemned. ibid. CHAP. VI.
Particular Interrogatories used by the Inquisitors against Witches. Page. 15
CHAP. VII. The Inquisitors trial of Weeping by Conjuration. Page. 16 CHAP.
VIII. Certain cautions against Witches, and of their tortures to procure
Confession. ibid. CHAP. IX. The fifteen Crimes laid to the charge of Witches,
by Witchmongers, specially by Bodin, in Demonomania. Page. 18 CHAP. X. A
Confutation of the former surmised Crimes patched together by Bodin, and the
only way to escape the Inquisitors hands. Page. 19 CHAP. XI. The Opinion of
Cornelius Agrippa concerning Witches, of his pleading for a poor woman accused
of Witchcraft, and how he convinced the Inquisitors. Page. 20 CHAP. XII. What
the fear of death and feeling of torments may force one to do, and that it is
no marvel though Witches condemn themselves by their own Confessions so
tyrannically extorted. Page. 21
BOOK III.
CHAP. I. The Witches bargain with the Devil, according to M. Mal. Bodin,
Nider, Daneus, Psellus, Erastus, Hemingius, Cumanus, Aquinas, Bartholomeus,
spineus, etc. Page 22 CHAP. II. The order of the Witches homage done (as it is
written by lewd Inquisitors and peevish Witchmongers) to the Devil in person:
of their Songs and Dances, and namely of Lavolta, and of other Ceremonies, also
of their Excourses. Page. 23 CHAP. III. How Witches are summoned to appear
before the Devil, of their riding in the air, of their accounts, of their
conference with the Devil, of his supplies, and their conference, of their
farewell and sacrifices, according to Daneus, Psellus, etc. Page. 24 CHAP. IV.
That there can no real league be made with the Devil the first Author of the
league, and the weak proofs of the Adversaries for the same. ibid. CHAP. V. Of
the private league, a notable table of Bodin concerning a French Lady, with a
confutation. Page. 25 CHAP. VI. A Disproof of their Assemblies, and of their
Bargain. Page. 26 CHAP. VII. A Confutation of the Objection concerning Witches
Confession. Page. 27 CHAP. VIII. What folly it were for Witches to enter into
such desperate peril, and to endure such intolerable torments for no gain or
commodity, and how it comes to pass that Witches are overthrown by their
Confessions. Page. 28 CHAP. IX. How Melancholy abuses old women, and of the
effects thereof by sundry examples. Page. 29 CHAP. X. That voluntary Confession
may be untruly made, to the undoing of the Confessors, and of the strange
operation of Melancholy, proved by a familiar and late example. Page. 30 CHAP.
XI. The strange and diverse effects of Melancholy, and how the same humor
abounding in Witches, or rather old women, fills them full of mavelous
imaginations, and that their Confessions are not to be credited. Page. 31 CHAP.
XII. A Confutation of Witches Confessions, especially concerning the League.
Page. 32 CHAP. XIII. A Confutation of Witches Confessions, concerning making of
Tempests and Rain; of the natural cause of Rain, and that Witches or Devils
have no power to do such things. Page. 33 CHAP. XIV. What would ensue, if
Witches Confessions or Witchmongers opinions were true, concerning the effects
of Witchcraft, Enchantments, etc. Page. 34 CHAP. XV. Examples of foreign
Nations, who in their Wars used the assistance of Witches; of Eybiting Witches
in Ireland, of two Archers that shot with Familiars. Page. 35 CHAP. XVI.
Authors condemning the fantastical Confessions of Witches, and how a Popish
Doctor takes upon him to disprove the same. Page. 36 CHAP. XVII. Witchmongers
Reasons to prove that Witches can work Wonders; Bodin's tale of a Friseland
Priest transported, that imaginations proceeding of Melancholy do cause
illusions. Page. 37 CHAP. XVIII. That the Confession of Witches is insufficient
in civil and common Law to take away life. What the sounder Divines, and
Decrees of Councels determine in this case. ibid. CHAP. XIX. Of four capital
crimes objected against Witches, all fully an swered and confuted as frivolous,
Page. 39 CHAP. XX. A request to such Readers as loath to hear or read filthy
and bawdy matters (which of necessity are here to be inserted) to pass over
eight Chapters. Page. 40
BOOK IV.
CHAP. I. OF Witchmongers opinions concerning evil Spirits, how they frame
themselves in more excellent sort than God made us. Page. 41 CHAP. II. Of bawdy
Incubus and Succubus, and whether the action of Venery may be performed between
Witches and Devils, and when Witches first yielded to Incubus. ibid. CHAP. III.
Of the Devils visible and invisible dealing with Witches in the way of lechery.
Page. 42 CHAP. IV. That the power of generation is both outwardly and inwardly
impeached by Witches, and of diverse that had their genitals taken from them by
Witches, and by the same means again restored. Page. 43 CHAP. V. Of Bishop
Sylvanus his leachery opened and covered again; how Maids having yellow hair
are most cumbred with Incubus, how married Men are bewitched to use other men's
wives, and to refuse their own. Page. 44 CHAP. VI. How to procure the
dissolving of bewitched love; also to enforce a man (how proper soever he be)
to love an old hag: and of a bawdy tricky of a Priest in Gelderland. ibid.
CHAP. VII. Of diverse Saints and holy persons, which were exceeding bawdy and
lecherous, and by certain miraculous means became chaste. Page. 45 CHAP. VIII.
Certain Popish and Magical cures for them that are bewitched in their
Privities. ibid. CHAP. IX. A strange cure done to one that was molested with
Incubus. Page. 46 CHAP. X. A Confutation of the former follies touching
Incubus, which by examples and proofs of like stuff is showed to be flat
knavery, wherein the carnal copulation with spirits is overthrown. Page. 47
CHAP. XI. That Incubus is a natural disease with remedies for the same,
besides, magica. cures herewithal expressed. Page. 48 CHAP. XII. The censure of
G. Chaucer, upon the knavery of Incubus. Page. 49
BOOK V.
CHAP. I. OF Transformations, ridiculous examples brought by the Adversaries
for the confirmation of their foolish doctrine. Page. 50 CHAP. II. Absurd
reasons brought by Bodin, and such others, for confirmation of Transformations.
Page. 52 CHAP. III. Of a Man turned into an Ass, and returned again unto a man
by one of Bodins Witches: S. Agust. opinion thereof. Page. 53 CHAP. IV. A
Summary of the former Fable with a Refutation thereof, after due Examination of
the same. Page. 54 CHAP. V. That the body of a man cannot be turned into the
body of a beast by a Witch, is proved by strong Reasons, Scriptures, and
Authorities. Page. 55 CHAP. VI. The Witchmongers Objections concerning
Nebuchadnezzar answered, and their error concerning Lycanthropia confuted.
Page. 57 CHAP. VII. A special objection answered concerning Transportations,
with the consent of diverse Writers thereupon. Page. 58 CHAP. VIII. The
Witchmongers Objection concerning the History of Job answered. Page. 59 CHAP.
IX. What several sorts of Witches are mentioned in the Scriptures, and how the
word Witch is there applied. Page. 61
BOOK VI.
CHAP. I. THe Exposition of this Hebrew word Chasaph, wherein is answered the
Objection contained in Exodus 22. to wit, Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live,
and of Simon Magus, Act. 8. Page. 63 CHAP. II. The place of Denteronomie
Expounded, wherein are recited all kind of Witches; also their opinions
confuted, which hold that they can work such miracles as are imputed unto them.
Page. 64 CHAP. III. That women have used poisoning in all ages more then men,
and of the inconvenience of poisoning. Page. 66 CHAP. IV. Of diverse poisoning
practices, otherwise called Veneficia, committed in Italy, Genua, Millen,
Wittenberge, also how they were discovered and executed. Page. 67 CHAP. V. A
great objection answered concerning this kind of Witchcraft called Veneficium.
Page. 68 CHAP. VI. In what kind of confections that Witchcrafty, which is
called Veneficium, consists: of Love-cups, and the same confuted by Poets.
ibid. CHAP. VII. It is proved by more credible Writers, that Love-cups rather
engender death through venom, than love by art; and with what toys they destroy
Cattle, and procure love. Page. 69 CHAP. VIII. J. Bodin triumphing against J.
Wier, overtaken with false Greek, and false interpretation thereof. Page. 70
BOOK VII.
CHAP. I. OF the Hebrew word Ob, what it signifies, where it is found, of
Pythonisses called Ventriloquae, who they be, and what their practices are,
experience and examples thereof showed. Page. 71 CHAP. II. How the lewd
practice of the Pythonist of Westwel came to light, and by whom she was
examined; and that all her Diabolical speech was but ventriloquie and plain
cosenage, which it proved by her own confession. Page. 73 CHAP. III. Bodin's
stuff concerning the Pythonist of Endor, with a true story of a counterfeit
Dutchman. Page. 74 CHAP. IV. Of the great Oracle of Apollo the Pythonist, and
how men of all sorts have been deceived, and that even the Apostles have
mistaken the nature of spirits, with an unanswerable argument, that spirits can
take no shapes. Page. 75 CHAP. V. Why Apollo was called Pytho, whereof those
Witches were called Pythonists, Gregory his Letter to the Devil. Page. 76 CHAP.
VI. Apollo, who was called Pytho, compared to the Rood of Grace, Gregory's
Letter to the Devil confuted. Page. 77 CHAP. VII. How diverse great Clarks and
good Authors have been abused in this matter of Spirits through false reports,
and by means of their credulity, have published lies, which are confuted by
Arist. and the Scrip. ibid. CHAP. VIII. Of the Witch of Endor, and whether she
accomplished the raising of Samuel truly, or by deceit, the opinion of some
Divines hereupon. Page. 78 CHAP. IX. That Samuel was not raised indeed, and how
Bodin and all Papists dote herein, and that souls cannot be raised by
Witchcraft. Page. 79 CHAP. X. That neither the Devil nor Samuel was raised, but
that it was a mere cosenage, according to the guise of our Pythonists. Page. 80
CHAP. XI. The Objection of the Witchmongers concerning this place fully
answered, and what circumstances are to be considered for the understanding of
this story, which is plainly opened from the beginning of 1 Samuel 28 to the 12.
verse. ibid. CHAP. XII. 12, 13, 14. 1 Samuel 28. expounded; wherein is showed
that Saul was cosened and abused by the Witch, and that Samuel was not raised,
is proved by the Witches own talk. Page. 82. CHAP. XIII. The residue of 1 Samuel
28. expounded; wherein is declared how cunningly this Witch brought Saul
resolutely to believe that she raised Samuel; what words are used to color the
cosenage, and how all might also be wrought by Ventriloquie. Page. 83 CHAP.
XIV. Opinions of some learned men, that Samuel was indeed raised, not by the
Witches art or power, but by the special miracle of God; that there are no such
Visions in these our days, and that our Witches cannot do the like. Page. 84
CHAP. XV. Of vain Apparitions, how people have been brought to fear Bugs, which
is partly reformed by Preaching of the Gospel; the true effect of Christ's
miracles. Page. 85 CHAP. XVI. Witches Miracles compared to Christ's; that God is
the Creator of all things; of Apollo, and of his names and portraiture. Page.
86
BOOK VIII.
CHAP. I. THat Miracles are ceased. Page. 85 CHAP. II. That the gift of
Prophecy is ceased. Page. 88 CHAP. III. That Oracles are ceased. Page. 89
CHAP. IV. A Tale written by many grave Authors, and believed by many wise men
of the Devils death. Another story written by Papists, and believed of all
Catholics, approving the Devils honesty, conscience, and courtesy. Page. 90
CHAP. V. The Judgment of the Ancient Fathers touching Oracles, and their
abolishment, and that they be now transferred from Delphos to Rome. Page. 91
CHAP. VI. Where and wherein Coseners, Witches, and Priests were wont to give
Oracles, and to work their feats. Page. 92
BOOK IX.
CHAP. I. THe Hebrew word Kasam expounded, and how far a Christian may
conjecture of things to come. Page. 93 CHAP. II. Proofs by the Old and New
Testament that certain Observations of the Weather are lawful. Page. 94 CHAP.
III. That certain Observations are indifferent, certain ridiculous, and certain
impious; whence that cunning is derived of Apollo, end of Aruspices. ibid.
CHAP. IV. The Predictions of Soothsayers and lewd Priests, the Prognostications
of Astronomers and Physicians allowable; Divine Prophesies holy and good. Page.
95 CHAP. V. The diversity of true Prophets; of Urim, and the Prophetical use of
the twelve Precious Stones contained therein; of the Divine Voice called Echo.
Page. 96 CHAP. VI. Of Prophesies conditional, whereof the Prophesies in the Old
Testament do entreat, and by whom they were published; Witchmongers answers to
the Objections against Witches supernatural actions. ibid. CHAP. VII. What were
the miracles expressed in the Old Testament; and what are they in the New
Testament; and that we are not now to look for any more miracles. Page. 97
BOOK X.
CHAP. I. THe Interpretation of the Hebrew word Onen; of the vanity of dreams,
and Divinations thereupon. Page. 99 CHAP. II. Of Divine, Natural, and Casual
Dreams, with the different causes and effects. ibid. CHAP. III. The Opinion of
diverse old Writers touching Dreams, and how they vary in noting the causes
thereof. Page. 100 CHAP. IV. Against Interpreters of Dreams; of the ordinary
cause of Dreams; Hemingius opinion of Diabolical Dreams; the Interpretation of
Dreams ceased. ibid. CHAP. V. That neither Witches, nor any other, can either
by words or herbs, thrust into the mind of a sleeping man, what cogitations or
dreams they list; and whence Magical dreams come. Page. 101 CHAP. VI. How men
have been bewitched, cosened, or abused by Dreams to dig and search for Money.
Page. 102 CHAP. VII. The art and order to be used in diging for Money, revealed
by Dreams; how to procure pleasant Dreams; of morning and midnight dreams.
ibid. CHAP. VIII. Sundry Receipts and Ointments, made and used for the
transportation of Witches, and other miraculous effects; an instance thereof
reported and credited by some that are learned. ibid. CHAP. IX. A confutation
of the former follies, as well concerning Ointments, Dreams, etc. as also the
assembly of Witches, and of their Consultations and Bankets at sundry places,
and all in Dreams. Page. 103 CHAP. X. That most part of Prophesies in the Old
Testament were revealed in Dreams, that we are not now to look for such
Revelations; of some who have dreamt of that which has come to pass; that
Dreams prove contrary; Nebuchadnezzar's rule to know a true Expositor of
Dreams. Page. 104
BOOK. XI.
CHAP. I. THe Hebrew word Nahas expounded; of the art of Augury, who invented
it; how slovenly a Science it is; the multitude of Sacrifices and Sacrificers
of the Heathen, and the causes thereof. Page. 106 CHAP. II. Of the Jews
Sacrifice to Moloch; a discourse thereupon, and of Purgatory. ibid. CHAP. III.
The Canibals cruelty; of Popish Sacrifices exceeding in tyranny the Jews or
Gentiles. Page. 107 CHAP. IV. The superstition of the Heathen about the Element
of Fire, and how it grew in such reverence among them; of their corruptions,
and that they had some inkling of the godly Fathers doings in that behalf.
ibid. CHAP. V. Of the Roman Sacrifices; of the estimation they had of Augury;
of the Law of the Twelve Tables. Page. 108 CHAP. VI. Colleges of Angurers,
their Office, their number, the signification of Augury, that the practisers of
that Art were coseners, their profession, their places of Exercise, their
Apparel, their Superstition. ibid. CHAP. VII. The times and seasons to exercise
Augury, the manner and order thereof; of the Ceremonies thereunto, belonging.
Page. 109 CHAP. VIII. Upon what signs and tokens Augurers did prognosticate;
Observations touching the inward and outward parts of Beasts, with notes of
Beasts behavior in the slaughterhouse. ibid. CHAP. IX. A Confutation of
Augury; Plato his reverend opinion thereof; of contrary events, and false
predictions. Page. 110 CHAP. X. The cosening Art of Sortilege or Lotary,
practiced especially by the Egyptian vagabonds; of allowed lots; of Pythagoras
his lot, etc. ibid. CHAP. XI. Of the Cabbalistical Art consisting of Traditions
and unwritten Verities learned without Bock, and of the Division thereof. Page.
111 CHAP. XII. When, how, and in what sort Sacrifices were first ordained, and
how they were profaned; and how the Pope corrupts the Sacraments of Christ.
Page. 112 CHAP. XIII. Of the Objects whereupon the Augurers used to
prognosticate, with certain cautions and notes. Page. 113 CHAP. XIV. The
division of Augury; persons admittable into the Colleges of Augury; of their
Superstition. ibid. CHAP. XV. Of the common peoples fond and sustitious
Collections and observations. Page. 114 CHAP. XVI. How old Writers vary about
the Matter, the Manner, and the Means, where things augurifical are moved.
Page. 115 CHAP. XVII. How ridiculous an Art Augury is; how Cato mocked it;
Aristotle's reason against it; fond Collections of Augurers; who allowed, and
who disallowed it. Page. 116 CHAP. XVIII. Fond Distinctions of the Heathen
Writers concerning Augury. Page. 117 CHAP. XIX. Of Natural and Casual Augury,
the one allowed, and the other disallowed. ibid. CHAP. XX. A Confutation of
Casual Augury which is mere Witchcraft, and upon what uncertainty those
Divinations are grounded. ibid. CHAP. XXI. The Figure-casters are Witches; the
uncertainty of their Art, and of their contradictions; Cornelius Agrippa's
sentence against. Judicial Astrology. Page. 118 CHAP. XXII. The subtilty of
Astrologers to maintain the credit of their Art; why they remain in credit:
certain impieties contained in Astrologers assertions. Page. 119 CHAP. XXXIII.
Who have power to drive away Devils with their only presence, who shall receive
of God whatsoever they ask in Prayer, who shall obtain everlasting life by
means of Constellations, as Nativity-casters affirm. Page. 120
BOOK XII.
CHAP. I. THe Hebrew word Haber expounded, where also the supposed secret force
of Charms and Enchantments is showed, and the efficacy of words is diverse ways
declared. Page. 121 CHAP. II. What is forbidden in Scriptures concerning
Witchcraft, of the operation of words, the superstition of the Cabalists and
Papists, who creates Substances; to imitate God in some cases is presumption;
words of Sanctification. ibid. CHAP. III. What effect and offense Witches
Charms bring; how unapt Witches are, and how unlikely to work those things
which they are thought to do: what would follow if those things were true which
are laid to their charge. Page. 122 CHAP. IV. Why God forbad the practice of
Witchcraft: the absurdity of the law of the Twelve Tables, whereupon their
estimation in miraculous actions is grounded; of their wondrous works. Page.
123 CHAP. V. An instance of one arraigned upon the law of the Twelve Tables,
whereby the said law is proved ridiculous; of two Witches that could do
wonders. ibid. CHAP. VI. Laws provided for the punishment of such Witches that
work miracles, whereof some are mentioned; and of certain Popish laws published
against them. Page. 124 CHAP. VII. Poetical Authorities commonly alleged by
Witchmongers, for the proof of Witches miraculous actions, and for confirmation
of their supernatural power. Page. 125 CHAP. VIII. Poetry and Popery compared
in Enchantments; Popish Witchmongers have more advantage herein than
Protestants. Page. 129 CHAP. IX. Popish Periapts, Amulets and Charms, Agnus
Dei, a Wastcote of Proof, a Charm for the Falling-evil, a writing brought to S.
Leo from Heaven by an Angel; the virtues of S. Saviors Epistle; a Charm
against Thieves; a writing found in Christ's wounds; of the Cross, etc. ibid. A
charm against shot, or a Wastcote of Proof. 130. Against the Falling-evil,
ibid. A Popish Periapt or Charm, which must never be said, but carried about
one against thieves. Another amulet. 131. A Papistical charm. A Charm found in
the Canon of the Mass. Other Papistical Charms. A Charm of the holy Cross. 132.
A Charm taken out of the Primer. Page. 133 CHAP. X. How to make Holy Water, and
the virtues thereof: S. Rufin's Charm; of the wearing and bearing of the Name
of Jesus; that the Sacrament of Confession, and the Eucharist is of as much
efficacy as other charms, and magnified by L. Varus. ibid. CHAP. XI. Of the
noble balm used by Moses, apishly counterfeited in the Church of Rome. Page.
134 CHAP. XII. The opinion of Ferrarius touching Charms, Periapts, Appensions,
Amulets, etc. Of Homerical medicines, of constant opinion, and the effects
thereof. ibid. CHAP. XIII. Of the effects of Amulets, the drift of Argerius
Ferrarius in the commendation of charms, etc. four sorts of Homerical
medicines, and the choice thereof; of imagination. Page. 135 CHAP. XIV. Choice
of charms against the Falling-evil, the biting of a mad Dog, the stinging of a
Scorpion, the Toothach, for a woman in travel, for the King's Evil, to get a
Thorn out of any member, or a bone, out of ones throat: Charms to be said
fasting, or at the gathering herbs; for sore Eyes, to open Locks, against
Spirits, for the bots in a Horse, and specially for the Duke of Alba's Horse;
for sour Wines, etc. 136. For the Falling-evil. ibid. Against the biting of a
mad Dog. 137. Against the biting of a Scorpion. Against the Toothach. A charm
to release a woman in Travel. To heal the King or Queens-evil, or any other
soreness in the Throat. A charm read in the Romish Church upon S. Blaze's day,
that will fetch a thorn out of any place of ones body. A bone out of the
Throat, etc. Lect. 3. ibid. A charm for the headache. 138. A charm to be said
each morning by a Witch fasting, or at least before she go abroad. Another
Charm that Witches use at the gathering of their Medicinable Herbs. An Old
Woman's Charm, wherewith she did much good in the Country, and grew famous
thereby, ibid. Another like charm. ibid. A charm to open locks 139. A charm
to drive away spirits that haunt any house. A pretty charm or conclusion for
one possessed. Another to the same effect ibid. Another charm or witchcraft
for the same, ibid. A charm for the bots in a horse, ibid. A charm against
vinegar Page. 140. CHAP. XV. The enchanting of Serpents and snakes; objections
answered concerning the same; fond reasons why charms take effect therein.
Mahomets pigeon, miracles wrought by an Ass at Memphis in Egypt, popish
charms against serpents; of miracle-workers, the taming of snakes, Bodins lie
of Snakes Page. 141. CHAP. XVI. Charms to carry water in a sive, to know what
is spoken of us behind our backs, for bleare eyes, to make seeds to grow well,
of images made of wax, to be rid of a witch to hang her up; notable authorities
against waxen images; a story bewraying the knavery of Waxen images. 145. A
Charm teaching how to hurt whom yon list with images of wax, etc. ibid. CHAP.
XVII. Sundry spirits of charms tending to diverse purposes, and first, certain
charms to make taciturnity in tortures. 146. Country charms against these and
all other Witchcrafts, in the saying also whereof witches are vexed, ibid. A
charm for the choine cough. For conporal or spiritual rest. Charms to find
cut a thief. 147. Another way to find out a thief that has stolen any thing
from you, 148. To put out the thieves eye. Another way to find out a thief
ibid. A charm to find out or spoil a thief ibid. S. Adelberts curse or charm
against thieves 149. Another enchantment Page. 151. CHAP. XVIII. A charm or
experiment to find out a witch. 152. To spoil a thief, a witch, or any other
enemy, and to be delivered from the evil, ibid. A notable charm or medicine
to pull out an arrow-head, or any such thing that sticks in the flesh or
bones, and cannot otherwise be had out. 153. Charms against a quotidian ague.
ibid. For all manner of agues intermittent. Periapts, characters, etc. for
agues, and to cure all diseases, and to deliver from all evil. ibid. More
charms for agues. 154. For a bloody flux, or rather an issue of blted. Cures
commenced and finished by witchcraft 155. Another witchcraft or knavery,
practiced by the same surgeon. 156. Another experiment for one bewitched.
Otherwise, A knack to know whether you be bewitched, or no, Page. 157. CHAP.
XIX. That one witchcraft may lawfully meet with another ibid. CHAP. XX. Who are
privileged from witches, what bodies are aptest to be bewitched, or to be
witches, why women are rather witches than men, and what they are ibid. CHAP.
XXI. What miracles witchmongers report to have been done by witches words etc.
contradictions of witchmongers among themselves how beasts are cured hereby, of
bewitched butter, a charm against witches, and a counter charm, the effect of
charms and words proved by L. Varius to be wonderful. 258. A charm to find
her that bewitched your kine. 259. Another, for all that have bewitched any
kind of cattle. ibid. A special charm to preserve all cattle from witchcraft.
Page. 260. CHAP. XXII. Lawful charms, rather medicinable cures for diseased
cattle. The charm of charms, and the power thereof, ibid. The charm of
charms. Otherwise Page. 261. CHAP. XXIII. A confutation of the force and
virtue falsely ascribed to charms and amulets, by the authorities of ancient
writers, both Divines and Physicians. ibid.
BOOK. XIII.
CHAP. I. THe signification of the Hebrew word Hartumin, where it is found
written in the Scriptures, and how it is diversely translated: whereby the
objection of Pharaohs Magitians is afterward answered in this book; also of
natural magic not evil in it self Page. 163. CHAP. II. How the philosophers
in times past traveled for the knowledge of natural Magic, of Solomon's
knowledge therein, who is to be called a natural Magician, a distinction
thereof, and why it is condemned for witchcraft. Page. 164. CHAP. III. What
secrets do lie hidden, and what is taught in natural Magic, how Gods glory is
magnified therein, and that it is nothing but the work of nature. Page. 165.
CHAP. IV. What strange things are brought to pass by natural magic ibid.
CHAP. V. The incredible operation of waters, both standing and running; of
wels, lakes, rivers, and of their wonderful effects Page. 166. CHAP. VI. The
virtues and qualities of sundry precious stones; of cosening Lapidaries, etc.
Page. 166. CHAP. VII. Whence the precious stones receive their operations, how
curious Magitians use them and of their seals. Page. 168 CHAP. VIII. The
sympathy and antipathy of natural and elementary bodies declared by diverse
examples of beasts, birds, plants, etc. Page. 170. CHAP. IX. The former matter
proved by many examples of the living and the dead. Page. 171 CHAP. X. The
bewitching venom contained in the body of an harlot, how her eye, her tongue,
her beauty and behavior bewitcheth some men: of bones and horns yielding
great virtue. Page. 172 CHAP. XI. Two notorius wonders, and yet not marvelled
at. Page. 173 CHAP. XII. Of illusions, confederacies, and legierdemain, and how
they may be well or ill used. ibid. CHAP. XIII. Of private confederacy, and of
Brandons Pigeon. Page. 174 CHAP. XIV. Of public confederacy, and whereof it
consists. Page. 175 CHAP. XV. How men have been abused with words of
equivocation, with sundry examples thereof. ibid. CHAP. XVI. How some are
abused with natural magic, and sundry examples thereof when illusions is added
thereunto; of Jacobs pied sheep, and of a black Moore. Page. 176 CHAP. XVII.
The opinion of witchmongers, that devils can create bodies, and of Pharaohs
magicians. ibid. CHAP. XVIII. How to produce or make monsters by art of magic,
and why Pharaohs magicians could not make lice. Page. 177 CHAP. XIX. That great
matters may be wrought by this art, when princes esteem and maintain it: of
diverse wonderful experiments, and of strange conclusions in glasses; of the art
perspective, etc. Page. 178 CHAP. XX. A comparison betwixt Pharaohs magicians
and our witches, and how their cunning consisted in juggling knacks. Page. 179
CHAP. XXI. That the serpents and frogs were truly presented, and the water
poisoned indeed by Jannes and Jambres; of false prophets, and of their
miracles; of Balaam ass. Page. 180 CHAP. XXII. The art of juggling discovered,
and in what points it does principally consist. Page. 181 CHAP. XXIII. Of the
ball, and the manner of legeir-demain therewith, also notable feats with one or
diverse balls. 182 To make a little ball swell in your hand till it be very
great. ibid. To consume (or rather to convey) one or many bals into nothing.
183 How to rap a wag upon the knuckles. ibid. CHAP. XXIV. Of conveyance of
money. ibid. To convey money out of one of your hands into the other by
legierdemain. ibid. To convert or transubstantiate money into counters, or
counters into money. 184. To put one testor into one hand, and another into the
other hand, with words to bring them together. ibid. To put one testor into a
strangers hand, and another into your own, and to convey both into the
strangers hand with words. ibid. How to do the same or the like feat otherwise.
ibid. To throw a piece of money away, and to find it again where you list.
ibid. With words to make a groat or a testor to leap out of a pot, or to run
along upon a table. 185. To make a groat or a testor to sink through a table,
and to vanish out of a handkercher very strongly, ibid. A notable trick to
transform a counter to a groat. ibid. CHAP. XXV. An excellent feat to make a
two-penny piece lie plain in the palm of your hand and to be passed from
thence when you list. 186. To convey a testor out of ones hand that holds it
fast. ibid. To throw a piece of money into a deep pond, and to fetch it again
from whence you list. ibid. To convey one shilling being in one hand into
another, holding your arms abroad like a rod. ibid. How to rap a wag on the
knuckles. Page. 187 CHAP. XXVI. To transform any one small thing into any
other form by holding of paper. ibid. CHAP. XXVII. Of cards, with good cautions
how to avoid cosenage therein: special rules to convey and handle the cards,
and the manner and order how to accomplish all difficult and strange things
wrought by cards. ibid. How to deliver out four aces, and to convert them into
four knaves. 188. How to tell one what card he sees in the bottom, when the
same card is shuffled into the stock. ibid. Another way to do the same, having
your self indeed never seen the card. 189. To tell one without confederacy what
card he thinks. ibid. CHAP. XXVIII. How to tell what card any man thinks;
how to convey the same into a kernel of a nut or cheristone, etc. and the same
again into ones pocket; how to make one draw the same or any card you list, and
all under one device, ibid. CHAP. XXIX. Of Fast or Loose, how to knit a hard
knot upon a Handkercher, and to undo the same with words, 190. A notable feat
of Fast or Loose, namely, to pull three Bead-stones from off a Cord, while you
hold fast the ends thereof, without removing of your hand. ibid. CHAP. XXX.
Juggling knacks by Confederacy, and how to know whether one cast Cross or Pile
by the ringing. 191. To make a shoal of Goslings draw a Timber-log. ibid. To
make a Pot or any such thing standing fast on the Cubboord, to fall down thence
by virtue of words. ibid. To make one Dance naked. ibid. To transform or alter
the color of ones Cap, or Hat. ibid. How to tell where a stolen Horse is
become. ibid. CHAP. XXXI. Boxes to alter one grain into another, or to consume
the Grain or Corn to nothing. 192. How to convey (with words or charms) the
Corn contained in one Box into another. ibid. Of another Box to convert Wheat
into Flower with words, etc. ibid. Of diverse petty Juggling knacks. Page. 193
CHAP. XXXII. To burn a Thread and to make it whole again with the ashes thereof,
ibid. To cut a Lace asunder in the midst, and to make it whole again, ibid. How
to pull Laces innumerable out of your mouth, of what color or length you list,
and never any thing seen to be therein. Page. 194 CHAP. XXXIII. How to make a
Book, wherein you shall show every leaf therein to be white, black, blue, red,
yellow, green, etc. ibid. CHAP. XXXIV. Desperate or dangeroous Juggling knacks,
wherein the simple are made to think, that a silly Juggler with words can hurt
and help, kill and revive any creature at his pleasure: and first to kill any
kind of Pullen, and to give it life again. 195. To eat a Knife, and fetch it
out of any other place. ibid. To thrust a Bodkin into your head without hurt.
196. To thrust a Bodkin through your tongue, and a knife through your arm, a
pitiful sight, without hurt or danger, ibid. To thrust a piece of Lead into
ones Eye, and drive it about (with a stick) between the skin and flesh of the
forehead, until it be brought to the other eye, and there thrust out, ibid. To
cut half your Nose asunder, and to heal it again presently without any salve.
ibid. To put a Ring through your cheek. ibid. To cut off ones head, and to lay
it in a Platter, etc. which the Juglers call the Decollation of John Baptist.
197. To thrust a Dagger or Bodkin into your guts very strangely, and to recover
immediately. ibid. To draw a Cord through your nose, mouth or hand, so sensible
as it is wonderful to see. 198. The Conclusion, wherein the Reader is referred
to certain patterns of Instruments wherewith diverse feats here specified are to
be executed. ibid.
BOOK XIV.
CHAP. I. OF the Art of Alchymistry, of their words of Art and devices to blear
men's eyes, and to procure credit to their Profession. Page. 202 CHAP. II. The
Alchymisters drift; the Canons Yeomans tale; of Alchymistical Stones and
Waters. Page. 203 CHAP. III. Of a Yeoman of the Country cosened by an
Alchymist. Page. 204 CHAP. IV. A certain King abused by an Alchymist; and of
the King's Fool a pretty jest. Page. 206 CHAP. V. A notable story written by by
Erasmus of two Alchymists; also of Longation and Curtation. ibid. CHAP. VI. The
Opinion of diverse learned men touching the folly of Alchymistry. Page. 210
CHAP. VII. That vain and deceitful hope is a great cause why men are seduced by
this alluring Art, and that their labors therein are bootless, etc. Page. 212
CHAP. VII. A Continuation of the former matter, with a Conclusion of the same.
ibid.
BOOK XV.
CHAP. I. OF Magical Circles, and the reason of their Institution. Page. 215
CHAP. II. How to raise up the Ghost of one that has hanged himself. Page. 217
CHAP. III. How to raise up the three Spirits, Paymon, Bathin, and Barma; and
what wonderful things may be effected through their Assistance. Page. 218 CHAP.
IV. How to consecrate all manner of Circles, Fumigations, Fires, Magical
Garments, and Utensils. Page. 220 CHAP. V. Treating more practically of the
Consecration of Circles, Fires, Garments and Fumigations. Page. 221 CHAP. VI.
How to raise and exorcise all sorts of Spirits belonging to the Airy Region.
Page. 222 CHAP. VII. How to obtain the familiarity of the Genius, or Good
Angel, and cause him to appear. Page. 223 CHAP. VIII. A form of Conjuring
Luridan the Familiar, otherwise called Belelah. Page. 224 CHAP. IX. How to
conjure the Spirit Balkin the Master of Luridan. Page. 226 CHAP. X. The
Exposition of Jidoni, and where it is found, whereby the whole Art of
Conjuration is deciphered. Page. 229 CHAP. XI. An inventary of the names,
shapes, powers, government, and effects of Devils and Spirits, of their several
signiorities and degrees: a strange discourse worth the reading. ibid. CHAP.
XII. The hours wherein principal Devils may be bound; to wit, raised and
restrained from doing of hurt. Page. 238 CHAP. XIII. The form of adjuring or
citing of the Spirits aforesaid to arise and appear. ibid. CHAP. XIV. A
confutation of the manifold vanities contained in the precedent Chapters,
specially of commanding of Devils. Page. 240 CHAP. XV. The names of the
Planets, their Characters, together with the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, their
dispositions, aspects, and government, with other observations. 241. The twelve
Signs of the Zodiac, their characters and denominations, etc ibid. Their
dispositions or inclinations. ibid. The disposition of the Planets. ibid. The
aspects of the Planets. 242. How the day is divided or distinguished. ibid. The
division of the Day and the Planetary Regiment. ibid. The division of the Night
and the Planetary Regiment. ibid. CHAP. XVI. The characters of the Angels of
the Seven days, with their names; of Figures, Seals and Periapts. Page. 243
CHAP. XVII. An experiment of the dead. Page. 244 CHAP. XVIII. A License for
Sybilla to go and come by at all times. Page. 247 CHAP. XIX. To know of
Treasure hidden in the Earth. ibid. This is the way to go Invisible by th^se
three Sisters of Fairies. ibid. CHAP. XX. An experiment of Citrael, etc. Angeli
diei dominici. 248. The Seven Angels of the Seven Days, with the Prayer called
Regina linguae. Page. 249 CHAP. XXI. How to enclose a Spirit in a
Crystal-stone. ibid. A figure or type proportional, showing what form must be
observed and kept, in making the figure whereby the former secret of enclosing
a Spirit in Crystal is to be accomplished, etc. Page. 251 CHAP. XXII. An
Experiment of the Spirit Bealphares. ibid. The two and twentieth Psalm. 252.
This Psalm also following, being the fifty one Psalm, must be said three times
over, etc. ibid. CHAP. XXIII. To bind the Spirit Bealphares, and to lose him
again. 253. A License for the Spirit to depart. 254. A type or figure of the
Circle for the Master and his fellows to fit in, showing how and after what
fashion it should be made. Page. 255 CHAP. XXIV. The making of the Holy Water.
ibid. To the water say also as follows. ibid. Then take the Salt in thy hand,
and say putting it into the water, making in the manner of a Cross. 256. Then
sprinkle upon any thing, and say as follows. ibid. CHAP. XXV. To make a
Spirit to appear in a Crystal. ibid. CHAP. XXVI. An Experiment of the Dead.
257. Now the Pater noster, Ave, and Credo must be said, and then the Prayer
immediately following Page. 258 CHAP. XXVII. A Bond to bind him to thee, and to
thy N. as follows. ibid. CHAP. XXVIII. This Bond following is to call him
inso your Crystal-stone, or Glass, etc. 260. Then being appeared, say these
words following, ibid. A License to depart. Page. 261. CHAP. XXIX. When to talk
with Spirits, and to have true answers to find out a Thief. ibid. To speak with
Spirits. ibid. CHAP. XXX. A Confutation of Conjuration, especially of the
raising, binding and dismissing of the Devil; of going Invisible and other lewd
practices. ibid. CHAP. XXXI. A Comparison between Popish Exorcists and other
Conjurors; A Popish Conjuration published by a great Doctor of the Romish
Church, his rules and cautions. Page. 263 CHAP. XXXII. A late Experiment, or
cosening Conjuration practiced at Orleance by the Franciscan Friars; how it was
detected, and the judgment against the Authors of that Comedy. Page. 264 CHAP.
XXXIII. Who may be Conjurors in the Romish Church besides Priests; a ridiculous
definition of Superstition; what words are to be used and not used in
Exorcisms; Rebaptism allowed; it is lawful to Conjure any thing; differences
between Holy Water and Conjuration. Page. 266 CHAP. XXXIV. The seven Reasons
why some are not rid of the Devil with all their Popish Conjurations; why there
were no Conjurors in the Primitive Church; and why the Devil is not so soon
cast out of the bewitched as of the possessed. Page. 267 CHAP. XXXV. Other
gross absurdities of Witchmongers in this matter of Conjurations. Page. 268
CHAP. XXXVI. Certain Conjurations taken out of the Pontifical, and out of the
Missal. 269. A Conjuration written in the Mass Book. Fol. 1. ibid. Oremus.
ibid. CHAP. XXXVII. That Popish Priests leave nothing unconjured; a form of
Exorcism for Incense. Page. 270 CHAP. XXXVIII. The Rules and Laws of Popish
Exorcists and other Conjurors all one, with a confutation of their whole power;
how St. Martin conjured the Devil. ibid. CHAP. XXXIX. That it is a shame for
Papists to believe other Conjurors doings, their own being of so little;
Hippocrates his opinion herein. Page. 272 CHAP. XL. How Conjurors have beguiled
Witches; what Books they carry about to procure credit to their Art: wicked
assertions against Moses and Joseph. ibid. CHAP. XLI. All Magical Arts confuted
by an argument concerning Nero; what Cornelius Agrippa and Carolus Gallus have
left written thereof, and proved by experience. Page. 273 CHAP. XLII. Of
Solomon's Conjurations, and of the opinion conceived of his cunning and
practice therein. Page. 274 CHAP. XLIII. Lessons read in all Churches, where
the Pope has authority, on St. Margaret's day; translated into English word
for word. Page. 275 CHAP. XLIV. A delicate story of a Lumbard, who by St.
Margaret's example, would needs fight with a real Devil. ibid. CHAP. XLV. The
story of St. Margaret proved to be both ridiculous and impious in every point.
Page. 276 CHAP. XLVI. A pleasant Miracle wrought by a Popish Priest. Page. 277
CHAP. XLVII. The former Miracle confuted, with a strange story of St. Lucy.
Page. 278 CHAP. XLVIII. Of Visions, Noises, Apparitions, and imagined Sounds,
and of other Illusions; of wandering Souls, with a confutation thereof. ibid.
CHAP. XLIX. Cardanus opinion of strange Noises; how counterfeit Visions grow to
be credited; of Popish Appearances; of Pope Boniface. Page. 279 CHAP. L. Of the
Noise or Sound of Echo, of one that narrowly escaped downing thereby, etc.
Page. 280 CHAP. LI. Of Theurgie, with a Confutation thereof: A Letter sent to
me concerning these matters. ibid. The Copy of a Letter sent unto me R. S. by
T.E. Master of Art, and practiser both of Physic, and also in times past, of
certain vain Sciences, now condemned to die for the same: wherein he opens
the truth touching those deceits. Page. 281
BOOK XVI.
CHAP I. A Conclusion, in manner of an Epilog, repeating mary of the former
absurdities of Witchmongers conceits; confutations thereof; and of the
authority of James Sprenger, and Henry Institor inquisitors and compilers of M.
Mal. Page. 283 CHAP II. By what means the common people have been made believe
in the miraculous works of Witches; a definition of Witchcraft, and a
description thereof. Page. 284 CHAP. III. Reasons to prove that Words and
Characters are but Bables, and that Witches cannot do such things as the
multitude supposes they can; their greatest wonders proved trifles; of a young
Gentleman cosened. ibid. CHAP IV. Of one that was so bewitched, that he could
read no Scriptures but Canonical; of a Devil that could speak no Latin; a proof
that Witchcraft is flat cosenage. Page. 286 CHAP V. Of the Divination by the
Sive and Sheeres, and by the Book and Key; Hemingius his opinion thereof
confuted; a babble to know what is a clock; of certain juggling knacks; manifold
reasons for the overthrow of Witches and Conjurors, and their cosenages; of the
Devils transformations; of Ferrum candens. ibid. CHAP. VI. How the Devil
preached good Doctrine in the shape of a Priest; how he was discovered; and
that it is a shame (after Confutation of the greater Witchcrafts) for any man
to give credit to the lesser points thereof. Page. 289 CHAP. VII. A Conclusion
against Witchcraft, in manner and form of an Introduction. Page. 290 CHAP.
VIII. Of Natural Witchcraft or Fascination. ibid. CHAP. IX. Of Enchanting or
Bewitching Eyes. Page. 291 CHAP. X. Of Natural Witchcraft for Love, etc. Page.
292
FINIS.
A DISCOURSE CONCERNING The NATURE and SUBSTANCE OF Devils and Spirits.

IN TWO BOOKS.

The First, By REGINAL SCOTT Esquire

The Second, Added in this Third Impression, as Succedaneous to the First, and
conducing to the completing of the Whole Work.

LONDON; Printed in the Year M.DC.LXV.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Devils and Spirits. BOOK I.
CHAP. I.
The Philosophers Opinions concerning Devils and Spirits; their manner of
reasoning thereupon, and the same confuted.

THere is no Question nor Theme (says Hierome Cardane) so difficult to deal
in, nor so noble an argument to dispute upon, H. Card. lib. de var. rer. 16.
cap. 93.
as this of Devils and Spirits; for that being confessed or doubted of, the
eternity of the Soul is either affirmed or denied. The Heathen Philosophers
reason hereof amongst themselves in this sort. First, The Platonists and
Stoics. The Epicureans and Peripateticks.
they that maintain the perpetuity of the Soul, say, That if the soul died with
the body; to what end should men take pains either to live well or die well,
when no reward for virtue, nor panishment for vice insueth after this life, the
which otherwise they might spend in ease and security? The other sort say, That
virtue and honesty is to be persued, Non spe praemii, sed virtutis amore, that
is, Not for hope of reward, but for love of virtue. If the soul live ever (say
the other) the least portion of life is here: And therefore we that maintain
the perpetuity of the Soul, may be of the better comfort and courage, to
sustain with more constancy the loss of children, yea and the loss of life it
self: whereas if the Soul were mortal, all our hope and felicity were to be
placed in this life, which many Atheists (I warrant you) at this day do. But
both the one and the other missed the cushion. For, to do any thing without
Christ, is to weary our selves in vain; since in him only corruptions are
purged. And therefore the folly of the Gentiles that place Summum bonum in the
felicity of the body, or in the happiness or pleasures of the mind, is not only
to be derided, but also abhorred. For, Summum bonum cannot consist in the
happiness of the body or mind.
both our bodies and minds are intermedled with most miserable calamities: and
therefore therein cannot consist perfect felicity. But in the Word of God is
exhibited and offered unto us that hope which is most certain, absolute, sound
and sincere, not to be answered or denied by the judgment of Philosophers
themselves: Moral Temperance.
For they that prefer temperance before all other things as Summum bonum, must
needs see it to be a witness of their natural calamity, corruption and
wickedness; and that it serves for nothing, but to restrain the dissoluteness,
which has place in their minds infected with vices; which are to be bridled
with such corrections; yea and the best of them all fails in some point of
modesty. Moral Prudence.
Wherefore serves our Philosophers prudence, but to provide for their own
folly and misery; whereby they might else be utterly overthrown? And if their
nature were not entangled in errors, they should have no need of such
circumspection. Moral Justice.
The justice whereof they speak, serves but to keep them from ravine, theft,
and violence: and yet none of them all are so just, but that the very best and
uprightest of them fall into great infirmities, both doing and suffering much
wrong and injury. Moral Fortitude.
And what is their fortitude but to arm them to endure misery, grief, danger,
and death it self? But what happiness or goodness is to be reposed in that
life, which must be waited upon with such calamities, Romans 2.
and finally must have the help of death to finish it? I say, if it be so
miserable, why do they place Summum bonum therein? S. Paul to the Romans
shows that it cannot be that we should attain to justice, through the moral
and natural actions and duties of this life: because that never the Jews nor
the Gentiles could e^press so much in their lives, as the very law of Nature or
of Moses required. And therefore he that works without Christ, does as he
that reckons without his host.

CHAP. II.
Mine own opinion concerning this Argument, to the disproof of some Writers
hereupon.

The question about Spirits doubtful and difficult.
I For my part do also think this Argument, about the Nature and Substance of
Devils and Spirits, to be so difficult, as I am persuaded that no one Author
has in any certain or perfect sort hitherto written thereof. In which respect
I can neither allow the ungodly and profane sects and doctrines of the
Sadduces and Peripateticks, who deny that there are any Devils or Spirits at
last; nor the fond and superstitious Treatises of Plato, Proclus, Plotinus,
Porphyrie; or yet the vain and absurd opinions of Psellus, Nider, Sprenger,
Cumanus, Bodin, Michael, Andreas, Janus, Matchaeus, Laurentius Ananias,
Jambilchus, who with many others write so ridiculously in these matters, as if
they were babes frayed with bugges: Plotinus. The Greeks. Laur. Ananias. The
Manichees. Plutarch. Psellus.

Mal. malef. Avicen, and the Cabalists. The Thalmudists.

Psellus, etc. The Platonists. The Papists.


Some affirming, That the souls of the dead become spirits, the good to be
Angels, the bad to be Devils: Some, That Spirits or Devils are only in this
life; Some, That they are men: Some, That they are women; Some, That Devils are
of such gender as they list themselves: Some, That they had no beginning, nor
shall have ending, as the Manichees maintain: Some, That they are mortal and
die, as Plutarch affirms of Pan: Some, That they have no bodies at all, but
receive bodies, according to their fantasies and imaginations: Some, That
their bodies are given unto them: Some, That they make themselves. Some say,
They are wind: Some, That they are the breath of living creatures; Some, That
one of them begat another: Some, That they were created of the least part of
the mass, whereof the Earth was made: and some, That they are substances
between God and Man, and that of them some are Terrestrial, some Celestial,
some Watery, some Airy, some Fiery, some Starry, and some of each and every part
of the Elements, and that they know our thoughts, and carry our good Works and
Prayers to God, and return his benefits back unto us, and that they are to be
worshipped, wherein they meet and agree jump with the Papists; as if you read
the notes upon the second chapter to the Colossians, in the Seminaries
Testament printed at Rhemes, you shall manifestly see, though as contrary to
the Word of God as black to white, as appears in the Apocalypse, Apoc. 19.10.
ibid. 21, 8, 9.
where the Angel expressly forbad John to worship him.

Again, some say, That they are mean betwixt Terrestrial and Celestial bodies,
communicating part of each nature; and that although they be eternal, yet that
they are moved with affections: and as there are Birds in the air, Fishes in
the water, and Worms in the earth; so in the fourth Element, which is the fire,
is the habitation of Spirits and Devils. And lest we should think them idle,
they say, They have charge over men, and Government in all Countries and
Nations. Some say, The Sadduces.
That they are only imaginations in the mind of man. Tertullian says, They are
Birds, and fly faster then any fowl of the air. Some say, That Devils are not,
Psellus de operatione daemonum, cap. 8.
but when they are sent; and therefore are called evil Angels. Some think, That
the Devil sends his Angels alroad, and he himself makes his continual abode
in Hell, his Mansion place.

CHAP. III.
The opinion of Psellus touching Spirits; of their several Orders; and a
Confutation of his Errors therein.

PSellus being of authority in the Church of Rome, and not impugnable by any
Catholic, being also instructed in these supernatural or rather Diabolical
matters by a Monk called Marcus, who had been familiarly conversant a long
time, as he said, with a certain Devil, reports upon the same Devils own
word, which must needs understand best the state of this question; That the
bodies of Angels and Devils consist not now of all one element, though perhaps
it were otherwise before the fall of Lucifer; and, Such are Spirits walking in
white sheets, etc.
That the bodies of Spirits and Devils can feel and be felt, do hurt and be
hurt: in so much as they lament when they are stricken; and being put to the
fire are burnt, and yet that they themselves burn continually, in such sort as
they leave ashes behind them in places where they have been; as manifest trial
thereof has been (if he say truly) in the borders of Italy. Psellus, ibid.
cap. 9.
He also says upon like credit and assurance; That Devils and Spirits do avoid
and shed from out of their bodies, such seed or nature, as whereby certain
vermin are ingendered, and that they are nourished with food, as we are, saving
that they receive it not into their mouths, but suck it it up into their
bodies, in such sort as sponges soke up waser. Also he says, Idem. cap. 10.
Idem. ibid. c. 11.
They have names, shapes, and dwelling places, as indeed they have, though not
in temporal and corporal sort.

Furthermore, he says, That there are six principal kind of Devils, Oh
Heathenish; nay, oh Papistical folly!
which are not only corporal, but temporal and worldly. The first sort consist
of fire, wandering in the Region near to the Moon, but have no power to go into
the Moon. The second sort consisting of air, have their habitation more low and
near unto us: These (says he) are proud and great boasters, very wise and
deceitful, and when they come down are seen with streams of fire at their tail.
He says, That these are commonly conjured up to make Images laugh, The
opinions of all Papists.
and Lamps burn of their own accord; and that in Assyria they use much to
prophecy in a Basin of Water. Which kind of Incantation is usual among our
Conjurors: A cosening knavery.
but it is here commonly performed in a Pitcher or Pot of water; or else in a
Vial of Glass filled with water, wherein they say at the first a little sound
is heard without a voice, which is a token of the Devils coming. Anon the water
seems to be troubled, and then there are heard small voices, wherewith they
give their answers, speaking so softly as no man can well hear them: H. Card.
lib. de. var. rer. 10. cap. 93.
because ( says Cardan) they would not be argued or rebuked of lies. But this
I have elsewhere more largely described and confuted. The third sort of Devils
are earthly; the fourth, watery, or of the Sea. The fifth, under the Earth. The
sixth sort are Lucifugi, that is, such as delight in darkness, and are scant
endued with sense, and so dull, as they can scarce be moved with Charms or
Conjurations.

The same man says, That some Devils are worse than other, but yet that they
all hate God, Devils of diverse natures, and their operations.
and are enemies to man. But the worser moity of Devils are Aquei, Subterranei,
and Lucifugi; that is, watery, under the Earth, and shunners of light: Because
(says he) these hurt not the souls of men, but destroy men's bodies like mad
and ravening beasts, molesting both inward and outward parts thereof. Aquei are
they that raise tempests, and drown Seafaring men, and do all other mischiefs
on the water. Subterranei and Lucifugi enter into the Bowels of men, and
torment them that they poss^ss with the phrinsie, and the falling evil. They
also assault them that are miners or pioners, which use to work in deep and
dark holes under the earth. Such Devils as are earthy and airy, he says, enter
by subtilty into the minds of men, to deceive them, provoking men to absurd and
unlawful affections.

The former opinion confuted.
But herein his Philosophy is very unprobable; for if the Devil be earthy, he
must needs be palpable; if he palpable, he be must needs kill them into whose
bodies he enters. Item, if he be of earth created, then must he also be
visible and untransformable in that point: for Gods creation cannot be
annihilated by the creature. So as though it were granted, that they might add
to their substance matter and form, etc. yet it is most certain, that they
cannot diminish or alter the substance whereof they consist, as not to be (when
they list) spiritual, or to relinquish and leave earth, water, fire, air, or
this and that element whereof they are created. But howsoever they imagine of
water, air, or fire, I am sure earth must always be visible and palpable, yea,
and air must always be invisible, and fire must be hot, and water must be
moist. And of these three latter bodies, specially of water and air, no form
nor shape can be exhibited to mortal eyes naturally, or by the power of any
creature.

CHAP. IV.
More absurd Assertions of Psellus and such others, concerning the actions and
passions of Spirits; his definition of them, and of his experience therein.

Psellus lib. de operat. daem. cap. 12.

If this were spoken of the tentations, etc. of Satan, it were tolerable. 1
Cor. 12.17.


MOreover the same Author says, That Spirits whisper in our minds, and yet not
speaking so loud, as our ears may hear them: but in such sort as our souls
speak altogether when they are dissolved; making an example by loud speaking
afar off, and a comparison of soft whispering near at hand, so as the Devil
enters so near to the mind as the Ear need not hear him; and that every part
of a Devil or Spirit sees, hears, and speaks, etc. But herein I will
believe Paul better then Psellus, or his Monk, or the Monks Devil: For Paul
says, If the whole body were an eye, where were hearing? If the whole body
were hearing, where were smelling, etc. Whereby you may see what accord is
betwixt Gods Word and Witchmongers.

Psellus ibid. cast. 13.

If a babe of two years old throw stones from Pauls-steeple, they will do hurt,
etc.

Howbeit I think the spirit of tentation to be that Devil; and therefore Christ
bids us, Wateh and pray, lest we be tempted, etc.


The Papists proceed in this matter, and say, That these Spirits use great
knavery and unspeakable bawdery in the breach and middle parts of man and
woman, by tickling, and by other lecherous devices; so that they fall jump in
judgment and opinion, though very erroneously, with the foresaid Psellus, of
whose doctrine also this is a parcel, to wit, That these Devils hurt not Cattle
for the hate they bear unto them, but for love of their natural and temperate
heat and moisture, being brought up in deep, dry and cold places. Marry they
hate the heat of the Sun and the Fire, because that kind of heat dries too
fast. They throw down stones upon men, but the blows thereof do no harm to them
whom they hit; because they are not cast with any force; for says he, The
Devils have little and small strength, so as the stones do nothing but fray and
terrify men, as scare-crows do Birds out of the Cornfieldsd. But when these
Devils enter into the pores, then do they raise wonderful tumults in the body
and mind of man. And if it be a subterrene Devil, it does writhe and bow the
possessed; and speaks by him, using the spirit of the Patient as his
instrument. But he says, that when Lucifugus poss^ss^th a man, he makes him
dumb, and as it were dead: and these be they that are cast out (says he) only
by F^sting and Prayer.

The same Psellus, Psel. in operat daem cap. 14 Idem. cap. 17.
with his mates Bodin and the penners of M. Mal. and others, do find fault with
the Physicians that affirm such infirmities to be curable with diet, and not by
enchantments; saying, That Physicians do only attend upon the body, and that
which is perceiveable by outward sense; and that as touching this kind of
divine Philosophy, they have no skill at all: And to make D^vels and Spirits
seem yet more corporal and terrene, he says, That certain Devils are belonging
to certain Countries, and speak the language of the same Countries, and none
other; some the Assyrian, some the Chaldaean, and some the Persian tongue, and
that they feel stripes, and fear hurt, and specially the dint of the Sword (in
which respect Conjurors have Swords with them in their Circles, to terrify
them) and that they change shapes, even as suddenly as men do change color
with blushing, fear, anger, and other moods of the mind. He says further, That
there be brute beasts among them, and yet Devils, Beaslike Devils.
and subject to any kind of death; insomuch as they are so foolish, as they may
be compared to Flies, Fleas, and Worms, who have no respect to any thing but
their food, not regarding or remembering the whole from out of whence they came
last. Marry Devils compounded of Earth, cannot often transform themselves, but
abide in some one shape, such as they best like, and most delight in; to wit,
in the shape of Birds or Women; and therefore the Greeks call them Neidas,
Nereidas, and Dreidas, in the feminine gender; which Dreidae, inhabited, (as
some write) the Islands beside Scotland, called Druidae, which by that means
had their denomination and name. Other Devils that dwell in dryer places
transform themselves into the masculine kind. Finally, Psellus says, They know
our thoughts, and can prophecy of things to come. His definition is, That they
are perpetual minds in a passible body.

To verify these toys he says, But Psellus saw nothing himself.
That he himself saw in a certain night a man brought up by Aletus Lybius into
a Mountain, and that he took an herb, and spat thrice into his mouth, and
anointed his eyes with a certain Ointment, Probable and likely stuff.
so as thereby he saw great troops of Devils, and perceived a Crow to fly into
his mouth; and since that hour he could prophecy at all times, saving on
Good Friday, and Easter-sunday. If the end of this tale were true, it might not
only have satisfied the Greek- Church, in keeping the day of Easter, together
with the Church of Rome; but might also have made the Pope (that now is)
content with our Christmas and Easter Day, and not to have gathered the minutes
together, and reformed it so, as to show how falsely he and his predecessors
(whom they say could not err) has observed it hitherto. And truly this, and
the dancing of the Sun on Easter Day morning, sufficiently or rather
miraculously prove that computation, which the Pope now begins to doubt of,
and to call in question.

CHAP. V.
The Opinion of Fascius Cardanus touching Spirits, and of his Familiar Devil.

FAscius Cardanus had (as he himself and his son Hierome Cardanus report) a
familiar Devil, consisting of the fiery Element, who, Fas. Card. operat. de
demon.
so long as he used Conjuration, did give true answers to all his demands; but
when he burned up his Book of Conjurations, though he resorted still unto him,
yet did he make false answers continually. He held him bound twenty and eight
years, and loose five years. And during the time that he was bound, he told him
that there were many Devils or Spirits. He came not always alone, but sometimes
some of his fellows with him. He rather agreed with Psellus then with Plato:
for he said they were begotten, born, died, and lived long; but how long they
told him not: howbeit, as he might conjecture by the Devils face, who was 42
years old, and yet appeared very young, he thought they lived two or three
hundred years; and they said that their souls and ours also died with their
bodies. They had Schools and Universities among them: but he conceived not that
any were so dull headed, as Psellus makes them. But they are very quick in
credit, that believe such fables, which indeed is the groundwork of Witchcraft
and Conjuration. But these Histories are so gross and palpable, that I might be
thought as wise in going about to confute them, as to answer the stories of
Friar Rush, Adam Bell, or the golden Legend.

CHAP. VI.
The Opinion of Plato concerning Spirits, Devils and Angels; what Sacrifices
they like best, what they fear; and of Socrates his familiar Devil.

The Plationsts Opinion.
PLato and his followers hold, that good Spirits appear in their own likeness;
but that evil Spirits appear and show themselves in the form of other bodies;
and that one Devil reigns over the rest, as a Prince does in every perfect
Commonwealth overmen. Item, they obtain their purposes and desires, only by
entreaty of men and women; because in nature they are their inferiors, and use
authority over men none otherwise than Priests by virtue of their function, and
because of Religion, wherein (they say) they execute the Office of God.
Sometimes, they say, that the fiery Spirits or supreme Substances enter into
the purity of the mind, and so obtain their purpose; sometimes otherwise, to
wit, by virtue of holy Charms, and even as a poor man obtains for Gods sake
any thing at a Princes hand as it were by importunateness.

The other sort of Devils and defiled souls are so conversant on earth, as that
they do much hurt unto earthly bodies, specially in leachery. Gods and Angels
(say they) because they want all material and gross substance, desire most the
pure Sacrifice of the Mind. The grosser and more terrestrial Spirits desire the
grosser Sacrifices, What kind of sacrifices each Spirit likes best.
as Beasts and Cattle. They in the middle or mean Region delight to have
Frankincense, and such mean stuff offered unto them, and therefore (say they)
it is necessary to Sacrifice unto them all manner of things, so the same be
slain, and dye not of their own accord; for such they abhor. Some say, that
Spirits fear wonderfully vain threats, and thereupon will depart; as if you
tell them that you will cut the Heavens in pieces, or reveal their secrets, or
complain of them to the gods; or say that you will do any impossibility, or
such things as they cannot understand, they are so timorous as they will
presently be gone: and that is thought the best way to be rid of them. But
these be most commonly of that sort or company, which are called Principatus,
being of all other the most easy to be conjured.

Of Socrates his private devil or familiar Spirit.
They say Socrates had a familiar Devil: which Plato relyeth much upon, using
none other argument to prove that there are such Spirits; but because Socrates
(that would not lie) said so; and partly because that Devil did ever dissuade
and prohibit, not only in Socrates his own cases, but sometimes in his friends
behalf; who (if they had been ruled) might through his admonition have saved
their lives. His Disciples gathered that his Devil was Saturnal, and a
principal fiery Devil; and that he, and all such as do naturally know their
Devils, are only such as are called Daemonii viri, otherwise coseners. Item,
they say, That fiery Spirits urge men to contemplation, the airy to business,
the watery to lust; and among these there are some that are Martial, which give
fortitude; some are Jovial, giving wisdom; some Saturnal, always using
disswasion and dehorting. Item, some are born with us, and remain with us all
our life; some are mere strangers, who are nothing else but the souls of men
departed this life, etc.

CHAP. VII.
Plato's nine Orders of Spirits and Angels; Dionysius his Division thereof not
much differing from the same; all disproved by learned Divines.

PLato proposes or sets forth nine several orders of Spirits, besides the
spirits and souls of men. The first Spirit is God that commands all the
residue; the second are those that are called Ideae, which gave all things to
all men; the third are souls of heavenly bodies which are mortal; the fourth
are Angels; the fifth Archangels; the sixth are Devils, who are ministers to
infernal powers, as Angels are to supernal; the seventh are half Gods; the
eighth are Principalities; the ninth are Princes. Dionys. in coelest. hierarch.
cap. 9, 10.
From which division Dionysius does not much swerve, saving that he deals (as
he says) only with good Spirits, whom he likewise divides into nine parts or
offices. The first he calls Seraphim, the second Cherubim, the third Thrones,
the fourth Dominations, the fifth Virtues, the sixth Powers, the seventh
Principalites, the eighth Archangels, the ninth and inferior sort he calls
Angels. Howbeit, some of these (in my thinking) are evil Spirits; or else Paul
gave us evil counsel, when he willed us, Ephesians. 6.
To fight against Principalities, and Powers, and all spiritual wickedness.

But Dionysius in that place goes further, impropriating to every Country,
Dionys. in coelest. hierarch.
and almost to every person of any account, a peculiar Angel; as to Jewry he
assigns Michael; to Adam, Razael; to Abraham Zekiel; to Isaac, Raphael, to
Jacob, Peliel; to Moses, Metraton, etc. But in these discourses, he either
followed his own imaginations and conceits, or else the corruptions of that
age. Nevertheless, I had rarher confute him by Mr. Calvin, and my Kinsman M.
Deering, than by my self, or mine own words. For Mr. Calvin says, That
Dionysius, J. Calv. lib stit. 1. c. 14. Edw. Deeri. in lect. upon the Hebrews*
reading. 6. Mal. 3.1.
herein speaks not as by hearsay, but as though he had slipped down from
Heaven, and told of things which he had seen. And yet (says he) Paul was wrapped
up into the third Heaven, and reports no such matters. But if you read Mr.
Deering upon the first chapter to the Hebrews, you shall see this matter
notably handled; where he says, That whenever Archangel is mentioned in the
Scriptures, it signifies our Savior Christ, and no creature. And certain it
is that Christ himself was called an Angel. The names also of Angels, as
Michael, Gabriel, etc. are given to them (says Calvin) according to the
capacity of our weakness. But because the decision of this is neither within
the compass of man's capacity, nor yet of his knowledge, I will proceed no
further to discuss the same, but to show the absurd opinions of Papists and
Witchmongers on the one side, and the most sober and probable collections of
the contrary-minded on the other side.

CHAP. VIII.
The Commencement of Devils fondly gathered out of the 14. of Isaiah; of
Lucifer and of his fall; the Cabalists, the Thalmudists and Schoolmens opinions
of the Creation of Angels.

THe Witchmongers, which are most commonly bastard Divines, do fondly gather
and falsely conceive the Commencement of Devils out of the 14. of Isaiah, where
they suppose Lucifer is cited, as the name of an Angel; Isa. 14.
who on a time being desirous to be cheekmate with God himself, would needs
(when God was gone a little aside) be sitting down or rather pirking up in Gods
own principal and Cathedral Chair; and that therefore God cast him and all his
confederates out of Heaven: so as some fell down from thence to the bottom of
the earth; some having descended but into the middle Region, and the tail of
them having not yet passed through the highet Region, stayed even then and
there, when God said, Ho. But God knows there is no such thing meant nor
mentioned in that place: For there is only fore-shewed the deposing and
deprivation of King Nebuchadnezzar, who exalting himself in pride (as it were
above the Stars) esteemed his glory to surmount all others, as far as Lucifer
the bright morning Star shines more gloriously than the other common Stars,
and was punished by exile, until such time as he had humbled himself; and
therefore metaphorically was called Lucifer.

But forsooth, because these great Clerks would be thought methodical, and to
have crept out at Wisdoms bosom, who rather crawled out of Follies breeches;
they take upon them to show us, first, whereof these Angels that fell from
Heaven were created; to wit, of the left side of that massy mold; whereof the
World was compounded, the which (say they) was Putredo terrae; that is, the
rottenness of the earth. The opinion of the Thalmudists.
Cabalists with whom Avicen seems to agree, say, That one of these begat
another; others say, They were made all at once: The Greeks do write, That
Angels were created before the World: The Latinists say, They were made the
fourth day, Laur. Anan. lib. de nature. daem. 1. Creavit coelum, and terram.
when the Stars were made: Laurence Ananias says, They were made the first
day, and could not be made the fourth day, bacause it is written; Quando facta
sunt sidera, laudaverunt me angeli: When the Stars were made, the Angels
praised me; so as (says he) they were made under the names of the Heavens.

There is also a great question among the Schoolmen, whether more Angels fell
down with Lucifer; or remainnd in Heaven with Michael. Many having a bad
opinion of the Angels honesties, affirm, that the greater part fell with
Lucifer; Laur. Anan. lib. de nature. Daem. 1.
but the better opinion is (says Laurentius Ananias) that the most part
remained. And of them that think so, some say, the tenth part were cast down,
some, the ninth; and some gather upon S. John, that the third part were only
damned; because it is written, That the Dragon with his tail plucked down with
him the third part of the Stars.

CHAP. IX.
Of the contention between the Greek and Latin Church touching the fall of
Angels, the variance among Papists themselves herein; a conflict between
Michael and Lucifer.

THere was also another contention between the Greek Church and the Latin; to
wit, of what orders of Angels they were that did fall with Lucifer. Our
Schoolmen say; They were of all the nine orders of Angels in Lucifer 's
conspiracy: But because the superior Order was of the more noble constitution
and excellent estate, and the inferior of a less worthy nature, the more part
of the inferior orders fell as guilty and offenders with Lucifer. Some say, The
Devil himself was of the inferior order of Angels; Laur. Anan. lib. de nature.
Dam. 1.
and some, that he was of the highest order; because it is written, In Cherubim
extentus and protegens posuite Monte sancto Dei, Extended upon a Cherubim and
protecting, I have put thee in the holy Mountain of God. And these say further;
That he was called the Dragon, because of his excellent knowledge. Finally
these great Doctors conclude, That the Devil himself was of the Order of
Seraphim, which is the highest, because it is written, Quomodo enim mane
oriebaris Lucifer? For when did thou rise in the morning O Lucifer? They of
this sect affirm, That Cacodaemones were they that repelled against Jove; I
mean they of Plato his sect, himself also holding the same opinion. Our
Schoolmen differ much in the cause of Lucifers fall. For some say it was for
speaking these words, Ponam sedem meam in aquilone, and similis ero altissimo,
I will put my seat in the North, and I will be like the most High. Others say;
Because he utterly refused felicity, and thought scorn thereof: Others say,
Because he thought all his strength proceeded from himself, and not from God;
Others say that it was, Because he attempted to do that by himself, and his own
ability, which he should have obtained by the gift of another; Others say, That
his condemnation grew hereupon, for that he challenged the place of the
Messiah; Others say, Because he detracted the time to adore the Majesty of God,
as other Angels did; Others say, Because he utterly refused it. Scotus and his
Disciples say that it was, Because he rebelliously claimed equal Omnipotency
with God; with whom lightly the Thomists never agree. Others say, It was for
all these causes together, Laur. Anan. lib. de nature. daem. 1.
and many more; so as hereupon (says Laurentius Ananias) grew a wonderful
conflict between Michael and his good Angels on the one side, and Lucifer and
his Fiends on the other: so as, after a long and doubtful skirmish, Michael
overthrew Lucifer, and turned him and his fellows out of the doors.

CHAP. X.
Where the Battle between Michael and Lucifer was fought; how long it
continued, and of their power: how fondly Papists and Infidels write of them;
and how reverently Christians ought to think of them.

NOw where this battle was fought, and how long it continued, there is as great
contention among the Schoolmen, as was betwixt Michael and Lucifer. The
Thomists say this battle was fought in the Empyreal Heaven, where the abode is
of blessed Spirits, and the place of pleasure and felicity. Augustine and many
others say, That the battle was fought in the highest Region of the Air; Others
say, In the Firmament; Others, In Paradise. The Thomists also say, Instans,
viz. punctum temp. nempe individuum Nunc.
It continued but one instant or prick of time; for they tarryed but two
instants in all, even from their Creation to their Expulsion. The Scotists say,
That between their production and their fall, there were just four instants.
Nevertheless, the greatest number of Schoolmen affirm, That they continued only
three instants; because it stood with Gods justice, to give them three
warnings; so as at the third warning Lucifer fell down like lead (for so are
the words) to the bottom of Hell; the rest were left in the Air, to tempt man.
The Sadduces were as gross the other way; for they said, That by Angels was
meant nothing else but the motions that God does inspire in men, or the tokens
of his power. He that reads Eusebius, Eusebius. in Eccles. histor.
shall see many more absurd opinions and asseverations of Angels; as how many
thousand years they serve as Angels, before they come to the promotion of
Archangels, etc.

Monsieur Bodin, M. Mal. and many other Papists gather upon the seventh of
Daniel, That there are just ten Millions of Angels in Heaven. Many say,
10000000. Johannes Cassianus in confessione theolog. tripart.
that Angels are not by nature, but by office. Finally, it were infinite to
show the absurd and curious collections hereabout. I for my part think with
Calvine, That Angels are creatures of God; though Moses spoke nothing of their
creation, who only applied himself to the capacity of the common people,
reciting nothing but things seen. And I say further with him, That they are
heavenly spirits, whose ministration and service God uses; and in that respect
are called Angels. I say yet again with him, That it is very certain, that they
have no shape at all; J. Call. lib instit. 1. cap. 14. sect. 8.
for they are spirits, who never have any; and finally, I say with him, That
the Scriptures for the capacity of our wit, does not in vain paint out Angels
unto us with wings; because we should conceive, that they are ready swiftly to
succor us. And certainly all the sounder Divines do conceive and give out,
that both the names and also the number of Angels are set down in the Scripture
by the Holy Ghost, in terms to make us understand the greatness and the manner
of their messages; which (I say) are either expounded by the number of Angels,
or signified by their names.

Furthermore, the School Doctors affirm, Mich. And. these. 107.101. Idem. these.
103, 108.
That four of the Superior Orders of Angels never take any form or shape of
bodies, neither are sent of any errand at any time. As for Archangels, they are
sent only about great and secret matters; and Angels are common Hacknies about
every trifle; and that these can take what shape or body they list; marry they
never take the form of women and children. Item, they say, That Angels take
most terrible shapes; for Gabriel appeared to Mary, when he saluted her, Facie
rutilante, vest coruscante, ingressu mirabili, aspectu terribili, etc. that
is, With a bright countenance, shining attire, wonderful gesture, and a
dreadful visage, etc. But of Apparitions I have spoken somewhat before, and
will say more hereafter. It has been long, and continues yet a constant
opinion, not only among Papists, but among others also; that every man has
assigned him, at the time of his nativity, a good Angel and a bad. For the
which there is no reason in Nature, nor authority in Scripture. For not one
Angel, but all the Angels are said to rejoice more at one Convert, than of
ninety and nine just. Neither did one only Angel convey Lazarus into Abraham's
bosom. And therefore I conclude with Calvin, Luke 15.7. Luke 16.22. J. Call.
lib. instit. 1. cap. 14. 2 Reg. 16.17.
That he which refers to one Angel, the care that God has to every one of
us, does himself great wrong; as may appear by so many fiery Chariots showed by
Elizaeus to his servant. But touching this mystery of Angels, let us reverently
think of them, and not curiously search into the nature of them, considering
the vileness of our condition, in respect of the glory of their creation. And
as for the foresaid fond imaginations and fables of Lucifer, etc. they are such
as are not only ridiculous, but also accomptable among those impious
curiosities, and vain questions, which Paul speaks of: neither have they any
title or letter in the Scripture for the maintenance of their gross opinions in
this behalf.

CHAP. XI.
Whether they became Devils, which being Angels kept not their Vocation, in
Jude and Peter; of the fond Opinion of the Rabbis touching Spirits and Bugs;
with a Confutation thereof.

Jud. verse. 6. 2 Pet. 2.4.
WE do read in Jude, and find it confirmed in Peter, That the Angels kept not
their first estate, but left their own habitation, and sinned, and (as Job
says) committed folly; and that God therefore did cast them down into Hell,
reserving them in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the
great day. But many Divines say, That they find not anywhere, that God made
Devils of them, or that they became the Princes of the World, or else of the
Air; Mal Malef. part. 2. quaest. 1. cap. 2, 3. Mal. Malef. part. 2. cap. 1.
quaest. 1.
but rather Prisoners. Howbeit, diverse Doctors affirm, That this Lucifer,
notwithstanding his fall, has greater power than any of the Angels in Heaven;
Marry they say, That there be certain other Devils of the inferior fort of
Angels, which were then thrust out for smaller faults, and therefore are
tormented with little pains, besides eternal damnation; and these (say they)
can do little hurt. They affirm also, That they only use certain juggling
knacks, delighting thereby to make men laugh, as they travel by the high ways;
but other (say they) are much more churlish. For proof hereof they allege the
eighth of Matthew, where he would none otherwise be satisfied but by exchange,
Mich. And. Laur. Anan. Mal. Malef. etc.

Author. lib. Zeor. Hammor. in Genesis 2.


from the annoying of one man, to the destruction of a whole herd of Swine. The
Rabbis, and namely Rabbi Abraham writing upon the second of Genesis, do say,
That God made the Fairies, Bugs, Incubus, Robin Good Fellow, and other familiar
or domestical Spirits and Devils on the Friday; and being prevented with the
evening of the Sabbath, finished them not, but left them unperfect; and
therefore, that ever since they use to fly the holiness of the Sabbath,
seeking dark holes in Mountains and Woods, wherein they hide themselves till
the end of the Sabbath, and then come alroad to trouble and molest men.

But as these opinions are ridiculous and fondly collected; so if we have only
respect to the bare word, The gross dullness of many at the Bearing of a spirit
named.
or rather to the letter, where Spirit or Devils are spoken of in the
Scriptures, we shall run into as dangerous absurdities as these are. For some
are so carnally minded, that a Spirit is no sooner spoken of, but immediately
they think of a black man with cloven feet, a pair of horns, a tail, claws, and
eyes as broad as a Basin, etc. But surely the Devil were not so wise in his
generation, as I take him to be, if he would terrify men with such ugly
shapes, though he could do it at his pleasure. For by that means men should
have good occasion and opportunity to fly from him, and to run to God for
succor; as the manner is of all them that are terrified, though perchance they
thought not upon God a long time before. But in truth we never have so much
cause to be afraid of the Devil, as when he flatteringly insinuates himself
into our hearts, to satisfy, please, and serve our humors, enticing us to
prosecute our own appetites and pleasures, without any of these external
terrors. I would weet of these men where they do find in the Scriptures, that
some Devils be spiritual, and some corporal; or how these earthy or watery
Devils enter into the mind of man. Augustine says, and diverse others affirm,
Aug. in ser. 4. Greg. 29. sup. Joh. Leo pont. ser. 8. Nativit.
That Satan or the Devil while we feed, allureth us with gluttony; he thrusts
lust into our generation; and sloth into our exercise; into our conversation,
envy; into our traffic, avarice; into our correction, wrath; into our
government, pride; he puts into our hearts evil cogitations; into our
mouths, lies, etc. When we wake, he moves us to evils works; when we sleep,
to evil and filthy dreams; he provokes the merry to looseness, and the sad to
despair.

CHAP. XII.
That the Devils assaults are Spiritual and not Temporal; and how grossly some
understand those parts of the Scripture.

UPon that which hitherto has been said, you see that the assaults of Satan
are spiritual, and not temporal; in which respect St. Paul wishes us not to
provide a corselet of Steel to defend us from his claws; Ephesians. 6.11, 12.
but bids us, Put on the whole armor of God, that we may be able to stand
against the invasions of the Devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood;
but against principalities, powers, and spiritual wickedness. And therefore St.
Peter advises us, 1 Pet. 5.8.
To be sober and watch; for the Devil goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking
whom he may devour. He means not with carnal teeth; for it follows thus,
Verse. 9.
Whom resist ye steadfast in the faith. And again St. Peter says, That which is
spiritual, 1 Cor. 2.14.
only discerns spiritual things; for no carnal man can discern the things of
the spirit; Why then should we think that a Devil, which is a Spirit, can be
known, or made tame and familiar unto a natural man; or contrary to nature, can
be by a Witch made corporal, being by God ordained to a spiritual proportion?

The cause of this gross conceit is, that we hearken more diligently to old
Wives, and rather give credit to their fables, than to the Word of God;
imagining by the tales they tell us, that the Devil is such a Bulbegger, as I
have before described. For whatsoever is proposed in Scripture to us by
Parable, or spoken figuratively or significatively, or framed to our gross
capacities, etc. is by them so considered and expounded, as though the bare
letter, or rather their gross imaginations thereupon were to be preferred
before the true sense and meaning of the Word. For I dare say, that when these
blockheads read Jothams Parable in the ninth of Judges to the men of Sichem, to
wit, that, Judge. 9.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
The trees went out to anoint a King over them, saying to the Olive Tree, Reign
thou over us; who answered and said, Should I leave my fatness? etc. they
imagine that the wooden Trees walked, and spoke with a man's voice: or else,
that some spirit entered into the Trees, and answered as is imagined they did in
the Idols and Oracles of Apollo, and such like; who indeed have eyes, and see
not; ears and hear not; mouths, and speak not, etc.

CHAP. XIII.
The Equivocation of this word Spirit; how diversely it is taken in the
Scriptures, where (by the way) is taught that the Scripture is not always
literally to be interpreted, nor yet allegorically to be understood.

SUch as search with the the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, shall find,
that Spirits, as well good as bad, are in the Scriptures diversely taken: yea
they shall well perceive, that the Devil is no horned beast. For Exodus 31.1.
sometimes in the Scriptures, Spirits and Devils are taken for infirmities of
the body: Act. 8.19. Gal. 3.
sometimes for the vices of the mind; sometimes also for the gifts of tither of
them. Joh. 6.70. Matthew. 16.23.
Sometimes a man is called a Devil, as Judas in the sixth of John, and Peter in
the 16. of Matthew. 1 Cor. 3. Gal. 3. 1 Cor. 2. 2 Cor. 7.
Sometimes a Spirit is put for the Gospel; sometimes for the mind or soul of
man; sometimes Luke 9. 1 Cor. 5. Philip. 1. 1 These. 5.
for the will of man, his mind and council; sometimes 1 John 4.
for Teachers and Prophets; sometimes 1 Timothy 4.
for zeal toward God; sometimes Ephesians. 5.
for joy in the Holy Ghost, etc.

And to interpret unto us the nature and signification of spirits, we find
these words written in the Scripture; to wit, Esai. 11.2.
The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him; The Spirit of counsel and
strength; The Spirit of wisdom and understanding; The spirit of knowledge and
the fear of the Lord. Again, Zach. 12.10.
I will pour out my Spirit upon the house of David, etc. The Spirit of grace
and compassion. Again, Romans 8.15.
Ye have not received the spirit of bondage, but the Spirit of adoption. And
therefore St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10, 11.
To one is given, by the Spirit, the word of wisdom; to another, the word of
knowledge by the same Spirit, to another, the gift of healing; to another, the
gift of faith by the same Spirit; to another; the gift of prophecy; to
another, the operation of great works: to another, the discerning of spirits;
to another, the diversity of tongues; to another, the interpretation of
tongues: and all these things works one and the self-same Spirit: Thus far
the words of St. Paul. And finally Isaiah says, Isai. 19.14.
that, The Lord mingled among them the spirit of error. And in another place.
Isai. 29.10.
The Lord has covered you with a spirit of slumber.

As for the spirits of divination spoken of 1 Samuel 28. Hest. 16.
in the Scripture, they are such as was in the woman of Endor, the Philippian
woman, the wench of Westwell, and the holy maid of Kent; who were endued with
spirits or gifts of divination, whereby they could make shift to gain money,
and abuse the people by sleights and crafty inventions. But these are possessed
of borrowed spirits, as it written Sap. 15.13, 29.
in the Book of Wisdom; and spirits of mere cosenage and deceit, as I have
sufficiently proved elsewhere. I deny not therefore that there are Spirits and
Devils, of such substance as it has pleased God to create them. But in what
place soever it be found or read in the Scriptures; a Spirit or Devil is to be
understood spiritually, and is neither a corporal nor a visible thing: Where it
is written, Judge. 9.23.
That God sent an evil spirit between Abimelech, and the men of Sichem, we are
to understand, that he sent the spirit of hatred, and not a Bulbegger. Also
where it is said, Numb. 5.14.
If the Spirit of jealousy come upon him: it is as much as to say, If he he be
moved with a jealous mind: and not that a corporal Devil assaulteth him. It is
said in the Gospel; Luke 13.11.
There was a woman which had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, who was
bowed together, etc. whom Christ by laying his hand upon her, delivered of her
disease. Whereby it is to be seen, that although it be said, that Satan had
bound her, etc. yet that it was a sickness or disease of body that troubled
her; for Christ's own words expound it. Neither is there any word of Witchcraft
mentioned, which some say was the cause thereof.

There were Mark. 16.9.
seven Devils cast out of Mary Magdalen. Which is not so grossly understood by
the learned, as that there were in her just seven corporal Devils, such as I
described before elsewhere; but that by the number of seven Devils, a great
multitude, and an uncertain number of vices is signified; which figure is usual
in diverse places of the Scripture. And this interpretation is more agreeable
with Lev. 26. Prove. 24. Luke 17.
Gods Word then the Papistical paraphrase, which is, That Christ under the name
of the seven Devils, recounteth the seven deadly sins only. Others allow
neither of these Expositions; because they suppose that the efficacy of Christ's
miracle should this way be confounded; as though it were not as difficult a
matter, with a touch, to make a good Christian of a vicious person; as with a
word to cure the Ague, or any other disease of a sick body. I think not but any
of both these cures may be wrought by means, in process of time, without
miracle; the one by the Preacher, the other by the Physician. But I say that
Christ's work in both was apparently miraculous; for, Mat. 8.16. Luke 4.36. Luke
7.21.
with power and authority, even with a touch of his finger, And a word of his
mouth, he made the blind to see, the halt to go, the lepers clean, the deaf to
hear, the dead to rise again, and the poor to receive the Gospel; out of whom
(I say) he cast Devils, and miraculously conformed them to become good
Christians, which before were dissolute livers; to whom he said, Joh. 8.11.
Go your ways and sin no more.

CHAP. XIV.
That it pleased God to manifest the power of his Son, and not of Witches by
miracles.

JEsus Christ, to manifest his divine power, rebuked the winds, and they
ceased; Luke 8.14.
and the waves of water, and it was calm; which if neither our Divines nor
Physicians can do, much less our Conjurors, and least of all our old Witches
can bring any such thing to pass. But it pleased God to manifest the power of
Christ Jesus by such miraculous and extraordinary means, providing, and as it
were, preparing diseases, that none otherwise could be cured, that his Sons
glory, and his Peoples faith might the more plainly appear; as namely, Levit.
14.7, 8. Joh. 9.1, etc.
Leprosy, Lunacy, and Blindness; as it is apparent in the Gospel, where it is
said, that the man was not stricken with blindness for his own sins, not for
any offense of his ancestors; but that he was made blind, to the intent the
works of God should be showed upon him by the hands of Jesus Christ. But
Witches with their charms can cure (as Witchmongers affirm) all these diseases
mentioned in the Scripture, and many other more; as the Gout, the Toothach,
etc. which we find not that ever Christ cured.

As touching those that are said in the Gospel, to be possessed of spirits,
Mat. 4.23, etc.
it seems in many places that it is indifferent, or all one, to say, He is
possessed with a Devil; or, he is lunatic or phrentick; which disease in these
days is said to proceed of melancholy. But if every one that now is lunatic,
be possessed with a real Devil; then might it be thought, that Devils are to be
thrust out of men by medicines. But who says in these times, with the woman of
Canaan, My Daughter is vexed with a Devil; except it be presupposed, that she
meant her daughter was troubled with some disease? Indeed we say, and say
truly, to the wicked, the Devil is in him: but we mean not thereby, that a real
Devil is gotten into his guts. And if it were so, I marvel in what shape this
real Devil, that possesses them, remains. Enters he into the body in one
shape, and into the mind in another? If they grant him to be spiritual and
invisible, I agree with them.

Some are of opinion, that the said woman of Canaan meant indeed that her
daughter was troubled with some disease; because it is written in stead of that
the Devil was cast out, that her daughter was made whole, Mat. 15.28.
even the self same hour. According to that which is said in the 12. of
Matthew, Mat. 12.22.
There was brought unto Christ one possessed of a Devil, which was both blind
and dumb, and he healed him; so as, he that was blind and dumb, both spoke and
saw. But it was the man, and not the Devil, that was healed, and made to speak
and see. Whereby (I say) it is gathered, that such as were diseased, as well as
they that were lunatic, were said sometimes to be possessed of Devils.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Possessed with Devils.

Mal. malef. quaest. 5. page 1.
HEre I cannot omit to show, how fondly diverse Writers, and namely, James
Sprenger, and Henry Institor do gather and note the cause, why the Devil makes
choice to possess men at certain times of the Moon; which is (say they) in two
respects: first, That they may defame so good a creature as the Moon; secondly,
Because the brain is the moistest part of the body. The Devil therefore
considers the aptnest and convenience thereof (the A maxim in Philosophy, as
the Sun in aridis and siccis.
Moon having dominion over all moist things) so as they take advantage thereby,
the better to bring their purposes to pass. And further they say, That Devils
being conjured and called up, appear and come sooner in some certain
constellations, than in other some: thereby to induce men to think that there
is some godhead in the Stars. But when Saul was releived with the sound of the
Harp, they say, That the departure of the Devil was by means of the sign of the
cross imprinted in David 's veins: whereby we may see how absurd the
imaginations and devices of men are, when they speak according to their own
fancies, without warrant of the Word of God. Joseph de antiquitat. Jud. item de
bello Iud. lib. 7. c. 35.
But methinks it is very absurd that Josephus affirms; to wit, That the Devil
should be thrust out of any man by virtue of a root. And as vain it is, that
A^llanus writes of the magical herb Cynospastus, otherwise called Aglaphotis;
which is all one with Solomon's root named Baaros, as having force to drive out
any Devil from a man possessed.

CHAP. XVI.
That we being not thoroughly informed of the Nature of Devils and Spirits, must
satisfy our selves with that which is delivered us in the Scriptures touching
the same; how this word Devil is to be understood both in the singular and
plural number; of the Spirit of God, and the spirit of the Devil; of tame
spirits; of Ahab.

THe Nature therefore and Substance of Devils and Spirits, because in the
Scripture it is not so set down, as we may certainly know the same; we ought to
content and frame our selves faithfully to believe the words and sense there
delivered unto us by the high Spirit, which is the Holy Ghost, who is Lord of
all spirits; always considering, that evermore spirits are spoken of in
Scripture, Numb. 27.16.
as of things spiritual, though for the help of our capacities they are
sometime more grossly and corporally expressed, either in Parables or by
Metephors, than indeed they are. As for example (and to omit the History of
Job, which elsewhere I handle) it is written; 2 Chronicles. 18.19, 20, 21.
The Lord said, Who shall entice Ahab, that he may fall at Ramoth Gilead? etc.
Then came forth a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said; I will go entice
him. And the Lord said, Wherewith? And he said; I will go and be a lying spirit
in the mouth of all his Prophets. Then he said; Go forth, thou shall prevail,
etc.

This story is here set forth in this wise, to bear with our capacities, and
specially with the capacity of that age, that could not otherwise conceive of
spiritual things, than by such corporal demonstrations. And yet here is to be
noted, that one spirit, and not many or diverse, did possess all the false
Prophets at once. Even as in another place, many thousand Devils are said to
possess one man; and yet it is also said even in the self same place, that the
same man was possessed only with one Devil. Mark. 5.9. Luke 8.27, 28.
For it is there said, that Christ met a man which had a Devil, and he
commanded the foul spirit to come forth of the man, J. Call. lib instit. lib. 1.
cap. 14. sect. 14.
etc. But Calvin says, Where Satan or the Devil is named in the singular
number, thereby is meant that power of wickedness, that stands against the
Kingdom of justice: And where many Devils are named in the Scriptures, we are
thereby taught, that we must fight with an infinite multitude of enemies, lest
despising the fewness of them, we should be more slack to enter into battle,
and so fall into security and idleness.

On the other side, it is as plainly set down in the Scripture, That some are
possessed with the Spirit of God, as that the others are endued and bound with
the spirit of the Devil. Yea sometimes we read, That one good Spirit was put
into a great number of persons; and again, That diverse Spirits rested in and
upon one man: and yet no real or corporal spirit meant. As for example; The
Lord took of the spirit that was upon Moses, and put it upon the seventy
Elders, Numb. 11.25. Acts 16.
and when the Spirit rested upon them they prophesied. Why should not this be
as substantial and corporal a spirit, as that wherewith the Maid in the Acts of
the Apostles was possessed? Also Elisha entreated Elias, 2 King. 2.9.
that when he departed, his spirit might be double upon him. We read also, that
the Spirit of the Lord came upon Judge. 3, 10.
Othniel, upon Chap. 6.34.
Gideon, Chap. 11.29.
Jeptha, Ibid. 14.6.
Samson, Numb. 24.2.
Balaam, 1 Samuel 10.6.
Saul, 1 Samuel 16.13.
David, Ez^k 11.5.
Ezekiel, 2 Chronicles. 24.20.
Zachary, 1 Chronicles. 12.18.
Amasay; yea it is written, that Caleb had another spirit than all the
Israelites beside; and in another place it is said, that Dan. 5.11.
Daniel had a more excellent spirit than any other. So as, though the spirits,
as well good as bad, are said to be given by number and proportion; yet the
quality and not the quantity of them is always thereby meant and presupposed.
Howbeit I must confess, that Christ had the Spirit of God without measure, as
it is written in the Joh. 3.34. Eccles. 8.8.
Evangelist John. But where it is said that spirits can be made tame, and at
commandment, I say to those gross conceivers of Scripture with Solomon, (who as
they falsely affirm, was of all others the greatest Conjuror) says thus in
express words; No man is lord over a spirit, to retain a spirit at his pleasure.

CHAP. XVII.
Whether Spirits and Souls can assume bodies, and of their Creation and
Substance, wherein Writers do extremely contend and vary.

SOme hold opinion, that Spirits and Souls can assume and take unto them bodies
at their pleasure, of what shape or or substance they list; of which mind all
Papists, and some Protestants are, being more gross than another sort, which
hold that such bodies are made to their hands. Howbeit, these do vary in the
Elements, wherewith these spiritual bodies are composed. For (as I have said)
some affirm, That they consist of fire; some think, of air; For every natural
motion is either circular or elementary.
and some; of the Stars and other celestial powers. But if they be celestial,
then (as Peter Martyr says) must they follow the circular motion; and, if they
be elementary; then must they follow the motions of those Elements, of which
their bodies consist. Of air they cannot be; for air is Corpus homogeneum; so
as every part of air is air, whereof there can be no distinct members made: For
an organical body must have bones, sinews, veins, flesh, etc. which cannot be
made of air. Neither (as Peter Martyr affirms) can an anybody receive or have
either shape or figure. But some ascend up into the clouds, where they find (as
they say) diverse shapes and forms even in the air. Unto which objection Peter
Martyr answers, saying, and that truly, That Clouds are not altogether air,
but have a mixture of other elements mingled with them.

CHAP. XVIII.
Certain Popish Reasons concerning Spirits made of Air; of Day-Devils and
Night-Devils; and why the Devil loves no Salt in his Meat.

MAny affirm (upon a fable cited by M. Mal.) that Spirits are of air, because
they have been cut (as he says) in sunder and closed presently again; and also
because they vanish away so suddenly. But of such Apparitions I have already
spoken, and am shortly to say more, which are rather seen in the imagination of
the weak and diseased, than in verity and truth. Which sights and apparations,
as they have been common among the unfaithful; so now, since the preaching of
the Gospel they are most rare. And as among faint-hearted people; namely,
women, children, and sick folks, they usually swarmd: so among strong bodies
and good stomachs they never used to appear; as elsewhere I haved proved; which
argues that they were only fantastical and imaginary. Now say they that
imagine Devils and Spirits to be made of air, that it must needs be that they
consist of that element; because otherwise when they vanish suddenly away, they
should leave some earthy substance behind them. If they were of water, then
should they moisten the place where they stand, Genesis 18. and 19.
and must needs be shed on the floor. If they consisted of fire, then would
they burn any thing that touched them: and yet (say they) Abraham and Lot
washed their feet, and were neither scalded nor burnt.

J. Bod. lib. de dam. 3. cap. 4.
I find it not in the Bible, but in Bodin, that there are Day-Devils and
Night-Devils. The same fellow says, That Deber is the name of that Devil which
hurts by night; and Cheleb is he that hurts by day howbeit, he confesses,
that Satan can hurt both by day and night; although it be certain (as he says)
that he can do more harm by night than by day; producing for example, how in a
night he slew the first born of Egypt. Exodus 12.29.
And yet it appears plainly in the Text, that the Lord himself did it.
Whereby it seems, that Bodin puteth no difference between God and the Devil.
For further confirmation of this his foolish assertion, that Devils are more
valiant by night than by day, Psalm. 104.20, etc.
he alleges the 104. Psalm, wherein is written, Thou make darkness, and it
is night, wherein all the Beasts of the Forest creep forth; the Lions roar,
etc. when the Sun rises, they retire, etc. So as now he makes all Beasts to
be Devils, or Devils to be Beasts. Oh barbarous blindness! J. Bod. lib. de
daem. 3. cap. 5. Levit. 1.
This Bodin also says, That the Devil loves no salt in his meat, for that it
is a sign of Eternity, and used by Gods Commandment in all Sacrifices; abusing
the Scriptures, which he is not ashamed to quote in that behalf. But now I will
declare how the Scripture teaches our dull capacities to conceive what manner
of thing the Devil is, by the very names appropriated unto him in the same.

CHAP. XIX.
That such Devils as are mentioned in the Scriptures, have in their names their
nature and qualities expressed, with instances thereof.

SUch Devils are mentioned in the Scriptures by name, have in their names their
nature and qualities expressed, being for the most part the idols of certain
Nations idolatrously erected, in stead, or rather in spite of God. For
Beelzebub which signifies, The Lord of the Flies, because he takes every
simple thing in his web, 2 King. 1.2.
was an Idol or Oracle erected at Ekron, to whom Ahaziah sent to know whether
he should recover his disease: as though there had been no God in Israel. Mat.
9.34. and 12.24.

Mark. 3.22. Luke 11.15.


This Devil Beelzebub was among the Jews reputed the principal Devil. The
Grecians called him Pluto, the Latins, Sumanus, quasi summum deorum manium, the
chief ghost or spirit of the dead whom they supposed to walk by night: although
they absurdly believed also that the soul died with the body. So as they did
put a difference between the ghost of a man and the soul of a man; and so do
our Papists; howbeit, none otherwise but that the soul is a ghost, when it
walks on the earth, after the dissolution of the body, or appears to any
man, either out of Heaven, Hell, or Purgatory, and not otherwise. 2 King. 19.37.
Nisroch signifies a delicate tentation, and was worshipped by Senacharib in
Assyria. 2 King. 17.31.
Tartak is in English, fettered, and was the Devil or Idol of the Hevites. Hos.
9.10. Numb. 25.3. Deuteronomy. 4.3.
Baal-peor, otherwise called Priapus, the gaping or naked god, was worshipped
among the Moabites. 2 King. 19.37.
Adramelech, that is, the cloak or power of the King, was an Idol at
Sepharvais, which was a City of the Assyrians. Numb. 21.29.

1 King. 11.33.


Chem^sh, that is, feeling, or departing, was worshipped among the Moabites.
Judge. 16.23.
Dagon, that is, corn or grief, was the Idol of the Philistines. 1 King. 11.33.
Astarte, that is, a fold or flock, is the name of a she idol at Sydonia, whom
Solomon worshipped; some think it was Venus. 1 King. 11.7. 2 King. 23.10. Jer.
32.35. Joseph. lib. de antiquit. Judaeor. 6. cap. 14.
Malcham that is, a King, was an Idol or Devil, which the sons of Ammon
worshipped.

Sometimes also we find in the Scriptures, that Devils and Spirits take their
names of wicked men, or of the houses or states of abominable persons: as
Astaroth, which (as Josephus says) was the Idol of the Philistines, whom the
Jews took from them at Solomon's commandment, and was also worshipped of
Solomon. Which though it signify riches, flocks, etc. yet it was once a City
belonging to Og the the King of Basan, where they say the Giants dwelt. In
these respects Astaroth is one of the special Devils named in Solomon's
Conjuration, and greatly employed by the Conjurors. I have sufficiently proved
in these quotations, 1 Samuel 7. 2 King. 23. Psalm. 96.5.
that these Idols are Dii gentium, the gods of the Gentiles; and then the
Prophet David may satisfy you, that they are Devils, who says Dii Gentium
daemonia sunt, The gods of the Gentiles are Devils. What a Devil was the Rood
of Grace to be thought, but such a one as before is mentioned and described,
who took his name of his courteous and gracious behavior toward his
worshippers, or rather those that offered unto him? The idolatrous knavery
whereof being now bewrayed, it is among the godly reputed a Devil rather than a
God; and so are diverse others of the same stamp.

CHAP. XX.
Diverse names of the Devil, whereby his Nature and Disposition is manifested.

IT has also pleased God to inform our weak capacities, as it were by
similitudes and examples, or rather by comparisons, to understand what manner
of thing the Devil is, by the very names appropriated and attributed unto him
in the Scriptures; wherein sometimes he is called by one name, sometimes by
another, by metaphors according to his conditions. Job 40.15. Job 2.11. Isa.
27.1.
Elephas is called in Job, Behemoth, which is Bruta; whereby the greatness and
brutishness of the Devil is figured. Leviathan is not much different from
Elephas; whereby the Devils great subtilty and power is showed unto us. Mat.
6.24. Luke 16.13.
Mammon the covetous desire of money, wherewith the Devil overcomes the
reprobate. Mat. 4.3.
Demon signifies one that is cunning or crafty. Cacodaemon is perversely
knowing. All those which in ancient times were worshipped as Gods, were so
called. Matthew. 4. John 8.44. Apoc. 12.9, 10.
Diabolus is Calumniator, an accuser, or a slanderer. Satan is Adversarius, an
Adversary, that troubles and molesteth. Apoc. 9.11.
Abaddon, a Destroyer. Mark. 5.9. Luke 8.30.
Legio, because they are many. Ephesians. 2.2.
Prince of the air. Joh. 14.30.
Prince of the world. Job 41.
A King of the Sons of pride. 1 Pet. 5.8.
A roaring Lion. Joh. 8.44.
An homicide or manslayer, a liar, and the Father of lies. 1 John 3.8.
The Author of sin. Act. 16.16.
A spirit. Yea sometimes he is called the spirit of the Lord, as the
executioner and minister of his displeasure, etc. Sometimes, the Hos. 4.14.
spirit of fornication, etc. And many other like epithets or additions are
given him for his name. He is also called Psalm. 34.7. 1 Chr. 21.30.
the Angel of the Lord. 2 Cor. 12.7.
The cruel Angel of Satan. The Apoc. 9.
Angel of Hell. The Ezekiel. 29.3.
great Dragon, for his pride and force. The Apoc. 12.3.
red Dragon, for his bloodiness. A Genesis 3.1.
Serpent. An Isa. 43.20.
Owl, a Kite, a Satyr, a Crow, a Pelican, a Hedghog, a Griph, a Stork, etc.

CHAP. XXI.
That the Idols or Gods of the Gentiles are Devils, their diverse names, and in
what affairs their labors and authorities are employed, wherein also the blind
superstition of the Heathen people is discovered.

Psalm. 96.5.
ANd for so much as the Idols of the Gentiles are called Devils, and are among
the unlearned confounded and intermedled with the Devils that are named in the
Scriptures; I thought it convenient here to give you a note of them; to whom
the Gentiles gave names, according to the offices unto them assigned. Penates
are the domestical gods, or rather Devils that are said to make men live
quietly within doors. Juno and Minerva.
But some think these rather to be such as the Gentiles thought to be set over
Kingdoms; and that Lares are such as trouble private houses, and are set to
oversee Cross-wayes and Cities. Larvae are said to be spirits that walk only by
night. Genii are the two Angels, which they supposed were appointed to wait
upon each man. Manes are the spirits which oppose themselves against men in the
way. Daemones were feigned gods by Poets, Cosening gods or knaves.
as Jupiter, Juno, etc. Virunculi terrei are such as was Robin Good Fellow,
that would supply the office of Servants, specially of Maids; as to make a fire
in the morning, sweep the house, grind Mustard and Malt, draw Water, etc. these
also rumble in houses, Terra, aqua, aer, ignis, Sol and Luna.
draw latches, go up and down stairs, etc. Dii geniales are the gods that every
man did sacrifice unto at the day of their birth. Tetrici be they that make
folk afraid, and have such ugly shapes, which many of our Divines do call
Subterranei. Cobali are they that follow men, and delight to laugh, with
tumbling, juggling, and such like toys. Virunculi are Dwarfs about three
handfuls longs, and do no hurt; but seem to dig in minerals, and to be very
busy, and yet do nothing. Guteli or Trulli are spirits (they say) in the
likeness of women, showing great kindness to all men; and hereof it is that we
call light women, trulls. Daemones montani are such as work in the minerals,
and further the work of the laborers wonderfully, who are nothing afraid of
them. Hudgin is a very familiar Devil, Hudgin of Germany, and Rush of England.
which will do no body hurt, except he receive injury: but the cannot abide
that, nor yet be mocked: he talks with men friendly, sometimes visibly, and
sometimes invisibly. There go as many tales upon this Hudgin, in some parts of
Germany, as there did in England of Robin Good Fellow. But this Hudgin was so
called, because he always wore a Cap or a Hood; and therefore I think it was
Robin Hood. Friar Rush was for all the world such another fellow as this
Hudgin, and brought up even in the same School; to wit, in a Kitchen; in so
much as the self same tale is written of the one as of the other, concerning
the Skullion, which is said to have been slain, etc. for the reading whereof I
referr you to Friar Rush his story, or else to John Wierus, J. Wier. lib. de
praest. daem. 1. cap. 23.
De praestigiis Daemonum.

There were also Familiares Daemones, which we call Familiars: such as Socrates
and Caesar were said to have; and such as Feats sold to Doctor Burcot. Quintus
Sertorius had Diana her self for his familiar; and Numa Pompilius had Aegeria;
but neither the one nor the other of all these could be preserved by their
familiars from being destroyed with untimely death. Simon Samareus boasted,
that he had gotten by Conjuration, the soul of a little child that was slain,
to be his familiar, and that he told him all things that were to come, etc. I
marvel what privilege souls have, which are departed from the body, to know
things to come more than the Souls within Man's Body. There were spirits, which
they called Albae mulieres, and Albae Sybillae, which were very familiar, and
did much harm (they say) to women with child, and to suckling children. Denmus
as a Devil is worshipped among the Indians in Calecute, who (as they think)
has power given him of God to judge the Earth, etc. his Image is horribly
pictured in a most ugly shape. Bawdy Priests in Ginnie.
Thevet says, that a Devil in America, called Agnan, bears sway in that
Country. In Ginnie one Grigrie is accounted the great Devil, and keeps the
Woods; these have Priests called Charoibes, which prophecy after they have
lien by the space of one hour prostrate upon a wench of twelve years old, and
all that while (say they) he calls upon a Devil called Hovioulsira, and then
comes fourth and utters his prophecy: For the true success whereof the
people pray all the while that he lies grovelling like a lecherous knave. There
are a thousand other names, which they say are attributed unto Devils; and such
as they take to themselves are more ridiculous than the names that are given by
others, which have more leisure to devise them. Look in the word (Ob) lib. 7.
cap. 3.
In little Books containing the cosening possessed at Maidstone, where such a
wonder was wrought; as also in other places, you may see a number of
counterfeit Devils names, and other trish trash.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Romans chief gods called Dii selecti, and of other Heathen gods, their
Names and Offices.

THere were among the Romans twenty idolatrous gods, which were called Dii
selecti sive electi, chosen gods; whereof twelve were male, and eight female,
whose names do thus follow: Janus, Saturnus, Jupiter, Genius, Mercurius,
Apollo, Mars, Vulcanus, Neptunus, Sol, Orcus and Vibar, which were all he-gods:
Tellus, Ceres, Juno, Minerva, Luna, Diana, Venus and Vesta, were all she-gods.
No man might appropriate any of these unto himself, but they were left common
and indifferent to all men dwelling in one Realm, Province, or notable City.
These Heathen Gentiles had also their Gods, which served for sundry purposes;
as to raise Thunder, they had Statores, Tonantes, A good god and goddess for
women.
Feretrii, and Jupiter Elicius. They had Cantius, to whom they prayed for wise
children, who was more apt for this purpose than Minerva that issued out of
Jupiters own brain. Lucina was to send them that were with child safe
delivery, and in that respect was called the mother of Childwives. Opis was
called the mother of the Babe new born, whose image women with child hanged
upon their girdles before their bellies, and bare it so by the space of nine
months; and the Midwife always touched the child therewith before she or any
other laid hand thereon.

If the child were well born, they sacrificed thereunto, although the mother
miscarried: but if the child were in any part unperfect, or dead, The names of
certain Heathenish Gods, and their peculiar offices.
etc. they used to beat the image into powder, or to burn or drown it. Vagianus
was he that kept their children from crying, and therefore they did always
hang his picture about Babes necks: for they thought much crying in youth
portended ill fortune in age. Cuninus, otherwise Cunius, was he that preserved
(as they thought) their children from misfortune in the Cradle. Ruminus was to
keep their dugs from corruption. Volumnus and his wise Volumna were gods, the
one for young men, the other for maids that desired marriage: for such as
prayed devoutly unto them, should soon be married. Agrestis was the god of the
fields, and to him they prayed for fertility. Bellus was the god of War and
warriers, and so also was Victoria, to whom the greatest Temple in Rome was
built. Honorius was he that had charge about Inkeepers, that they should well
entreat Pilgrims. Berecinthia was the mother of all the gods. Aesculanus was
to discover their mines of Gold and Silver, and to him they prayed for good
success in that behalf. Aesculapius was to cure the sick, whose Father was
Apollo, and served to keep weeds out of the Corn. Segacia was to make seeds to
grow. Flora preserved the Vines from frosts and blasts. Sylvanus was to
preserve them that walked in Gardens. Bacchus was for Drunkards. Pavor for
Cowherds; Meretrix for whores, to whose honor there was a Temple built in
Rome, in the midst of forty and four streets, which were all inhabited with
common Harlots. A very homely charge.
Finally Colatina, alias Clotina, was goddess of the stool, the Jakes, and the
Privy, to whom as to every of the rest, there was a peculiar Temple edified:
besides that notable Temple called Pantheon, wherein all the gods were placed
together; so as every man and woman, according to their follies and devotions,
might go thither and worship what gods they list.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of diverse Gods in diverse Countries.

THe Egyptians were yet more foolish in this behalf than the Romans (I mean
the Heathenish Romans that then were, and not the Popish Romans that now are,
for no Nation approaches near to these in any kind of Idolatry.) The
Egyptians worshipped Anubis in the likeness of a Dog, because he loved Dogs
and hunting. Beasts, Birds, Vermin, Fishes, Herbs and other trumpery,
worshipped as gods.
Yea they worshipped all living creatures, as namely of Beasts, a Bullock, a
Dog, and a Cat; of flying Fowls, Ibis (which is a Bird with a long bill,
naturally devouring up venomous things and noisome Serpents) and a
Sparrow-hawk: of fishes they had two gods; to wit, Lepidotus piscis, and
Oxyrinchus. The Saitans and Thebans had to their god a Sheep. In the City
Lycopolis they worshipped a Woolf; in Herinopolis, the Cynocephalus; the
Leopolitans, a Lion; in Laetopolis, a Fish, in Nilus called Latus. In the City
Cynopolis, they worshipped Anubis. At Babylon, besides Memphis, they made an
Onion their god; the Thebans, an Eagle, the Mendeseans, a Goat; the Persians, a
Fire called Orimasda; the Arabians, Bacchus, Venus, and Diasaren; the
Boeotians, Amphyaraus; the Africans, Mopsus; the Scythians, Minerva; the
Naucratits, Serapis, which is a Serpent; Astartes (being as Cicero writes the
fourth Venus, who was she, as others affirm, whom Solomon worshipped at his
Concubines request) was the goddess of the Assyrians. At Noricum, being a part
of Bavaria, they worship Tibilenus; the Moors worship Juba; the Macedonians,
Gabirus; the Poenians, Uranius; at Samos, Juno was their god; at Paphos, Venus;
at Lemnos, Vulcan; at Naxos, Liberus; at Lampsack, Priapus with the great
genitals; who was set up at Hellespont to be adored. In the Isle Diomedea,
Diomedes; at Delphos, Apollo; at Ephesus, Diana was worshipped. And because
they would play small game rather than sit out, they had Acharus Cyrenaicus, to
keep them from Flies and flie-blows; Hercules Canopius, to keep them from
Fleas; Apollo Parnopejus, Imperial gods and their assistants.
to keep their cheeses from being Mouseaten. The Greeks were the first, that I
can learn to have assigned to the gods their principal Kingdoms and Offices: as
Jupiter to rule in Heaven, Pluto in Hell, Neptune in the Sea, etc. To these
they joined, as assistants, diverse Commissioners; as to Jupiter, Saturn, Mars,
Venus, Mercury, and Minerva: to Neptune, N^reus, etc. Tutilina was only a
mediatrix to Jupiter, not to destroy Corn with Thunder or Tempests, before whom
they usually lighted Candles in the Temple, to appease the same, according to
Popish custom in these days. The number of gods among the Gentiles.
But I may not repeat them all by name, for the gods of the Gentiles were by
good record, as Varro and others report, to the number of thirt thousand, and
upward. Whereby the reasonable Reader may judge their superstitious blindness.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Popish Provincial gods; a comparison between them and Heathen gods; of
Physical gods; and of what Occupation every Popish god is.

NOw if I thought I could make an end in any reasonable time, I would begin
with our antichristian gods, otherwise called Popish idols, which are as rank
Devils as Dii Gentium, Gods of the Gentiles, spoken of in the Psalms: or as Dii
Montinum, Gods of the Mountains, set forth and rehearsed in the first Book of
the Kings: or as Dii Terrarum, or Dii Populorum, 1 King. 20. 2 Chronicles. 32. 1 Chronicles. 16. Judge. 3. 2 Chronicles. 25. 2 King 23, etc.
Gods of the Earth or of People, mentioned in the second of the Chronicles, 32.
and in the first of the Chronicles, 16. or as Dii Terrae, Gods of the Earth, in
Judges 3. or as Dii filiorum Seir, Gods of the sons of Seir in the second of
the Chronicles, 25. or as Dii Alieni, Strange Gods, which are so often
mentioned in the Scriptures.

Surely, there were in the Popish Church more of these in number, more in
common, more in private, more public, more for lewd purposes, and more for no
purpose, than among all the Heathen, either heretofore, or at this present
time: for I dare undertake, that for every Heathen Idol I might produce twenty
out of the Popish Church. For there were proper Idols of every Nation: Popish
gods of Nations.
as S. George on Horseback for England, (excepting whom, there is said to be no
more Horsemen in Heaven save only S. Martine) S. Andrew for Burgundy and
Scotland, S. Michael for France, S. James for Spain, S. Patrick for Ireland, S.
David for Wales, S. Peter for Rome, and some part of Italy. Had not every City
in all the Popes Dominions his several Patron? As Paul for London, Denis for
Paris, Ambrose for Millen, Loven for Gaunt, Rombal for Mackline, S. Mark's Lion
for Venice, the three Magitian Kings for Cullen, and so of other? Yea, had they
not for every small Town, and every Village and Parish (the names whereof I am
not at leisure to repeat) a several Idol? As S. Sepulcher, for one; S. Bride,
Parish Gods or Popish Idols.
for another; S. Alhallows, All Saints, and our Lady for all at once: which I
thought meeter to rehearse, than a bed-roll of such a number as are in that
predicament. Had they not he-Idols and she-idols, some for men, some for women,
some for beasts, some for fowls? etc. Do you not think that S. Martin might be
opposed to Bacchus? If S. Martin be too weak, we have S. Urbane, S. Clement,
and many other to assist him. Was Venus and Meretrix an Advocate for Whores
among the Gentiles? Behold, there were in the Romish Church to encounter with
them, S. Aphra, S. Aphrodite, and S. Maudline. But insomuch as long as Meg was
as very a whore as the best of them, she had wrong that she was not also
canonized, and put in as good credit as they: for she was a Gentlewoman born;
whereunto the Pope has great respect in cannonizing of his Saints. For (as I
have said) he cannonizeth the rich for Saints, and burns the poor for
Witches. But I doubt not, Magdalen, and many other godly women are very Saints
in Heaven, and should have been so, though the Pope had never cannonized them;
but he does them wrong, to make them the Patronesses of Harlots and strong
Strumpets.

Was there such a Traitor among all the Heathen Idols, as S. Thomas Becket? See
the Golden Legend for the life of S. Bridget.

He-Saints and she-Saints of the old stamp, with their peculiar virtues
touching the curing of diseases.


Or such a whore as S. Bridget? I warrant you S. Hugh was as good a Huntsman as
Anubis. Was Vulcan the Protector of the Heathen Smiths? Yea forsooth, and S.
Euloge was Patron for ours. Our Painters had Luke, our Weavers had Steven, our
millers had Arnold, our Traitors had Goodman, our Sowters had Crispine, our
Potters had S. Gore with a Devil on his shoulder, and a Pot in his hand. Was
there a better Horseleech among the gods of the Gentiles than S. Loy? Or a
better Sowgelder than S. Anthony? Or a better Toothdrawer than S. Apolline? I
believe that Apollo Parnopeius was no better a Ratcatcher than S. Gertrude, who
has the Popes Patent and commendation therefore. The Thebans had not a better
Shepherd than S. Wendeline, nor a better Gissard to keep their Geese than
Gallus. But for Physic and Surgery, our Idols exceed them all. For S. John,
and S. Valentine excelled at the Falling-evil. S. Roch was good at the Plague,
S. Petronill at the Ague. As for S. Margaret, she passed Lucina for a Midwife,
and yet was but a Maid; in which respect S. Marpurge is joined with her in
Commission.

For mad men, and such as are possessed with Devils, S. Roman was excellent,
and Friar Ruffine was also prettily skilful in that Art. For Botches and Biles,
Cosmus and Damian; S. Clare for the Eyes, S. Apolline for Teeth, S. Job for the
For the French Pox or the common kind of Pox, or both? This would be known.
Pox. And for sore Breasts S. Agatha was as good as Ruminus. Whosoever served
Servatius well, should be sure to lose nothing: if Servatius failed in his
office, S. Vinden could supply the matter with his cunning; for he could cause
all things that were lost to be restored again. But here lay a straw for a
while, and I will show you the names of some, which exceed these very far, and
might have been cannonized for Arch-Saints; all the other Saints or Idols being
in comparison of them but bunglers, and bench-whistlers. And with your leave,
when all other Saints had given over the matter, and the Saints utterly
forsaken of their servitors, they repaired to these that I shall name unto you,
with the good consent of the Pope, who is the fautor, or rather the Patron of
all the Saints, Devils, and Idols living or dead, and of all the gods save one.
And whereas none other Saint could cure above one disease, in so much as it was
idolatry, folly I should have said, to go to Job for any other malady than the
Pox; nothing comes amiss to these. For they are good at any thing, and never a
whit nice of their cunning: yea greater matters are said to be in one of their
powers, than is in all the other Saints. New Saints.
And these are they: S. Mother Bungie, S. Mother Pain, S. Feats, S. Mother
Still, S. Mother Dutton, S. Kytrell, S. Ursula Kemp, S. Mother Newman, S.
Doctor Heron, S. Rosimund a good old Father, and diverse more that deserve to be
registered in the Popes Calendar, or rather the Devils Rubric.

CHAP. XXV.
A Comparison between the Heathen and the Papists, touching their excuses for
Idolatry.

ANd because I know, that the Papists will say, that their Idols are Saints,
and no such Devils as the gods of the Gentiles were: you may tell them, that
not only their Saints, Divos vocant Grammatici eos qui ex hominibus dii facti
sunt.
but the very Images of them were called Divi. Which though it signify gods,
and so by consequence Idols or Fiends: yet put but an (l) thereunto, and it is
Divil in English. But they will say also that I do them wrong to gibe at them;
because they were holy men and holy women. I grant some of them were so, and
further from allowance of the Popish Idolatry employed upon them, than grieved
with the derision used against that abuse. Yea even as Silver and Gold are made
Idols unto them that love them too well, and seek too much for them: so are
these holy men and women made Idols by them that worship them, and attribute
unto them such honor as to God only appertains.

The Heathen gods were for the most part good men, and profitable members to
the Commonwealth wherein they lived, and deserved fame, etc. in which respect
they made gods of them when they were dead; as they made Devils of such
Emperors and Philosophers as they hated, or as had deserved ill among them.
And is it not even so, and worse, in the Commonwealth and Church of Popery?
Does not the Pope excommunicate, curse, and condemn for Heretics, and drive to
the bottomless pit of Hell, proclaiming to the very Devils, all those that
either write, speak, or think, contrary to his idolatrous doctrine? Cicero, Cic.
de nature. deorum.
when he derided the Heathen gods, and inveighed against them that yielded such
servile honor unto them, knew the persons, unto whom such abuse was committed,
had well deserved as civil Citizens; and that good fame was due unto them, and
not divine estimation. Yea the Infidels that honored those gods, as hoping to
receive benefits for their devotion employed that way, knew and conceived that
tke Statues and Images, before whom with such reverence they poured forth their
Prayers, were stocks and stones, and only pictures of those persons whom they
resembled: yea they also knew, that the parties themselves were creatures, The
Papists see a moth in the eye of others, but no beam in their own.
and could not do so much as the Papists and Witchmongers think the Rood of
Grace, or mother Bungie could do. And yet the Papists can see the abuse of the
Gentiles, and may not hear of their own idolatry more gross and damnable than
the others.

CHAP. XXVI.
The conceit of the Heathen and the Papists all one in Idolatry; of the Council
of Trent; a notable story of a Hangman arraigned after he was dead and buried,
etc.

BUt Papists perchance will deny, that they attribute so much to these Idols as
I report; or that they think it so meritorious to pray to the images of Saints
as is supposed; affirming, that they worship God, and the Saints themselves,
under the forms of Images. Which was also the conceit of the Heathen, and their
excuse in this behalf; whose eyesight and insight herein reached as far as the
Papistical distinctions published by Popes and their Councils. Neither do any
of them admit so gross Idolatry, The idolatrous Council of Trent.
as the Council of Trent has done, who allows that worship to the Rood that
is due to Jesus Christ himself; and so likewise of other Images of Saints. I
thought it not impertinent therefore in this place to insert an example taken
out of the Rosarie of our Lady, in which Book do remain (besides this) ninety
and eight examples to this effect: which are of such authority in the Church of
Rome, that all Scripture must give place unto them. And these are either read
there as their special Homilies, or preached by their chief Doctors. And this
is the Sermon for this day verbatim translated out of the said Rosarie, a Book
much esteemed and reverenced among Papists.

A certain Hangman passing by the Image of our Lady, saluted her, commending
himself to her protection. Afterward, while he prayed before her, Exempl. 4.
he was called away to hang an offender; but his Enemies intercepted him, and
slew him by the way. And lo a certain holy Priest, which nightly walked about
every Church in the City, rose up that night, and was going to his Lady, I
should say, to our Lady-Church. And in the Churchyard he saw a great many dead
men, and some of them he knew, of whom he asked, What the matter was, etc. who
answered, That the Hangman was slain, and the Devil challenged his soul, the
which our Lady said was her: and the Judge was even at hand coming thither to
hear the cause, and therefore (said they) we are now come together. The Priest
thought he would be at the hearing hereof, and hid himself behind a tree; and
anon he saw the judicial seat ready prepared and furnished, But our Lady spyed
him well enough; as you shall read.
where the Judge, to wit, Jesus Christ, sat, who took up his mother unto him.
Soon after the Devils brought in the Hangman pinnioned, and proved by good
evidence, that his soul belonged to them. On the other side, our Lady pleaded
for the Hangman, proving that he at the hour of death commended his soul to
her. The judge hearing the matter so well debated on either side, but willing
to obey (for these are his words) his mothers desire, and loath to do the
Devils any wrong, gave sentence that the Hangmans soul should return to his
body, until he had made sufficient satisfaction; ordaining that the Pope should
set forth a public form of Prayer for the Hangmans soul. It was demanded, who
should do the errand to the Popes Holiness? Marry quoth our Lady, that shall
yonder Priest that lurketh behind the tree. The Priest being called forth, and
enjoined to make relation hereof, The Priests Arse made buttons.
and to desire the Pope to take the pains to do according to this decree, asked
by what token he should be directed. Then was delivered unto him a Rose of such
beauty, as when the Pope saw it, he knew his message was true. And so, if they
do not well, I pray God we may.

CHAP. XXVII.
A Confutation of the Fable of the Hangman; of many other feigned and
ridiculous Tales and Apparitions, with a reproof thereof.

BY the tale above mentioned you see what it is to worship the Image of our
Lady. For though we kneel to God himself, and make never so humble Petitions
unto him, without faith and repentance it shall do us no pleasure at all. Our
B. Ladies favor.
Yet this Hangman had great friendship showed him for one point of courtesy
used to our Lady, having not one dram of faith, repentance, nor yet of honesty
in him. Nevertheless, so credulous is the nature of man, as to believe this and
such like fables: yea, to discredit such stuff, is thought among the Papists
flat heresy. And though we that are Protestants, will not believe these toys,
being so apparently Popish: yet we credit and report other appearances, and
assuming of bodies by souls and spirits; though they be as profane, absurd,
and impious as the other. We are sure the holy Maid of Kent's Vision was a very
cosenage: but we can credit, imprint, and publish for a true possession or
history, the knavery used by a cosening varlot at Maidstone; Greg. 4. dialog.
cap 51. Alexand. lib. 5. cap. 23. and lib. 2. cap. 9, etc. Greg. lib 4. dialog.
c. 40. idem. cap. 55. and in other places elsewhere innumerable.

Micha. And. these. 151.


and many other such as that was. We think souls and spirits may come out of
Heaven or Hell, and assume bodies, believing many absurd tales told by the
Schoolmen and Romish Doctors to that effect: but we discredit all the stories
that they, and as grave men as they are, tell us upon their knowledge and
credit, of souls condemned to Purgatory, wandering for succor and release by
Trentals and Masses said by a Popish Priest, etc. and yet they in probability
are equal, and in number far exceed the other.

We think that to be a lie, which is written, or rather fathered upon Luther;
to wit, That he knew the Devil, and was very conversant with him, and had eaten
many bushels of Salt, and made jolly good cheer with him; and that he was
confuted in a desputation with a real Devil about the abolishing of private
mass. Neither do we believe this report, Alex. ab Alexand. lib. 4. genealog.
dierum. cap. 19. Plutarch. oratione ad Apollonium. Item. Basiliens. in epist.
Platina de vitis pontificum.

Nauclerus 2. generat. 35.


That the Devil in the likeness of a tall man, was present at a Sermon openly
made by Carolostadius; and from this Sermon went to his house, and told his son
that he would fetch him away after a day or twain, as the Papists say he did
indeed, although they lie in every point thereof most maliciously. But we can
believe Platina and others, when they tell us of the appearances of Pope
Benedict the eight, and also the ninth; how the one rode upon a black Horse in
the Wilderness, requiring a Bishop (as I remember) whom he met, that he would
distribute certain money for him, which he had purloined of that which was
given in Alms to the poor, etc. and how the other was seen a hundred years
after the Devil had killed him in a Wood, of an Hermit in a Bears-skin, and an
Asses-head on his shoulders, etc. himself saying that he appeared in such sort
as he lived. And diverse such stuff rehearsed by Platina.

Ambr. ser. 90. de passione Agn. Eusebius. lib. Eccl. hist. 5. Niceph. bib. 5.
cap. 7. Hieronym. in vita Pau. Theodor. lib. hist. 5. c. 24. Athan. in vita
Antho.
Now because S. Ambrose writes, that S. Anne appeared to Constance the daughter
of Constantine, and to her Parents, watching at her Sepulcher: and because
Eusebius and Nicephorus say, That the Pontamian Virgin, Origen's Disciple,
appeared to S. Basil, and put a Crown upon his head, in token of the glory of
his martyrdom, which should shortly follow: and because Hierome writes of
Paul's appearance; and Theodoret, of S. John the Baptist; and Athanasius, of
Ammons, etc. many do believe the same stories and miraculous appearances to be
true. But few Protestants will give credit unto such shameful fables, or any
like them, when they find them written in the Legendary, Festival, Rosaries of
our Lady, or any other such Popish Authors. Whereby I gather, that if the
Protestant believe some few lies, the Papists believe a great number. This I
write, to show the imperfection of man, how attentive our ears are to hearken
to tales. And though herein consists no great point of faith or infidelity; yet
let us that profess the Gospel take warning of Papists, not to be carried away
with every vain blast of doctrine; but let us cast away these profane and old
Wives fables. And although this matter have passed so long with general credit
and authority; yet many Melancth. in Calendar. Manlii 23. April.

Marbach. lib. de miracul. adversus Ins.

Johannes Rivius de veter. superstit

Athan. lib. 99. quest. 11. August. de cura pro mortu. cap. 13.

Luke 16 29.


grave Authors have condemned long since all those vain Visions and
Apparitions, except such as have been showed by God, his Son, and his Angels.
Athanasius says, That souls once loosed from their bodies, have no more
society with mortal men. Augustine says, That if souls could walk and visit
their friends, etc. or admonish them in sleep, or otherwise, his Mother that
followed him by Land and by Sea would show her self to him, and reveal her
knowledge, or give him warning, etc. But most true it is that is written in the
Gospel: We have Moses and the Prophets, who are to be hearkened unto, and not
the dead.

CHAP. XXVIII.
A Confutation of Johannes Laurentius, and of many others, maintaining these
fained and ridiculous Tales and Apparitions, and what drives them away: of
Moses and Elias appearance in Mount Tabor.

FUrthermore, to prosecute this matter in more words; if I say that these
Apparitions of Souls are but knaveries and cosenages; Matthew. 17.3. Luke 9.30.
they object that Moses and Elias appeared in Mount Tabor, and talked with
Christ, in the presence of the principal Apostles; yea, and that God appeared
in the bush, etc. As though Spirits and Souls could do whatsoever it pleases
the Lord to do, Johan. Laur. lib. de nature. demon.
or appoint to be done for his own glory, or for the manifestation of his Son
miraculously. And therefore I thought good to give you a taste of the
Witchmongers absurd opinions in this behalf.

And first you shall understand, that they hold, Mich. Andr. these. 222 etc.
That all the souls in heaven may come down and appear to us when they list,
and assume any body saving their own; otherwise (say they) such souls should
not be perfectly happy. They say, That you may know the good souls from the bad
very easily: Idem these. 235. and 236.
For a damned soul has a very heavy and sour look; but a Saints soul has a
cheerful and a merry countenance; these also are white and shining, the other
cole black. And these damned souls also may come up out of Hell at their
pleasure; although Abraham made Dives believe the contrary. Idem. these. 226.
Th. Aq. 1. page quaest. 89. ar. 8.
They affirm, That damned Souls walk oftenest: next unto them the souls of
Purgatory; and most seldom the souls of Saints. Also they say, That in the old
Law souls did appear seldom; and after doomsday they shall never be seen more:
Gregor. in dial. 4.

Mich. And. these. 313, 316, 317.


in the time of grace they shall be most freequent. The walking of these souls
( says Michael Andr.) is a most excellent argument for the proof of Purgatory;
for (says he) those souls have testified that which the Popes have affirmed in
that behalf; to wit, that there is not only such a place of punishment, but
that they are released from thence by Masses, and such other satisfactory
works; whereby the goodness of the Mass is also ratified and confirmed.

These heavenly or purgatory souls (say they) appear most commonly to them that
are born upon Ember-dayes, and they also walk most usually on those
Ember-dayes; Idem. these. 346. Leo sermon. de jejuniis 10. men's. Gelas. in
Epistola ad Episc. Mich. Andr. these. 345. Greg. dial. 4. cap. 1, 12, 14. Mich.
And. these. 347. Greg. dial. 4. cap. 11. Mich. And. these. 347.
because we are in best state at that time to pray for the one, and to keep
company with the other. Also they say, That souls appear oftenest by night;
because men may then be at be at best leisure, and most quiet. Also they never
appear to the whole multitude, seldom to a few, and most commonly to one alone;
for so one may tell a lie without controlment. Also they are oftenest seen by
them that are ready to die; as Trasilla saw Pope Foelix; Ursine, Peter and
Paul; Galla Romana, S. Peter; and as Musa the maid saw our Lady; which are the
most certain appearances credited and allowed in the Church of Rome: Also they
may be seen of some, and of some other in that presence not seen at all; as
Ursine saw Peter and Paul, and yet many at that instant being present could not
see any such sight, but thought it a lie; as I do. Michael Andraeas confesses,
That Papists see more Visions than Protestants; he says also, That a good soul
can take none other shape than of a man; marry a damned soul may and does take
the shape of a Black-moor, Mich. And. these. 341. Idem. these. 388. Idem. these.
411. Mal. Malef. J. Bod. etc. Mich. And. these. 412.

Idem. these. 414.


or of a Beast, or of a Serpent, or specially of an Heretic. The Christian
signs that drive away these evil souls, are the cross, the Name of Jesus, and
the relics of Saints; in the number whereof are Holy Water, Holy-bread, Agnus
Dei, etc. For Andrew says, That notwithstanding Julian was an Apostate, and a
betrayer of Christian Religion; yet at an extremity, with the only sign of the
Cross, he drove away from him many such evil spirits; whereby also (he says)
the greatest diseases and sicknesses are cured, and the sorest dangers avoided.

CHAP. XXIX.
A Confutation of assuming of Bodies, and of the Serpent that seduced Eve.

THey that contend so earnestly for the Devils assuming of bodies and visible
shapes, do think they have a great advantage by the words uttered in the third
of Genesis, Genesis 3.14, 15.
where they say, the Devil entered into a Serpent or Snake; and that by the
curse it appears, that the whole displeasure of God lighted upon the poor
Snake only. How those words are to be considered, may appear, in that it is of
purpose so spoken, as our weak capacities may thereby best conceive the
substance, tenor, and true meaning of the word, which is there set down in the
manner of a Tragedy, in such humane and sensible form, as wonderfully informs
our understanding; though it seem contrary to the spiritual course of Spirits
and Devils, and also to the nature and divinity of God himself; who is
infinite, and whom no man ever saw with corporal eyes, and lived. And
doubtless, if the Serpent there had not been taken absolutely, nor
Metaphorically for the Devil, the Holy Ghost would have informed us thereof in
some part of that story. But to affirm it sometimes to be a Devil, and
sometimes a Snake; whereas there is no such distinction to be found or seen in
the Text, is an invention and a fetch (methinks) beyond the compass of all
divinity. Genesis 3.1. 2 Cor. 11.3.
Certainly the Serpent was he that seduced Eve; now whether it were the Devil,
or a Snake; let any wiseman (or rather let the Word of God) judge. Doubtless
the Scripture in many places expounds it to be the Devil. And I have (I am
sure) one wise man on my side for the interpretation hereof, Sap. 2.24.
namely Solomon; who says, Through envy of the Devil came death into the
world; referring that to the Devil, which Moses in the letter did to the
Serpent. But a better Expositor hereof needs not, than the Text it self, even
in the same place, where it is written; I will put enmity between thee and the
woman, and between thy seed and her seed; he shall break thy head, and thou
shall bruise his heel. What Christian knows not, that in these words the
mystery of our redemption is comprised and promised? Wherein is not meant (as
many suppose) that the common seed of women shall tread upon a Snakes-head, and
so break it in pieces, etc. but that special seed, which is Christ, should be
born of a woman, to the utter overthrow of Satan, and to the redemption of
mankind, whose heel or flesh in his members the Devil should bruise and
assault, with continual attempts, and carnal provocations, etc.

CHAP. XXX.
The Objection concerning the Devils Assuming of the Serpents Body answered.

Genesis 3.1.
THis word Serpent, in holy Scripture is taken for the Devil: The Serpent was
more subtle than all the Beasts of the field. It likewise signifies such as be
evil speakers, such as have slandering tongues, also Heretics, Psalm. 64.3.
Numb. 8. and 9. Joh. 3.14.
etc. They have sharpened their tongues like Serpents. It does likewise betoken
the death and Sacrifice of Christ: As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the
Wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted up upon the Cross. Moreover, it is
taken for wicked men: O ye Serpents and generation of Vipers. Mat. 23 33. Mat.
10.16.
Thereby also is signified as well a wise as a subtle man: and in that sense
did Christ himself use it, saying, Be ye wise as Serpents, etc. So that by this
brief collection you see, that the word Serpent, as it is equivocal, so
likewise it is sometimes taken in the good, and sometimes in the evil part. But
where it is said, That the Serpent was father of lies, author of death, and the
worker of deceit; methinks it is a ridiculous opinion to hold, that thereby a
Snake is meant; which must be, if the letter be preferred before the Allegory.
J. Call. in Genesis cap. 3.1.
Truly Calvin's opinion is to be liked and reverenced, and his example to be
embraced and followed, in that he offers to subscribe to them that hold, that
the Holy Ghost in that place did of purpose use obscure figures, that the clear
light thereof might be deferred, till Christ's coming. Idem. ibid.
He says also with like commendation (speaking hereof, and writing upon this
place) That Moses does accommodate and fitten for the understanding of the
common people, in a rude and gross style, those things which he there
delivers; Idem. ibid.
Idem. ibid.
forbearing once to rehearse the name of Satan. And further he says, That this
order may not be thought of Moses his own device; but to be taught him by the
Spirit of God: for such was (says he) in those days the childish age of the
Church, which was unable to receive higher or profounder doctrine. Finally, he
says, even hereupon, That the Lord has supplied, with the secret light of his
Spirit, whatsoever wanted in plainness and clearness of external words.

If it be said, according to experience, That certain other Beasts are far
more subtle than the Serpent: They answer, That it is not absurd to confess,
that the same gift was taken away from him, by God, because he brought
destruction to mankind. Which is more (methinks) than need be granted in that
behalf. For Christ says not; Mat. 10.16.
Be ye wise as Serpents were, before their transgression; but, Be wise as
Serpents are. I would learn what impiety, absurdity, or offense it is to hold,
that Moses, under the person of a poisoning Serpent or Snake, describes the
Devil that poisoned Eve with his deceitful wor^s, and venomous assault. Whence
comes it else, that the Devil is called so often, The Viper, The Serpent,
Isai. 30.6. Mat. 3.7. and 12. Luke 3.34. and 23, 33. Genesis 3.1.
etc. and that his children are called the generation of Vipers; but upon this
first description of the Devil made by Moses? For I think none so gross, as to
suppose, that the wicked are the children of Snakes, according to the letter;
no more than we are to think and gather, that God keeps a Book of Life,
written with Pen and Ink upon Paper; as Citizens record their Freemen.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of the Curse rehearsed Genesis 3. and that place rightly expounded; John Calvin's
opinion of the Devil.

THe curse rehearsed by God in that place, whereby Witchmongers labor so
busily to prove that the Devil entered into the body of a Snake, and by
consequence can take the body of any other creature at his pleasure, etc.
reaches I think further into the Devils matters, than we can comprehend it, or
is needful for us to know, that understand not the ways of the Devils
creeping, and is far unlikely to extend to plague the generation of Snakes;
though they had been made with legs before that time, and through his curse
was deprived out of that benefit, And yet, if the Devil should have entered
into the Snake, in manner and form as they suppose, I cannot see in what degree
of sin the poor Snake should be so guilty, as that God, who is the most
righteous Judge, might be offended with him. Family of Love.
But although I abhor that lewd interpretation of the Family of Love, and such
other Heretics, as would reduce the whole Bible into allegories: yet
(methinks) the creeping there is rather metaphorically or significatively
spoken, than literally; even by that figure, which is there prosecuted to the
end: Wherein the Devil is resembled to an odious creature, who as he creeps
upon us to annoy our bodies; so does the Devil there creep into the conscience
of Eve, to abuse and deceive her: whose seed nevertheless shall tread down and
dissolve his power and malice: And through him, all good Christians (as Calvin
says) obtain power to do the like. J. Call. lib. instit. 1. cap. 14. sect. 18.
For we may not imagine such a material tragedy, as there is described, for the
ease of our feeble and weak capacities.

For whenever we find in the Scriptures, that the Devil is called God, the
Prince of the world, a strong armed man, to whom is given the power of the air;
a roaring Lion, a Serpent, etc. the Holy Ghost moved us thereby, to beware of
the most subtle, strong and mighty Enemy, and to make preparation, and arm our
selves with faith against so terrible an Adversary. And this is the opinion and
counsel of Calvin, J. Call. lib. instit. 1. cap. 14. sect. 13.
That we seeing our own weakness, and his force manifested in such terms, may
beware of the Devil, and may fly to God for spiritual aid and comfort: And as
for his corporal assaults, or his attempts upon our bodies, his night-walkings,
his visible appearings, his dancing with Witches, etc. we are neither warned in
the Scriptures of them, nor willed by God or his Prophets to fly them; neither
is there any mention made of them in the Scriptures. And therefore think I
those Witchmongers and absurd Writers to be as gross on the one side, as the
Sadduces are impious and fond on the other, which say, That Spirits and Devils
are only motions and affections, Aug. de cura pro mort etc.
and that Angels are but tokens of Gods power. I for my part confess with
Augustine, That these matters are above my reach and capacity; and yet so far
as God Word teaches me, I will not stick to say, That they are living
creatures, ordained to serve the Lord in their vocation. And although they
abode not in their first estate, yet that they are the Lords Ministers, and
Executioners of his wrath, to try and tempt in this world, and to punish the
reprobate in Hell fire in the world to come.

CHAP. XXXII.
Mine own Opinion and Resolultion of the Nature of Spirits, and of the Devil,
with his properties.

BUt to use few words in a long matter, and plain terms in a doubtful case,
this is mine opinion concerning this argument. First, that Devils are spirits
and no bodies: P. Mart. in loc. com. 9. sect. 14.
For (as Peter Martyr says) spirits and bodies are by antithesis opposed one
to another; so as a body is no spirit, nor a spirit a body. And that the Devil,
whether he be many or one (for by the way you shall understand, that he is so
spoken of in the Scriptures, as though there were but 1 Samuel 22. Luke 8. John
8. Ephesians. 6. 2 Timothy 2. 1 Pet. 5.
one, and sometimes as though Col. 1.16. 1 Cor. 10. Mat. 8. and 10. Luke 4.
one were many legions, the sense whereof I have already declared according to
Calvin's opinion; he is a creature made by God, and that for vengeance, as it is
written in Ecclus. 39. v. 28. and of himself naught, though employed by God to
necessary and good purposes. For in places where it is written, that Sap. 1.
Apocal. 4.
1 Timothy 4.4.
all the creatures of God are good: and again, when God, in the creation of the
world, Genesis 1.
saw all that he had made was good; the Devil is not comprehended within those
words of commendation. For it is written, that he was a Joh. 8.44. 1 John 3.8.
murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth; because there is no
truth in him; but when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own, as being a
liar, and the father of lies, and (as John says) a sinner from the beginning.
Neither was his creation (so far as I can find) in that week that God made man,
and those other creatures mentioned in Genesis the first, and yet God created
him purposely to destroy. I take his substance to be such as no man can by
learning define, nor by wisdom search out. M. Deering says, Edw. Deering, in
his reading upon Heb. 1. Reading the 6. Ephesians. 6.12. Col. 2.16. Matthew. 25.
Tha^ Paul himself, reckoning up principalities, powers, etc. adds, Every
name that is named in this world, or in the world to come. A clear sentence
(says he) of Paul 's modesty, in confessing a holy ignorance of the state of
Angels, which name is also given to Devils in other places of the Scripture.
His essence also and his form is also so proper and peculiar (in mine opinion)
unto himself, as he himself cannot alter it, but must needs be content
therewith, as with that which God has ordained him, and assigned unto him, as
peculiarly as he has given to us our substance without power to alter the same
at our pleasures. For we find not that a spirit can make a body, more than a
body can make a spirit: the Spirit of God excepted, which is Omnipotent.
Nevertheless, I learn that their nature is prone to all mischief: for as the
very signification of an Enemy and as an accuser is wrapped up in Satan and
Diabolus; so does Christ himself declare him to be in the thirteenth of
Matthew. 1 Pet. 5. Idem. ibid. Mat. 25.45.
And therefore he brooketh well his name; for he lies daily in wait, not only
to corrupt, but also to destroy mankind; being (I say) the very tormentor
appointed by God to afflict the wicked in this world with wicked temptations,
and in the world to come with Hell fire. Mal. malef. par. 1. quaest. 5. The
crymon of the word Diabolus.
But I may not here forget how M. Mal. and the residue of that crew do expound
that word Diabolus; for Dia (say they) is Duo, and Bolus is Morsellus, whereby
they gather that the Devil eats up a man both body and soul at two morsels.
Whereas in truth the wicked may be said to eat up and swallow down the Devil,
rather than the Devil to eat up them; though it may well be said by a figure,
that the Devil like a roaring Lion seeks whom he may devour: which is meant
of the soul and spiritual devouring, as very novices in Religion may judge.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Against fond Witchmongers, and their opinions concerning corporal Devils.

NOw, how Brian Darcies he-spirits and she-spirits, Titty and Tiffin, Suckin
and Pidgin, Liard and Robin, etc. his white-spirits and black-spirits,
gray-spirits and red-spirits, Devil-toad and Devil-lambe, Devils-cat and
Devils-dam, agree herewithal, or can stand consonant with the Word of God, or
true Philosophy, let Heaven and Earth judge. The book of W.W. published.
In the mean time let any man with good consideration peruse that Book
published by W.W. it shall suffice to satisfy him in all that may be required
touching the vanities of the Witches Examinations, Confessions, and Executions;
where, though the tale be told only of the accusers part, without any other
answer of theirs than their Adversary sets down; mine assertion will be
sufficiently proved true. And because it seems to be performed with some kind
of authority, I will say no more for the confutation thereof, but referr you to
the Book it self; whereto if nothing be added that may make to their reproach,
I dare warrant nothing is left out that may serve to their condemnation. See
whether the witnesses be not single, of what credit, sex and age they are;
namely lewd, miserable and envious poor people; most of them which speak to any
purpose being old women, and children of the age of 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9. years.

And note how and what the Witches confess, and see of what weight and
importance the causes are; whether their confessions be not won through hope of
favor, and extorted by flattery or threats, without proof. But in so much as
there were not past seventeen or eighteen condemned at once at S. Osees in the
County of Essex, At S. Osees 17. or 18. Witches condemned at once.
being a whole Parish (though of no great quantity) I will say the less:
trusting that by this time there remain not many in that Parish. If any be yet
behind, I doubt not but Brian Darcie will find them out; who, if he lack aid,
Richard Gallis of Windsor were meet to be associated with him; which Gallis
has set forth another Book to that effect, of certain Witches of Windsor
executed at Abington. But with what impudency and dishonesty he has finished
it, with what lies and forgeries he has furnished it; what folly and frenzy he
has uttered in it, I am ashamed to report; and therefore being but a two-penny
Book, I had rather desire you to buy it, and so to peruse it, than to fill my
Book with such beastly stuff.

CHAP. XXXIV.
A Conclusion wherein the Spirit of spirits is described, by the illumination
of which Spirit all spirits are to be tried: with a Confutation of the
Pneumatomachi flatly denying the divinity of this Spirit.

TOuching the manifold signification of this word [Spirit] I have elsewhere in
this brief discourse told you my mind; which is a word nothing different in
Heb. from breath or wind. For all these words following; to wit, Spiritus,
Ventus, Platus, Halitus, are indifferently use by the Holy Ghost, Isai. 30.28.
and called by this Hebrew word (...) in the sacred Scripture: For further
proof whereof I cite unto you the words of Isaiah; For his Spirit (or Breath)
is as a River that overfloweth up to the neck, etc. in which place the Prophet
describes the coming of God in heat and indignation unto judgment, etc. Zach.
6.5. Genesis 1.2. John 3.8.
I cite also unto you the words of Zachary; These are the four Spirits of the
Heaven, etc. Likewise in Genesis; And the Spirit of God moved upon the waters.
Moreover, I cite unto you the words of Christ; The Spirit (or Wind) blows
where it lists. Unto which said places infinite more might be added out of
holy Writ, tending all to this purpose; namely, to give us this for a note,
that all the sayings above cited with many more that I could allege, where
mention is made of spirit, the Hebrew Text uses no word but one; to wit, (...)
which signifies (as I said) Spiritum, ventum, flatum, halitum; which may be
Englished, Spirit, wind, blast, breath.

But before I enter upon the very point of my purpose, it shall not be amiss,
to make you acquainted with the collection of a certain School Divine; who
distinguishes and divides this word [Spirit] into six significations; Eras.
Sntar. in dictio Scholast. doctr. lit. S.
saying, that it is sometimes taken for the air, sometimes for the bodies of
the blessed, sometimes for the souls of the blessed, sometimes for the power
imaginative or the mind of man; and sometimes for God. Again he says, That of
spirits there are two sorts, some created, and some uncreated.

A spirit uncreated (says he) is God himself, and it is essentially taken, and
agrees unto the three Persons notionally, to the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost personally. A spirit created is a creature, and that is likewise of two
sorts; to wit, bodily, and bodiless. A bodily spirit is also of two sorts: for
some kind of spirit is so named of spiritualness, as it is distinguished from
bodiliness: otherwise it is called Spiritus a spiriando, id est, a flando, of
breathing or blowing, as the wind does. A bodiless spirit is one way so named
of spiritualness, and then it is taken for a spiritual substance; and is of two
sorts; some make a full and complete kind, and is called complete or perfect,
as a spirit angelical: some do not make a full and perfect kind, and is called
incomplete or unperfect as the soul. There is also the spirit vital, which is a
certain subtle or very fine substance necessarily disposing and tending unto
life. There be moreover spirits natural, which are a kind of subtle and very
fine substances, disposing and tending unto equal complexions of bodies. Again,
there be spirits animal, which are certain subtle and very fine substances
disposing and tempering the body, that it might be animated of the form, that
is, that it might be perfected of the reasonable soul. Thus far he, In whose
division you see a Philosophical kind of proceeding, though not altogether to
be condemned, yet in every point not to be approved.

Erasm. Sar. in lib. loc. and lit. praedictis.
Now to the Spirit of spirits, I mean the principal and holy Spirit of God,
which one defines, or rather describes to be the third Person in the Trinity,
issuing from the Father and the Son, no more the charity, dilection and love of
the Father and the Son, than the Father is the charity, dilection and love of
the Son and Holy Ghost. Laurent. a Villavicentio in phrasib. script. lit. S.
page 176.
Another treating upon the same argument proceeds in this reverent manner:
The holy Spirit is the virtue or power of God, quickening, nourishing,
fostering, and perfecting all things; by whose only breathing it comes to pass
that we both know and love God, and become at the length like unto him: which
Spirit is the pledge and earnest penny of grace, and bears witness unto our
heart, Romans 8.15. 1 Cor. 15.15.
whiles we cry Abba Father. This Spirit is called the Spirit of God, the Spirit
of Christ, and the Spirit of him which raised up Jesus from the dead.

Jesus Christ, for that he received not the Spirit by measure, but in fullness,
does call it his Spirit, saying; When the Comforter shall come, whom I will
send, John 15.26.
even the Holy Spirit, he shall testify of me. This Spirit has diverse
Metaphorical names attributed thereunto in the Holy Scriptures. It is called by
the name of water, because it washes, comfort, moistneth, softeneth and
makes fruitful with all godliness and virtues the minds of men, which
otherwise would be unclean, comfortless, hard, dry, and barren of all goodness;
whereupon the Prophet Isaiah says; I will pour water upon the thirsty, and
floods upon the dry ground, etc. Isai. 44.3. John 7.38. John 4.14.
Wherewithal the words of Christ do agree; He that believes in me, as says
the Scripture, out of his belly shall flow rivers of waters of life. And
elsewhere; Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall never
be more athirst. Other places likewise there be, wherein the Holy Spirit is
signified by the name of water and flood; as in the 13. of Isaiah, the 29. of
Ezekiel. the 146. Psalm, etc. The same Spirit by reason of the force and vehemence
thereof is termed fire. For it does purify and cleanse the wholeman from top
to toe, it does burn out the soil and dross of sins, and sets him all in a
flaming and hot burning zeal to prefer and further Gods glory. Which plainly
appeared in the Apostles, who when they had received the Spirit, they spoke
fiery words, yea such words as were uncontrollable, in so much as in none more
than in them this saying of the Prophet Jeremy was verified, Jer. 23.29.
Nunquid non verba mea sunt quasi ignis? Are not my words even as it were fire?
This was declared and showed by those fiery tongues, which were seen upon the
Apostles after they had received the Holy Spirit.

Moreover, this Spirit is called anointing, or ointment, because that as in
old time Priests and Kings were by anointing deputed to their office and
charge, and so were made fit and serviceable for the same; even so the elect
are not so much declared as renewed and made apt by the training up of the Holy
Spirit, both to live well and also to glorify God. Whereupon depends the
saying of John; 1 John 2.27.
And ye have no need that any should teach you, but as the same ointment does
teach you. It is also called in Scripture, The Oil of gladness and rejoicing;
whereof it is said in the Book of Psalms; Psalm. 45.7. Cyrill. in Evang. Joh.
lib 3. cap. 14.
God even thy God has anointed thee with the Oil of joy and gladness, etc.
And by this goodly and comfortable name of Oil in the Scriptures is the mercy
of God oftentimes expressed, because the nature of that does agree with the
property and quality of this. For as Oil does float and swim above all other
liquors, so the mercy of God does surpass and overreach all his works, and the
same does most of all disclose it self to miserable man.

It is likewise called the Finger of God, that is, the might and power of God:
Exodus 8.19.
by the virtue whereof the Apostles did cast out Devils; to wit, even by the
finger of God. It is called the Spirit of Truth, because it makes men true and
faithful in their vocation; and for that it is the touchstone to try all
counterfeit devices of man's brain, and all vain Sciences, profane Practices,
deceitful Arts, and circumventing Inventions; such as be in general all sorts
of Witchcrafts and Enchantments, within whose number are comprehended all those
wherewith I have had some dealing in my Discovery; to wit, Charms or
Incantations, Divinations, Augury, Judicial Astrology, Nativity-casting,
Alchymistry, Conjuration, Lot-share, Popery which is mere paltry, with diverse
other: not one whereof, no nor altogether are able to stand to the trial and
examination, which this Spirit of Truth shall and will take of those false and
evil spirits. Nay, they shall be found, when they are laid into the balance, to
be lighter than vanity: very dross, when they once come to be tried by the
fervent heat of this Spirit; and like chafe, when this Spirit blows upon
them, driven away with a violent whirlwind; such is the perfection, integrity,
and effectual operation of this Spirit, whose working as it is manifold, so it
is mavelous, and therefore may and is called the Spirit of spirits.

This Spirit withdrawing it self from the hearts of men, The holy Spirit can
abide nothing that is carnal and unclean.
for that it will not inhabit and dwell where sin has dominion, gives place
unto the spirit of error and blindness, to the spirit of servitude and
compunction, which biteth, gnaweth, and whetteth their hearts with a deadly
hate of the Gospel; in so much as it grieveth their minds and irketh their ears
either to hear or understand the truth; of which disease properly the Pharisees
of old were, and the Papists even now are sick. Yea, the want of this good
Spirit is the cause that many fall into the spirit of perverseness and
frowardness, into the spirit of giddiness, lying, drowsiness, and dullness;
according as the Prophet Isaiah says; For the Lord has covered you with a
spirit of slumber, Isai. 29.10. Isai. 19, 14.
and has shut up your eyes; and again elsewhere, Dominus miscuit in medio,
etc. The Lord has mingled among them the spirit of giddiness, and has made
Egypt to err, as a drunken man erreth in his vomit: And as it is said by Paul;
And their foolish heart was blinded, Romans 1.21, 24. Deuteronomy. 28.28, 29.
and God gave them over unto their own hearts lusts. Which punishment Moses
threatens unto the Jews; The Lord shall smite thee with madness, with
blindness and amazedness of mind, and thou shall grope at high noon as a blind
man uses to grope, etc.

In some, this word [Spirit] does signify a secret force and power, wherewith
our minds are moved and directed; if unto holy things, then it is the motion of
the holy Spirit, of the Spirit of Christ and of God; if unto evil things, then
is it the suggestion of the wicked spirit, A question.
of the Devil, and of Satan. Whereupon I infer, by the way of a question, with
what spirit we are to suppose such to be moved, as either practice any of the
vanities treated upon in this Book, or through credulity addict themselves
thereunto as unto divine oracles, or the voice of Angels breaking through the
clouds? An answer.
We cannot impute this motion unto the good Spirit; for then they should be
able to discern between the nature of spirits, and not swerve in judgment: it
follows therefore, that the spirit of blindness and error does seduce them,
so that it is no marvel if in the alienation of their minds they take falsehood
for truth, A great likelihood no doubt.
shadows for substances, fancies for verities, etc, for it is likely that the
good Spirit of God has forsaken them, or at leastwise absented it self from
them; else would they detest these devilish devices of men, which consist of
nothing but delusions and vain practices, whereof (I suppose) this my Book to
be a sufficient discovery.

Judgment distinguished.
It will be said, That I ought not to judge, for he that judges shall be
judged. Whereto I answer, That judgment is not to be understood of three kind
of actions in their proper nature; whereof the first are secret, and the
judgment of them shall appertain to God, who in time will disclose whatsoever
is done in covert, and that by his just judgment. The second are mixed actions,
taking part of hidden, and part of open, so that by reason of their uncertainty
and doubtfulness they are discussable and to be tried; these after due
examination are to have their competent judgment, and are incident to the
Magistrate. The third are manifest and evident, and such as do no less
apparently show themselves than an inflammation of blood in the body: and of
these actions every private man gives judgment, because they be of such
certainty, as that of them a man may as well conclude, as to gather that
because the Sun is risen in the East, Ergo it is morning: he is come about and
is full South, Ergo it is high noon; he is declining and closing up in the
West, Ergo, it is evening. So that the objection is answered.

Howbeit, letting this pass, and spiritually to speak of this Spirit, which
whiles many have wanted, Josias Simlerus lib. 4. cap. 5. adversus veteres and
novos Antitrinitarios, etc.

Mat. 12.31, 32.


it has come to pass that they have proved altogether carnal; and not
savouring heavenly divinity have tumbled into worse than Philosophical
barbarism; and these be such as of Writers are called Pneumatomachi, a Sect so
injurious to the holy Spirit of God, that contemning the sentence of Christ,
wherein he foretells, That the sin against the Holy Spirit is never to be
pardoned, neither in this world nor in the world to come; they do not only deny
him to be God, but also pull from him all being, and with the Sadduces maintain
there is none such; but that under and by the name of holy Spirit is meant a
certain divine force, wherewith our minds are moved, and the grace and favor
of God whereby we are his beloved. Against these shameless Enemies of the Holy
Spirit, I will not use material weapons, but syllogistical charms. And first, I
will set down some of their paralogisms or false arguments; and upon the neck
of them infer fit confutations grounded upon sound reason and certain truth.

Their first Argument is knit up in this manner. The Holy Spirit is nowhere
expressly called God in the Scriptures; Ergo he is not God, 1. Objection. The
Scripture does never call the Holy Spirit God.
or at leastwise he is not to be called God.

The Antecedent of this Argument is false; because the Holy Spirit has the
title or name of God in the fifth of the Acts. Again, the consequent is false.
For although he were not expressly called God, The 1. answer. A refutation of
the antecedent^ etc.
yet should it not thereupon be concluded that he is not very God; because unto
him are attributed all the properties of God, which unto this do equally
belong. And as we deny not that the Father is the true light, although it be
not directly written of the Father, but of the Son; He was the true light
giving light to every man that comes into this world; so likewise it is not to
be denied, that the Spirit is God, although the Scripture does not expressly and
simply note it; sithence it ascribes equal things thereunto; as the properties
of God, the works of God, the service due to God, and that it does
interchangeably take the names of Spirit and of God oftentimes. They therefore
that see these things attributed unto the Holy Spirit, and yet will not suffer
him to be called by the name of God; do as it were refuse to grant unto Eve the
name of Homo, whom notwithstanding they confess to be a creature reasonable and
mortal.

The second reason is this. 2. Objection. Hilarie does not call the Spirit God;
neither is he so named in the common Collects.
Hilarie in all his twelve Books of the Trinity does nowhere write that the
Holy Spirit is to be worshipped; he never gives thereunto the name of God,
neither dares he otherwise pronounce thereof, than that it is the Spirit of
God. Besides this, There are usual Prayers of the Church commonly called the
Collects, whereof some are made to the Father, some to the Son, but none to the
Holy Spirit; and yet in them all mention is made of the three persons.

Hereunto, I answer, that although Hilarie does not openly call the Holy
Spirit, God: yet does he constantly deny it to be a creature. The 2. answer.
Hilarious lib. 12. de Triade.
Now if any ask me why Hilarie was so coy and nice to name the Holy Spirit,
God, whom he denies to be a creature, when as notwithstanding between God and
a creature there is no mean: I will in good sooth say what I think. I suppose
that Hilarie, for himself thought well of the Godhead of the Holy Spirit: but
this opnion was thrust and forced upon him by the Pneumatomachi, who at that
time rightly deeming of the Son, did erewhiles join themselves to those that
were sound of judgment. The place is long, and therefore I had rather refer the
Reader unto the Book than to insert so many lines.
There is also in the Ecclesiastical History a little book which they gave
Liberius a Bishop of Rome, whereinto they foisted the Nicene Creed. And that
Hilarie was a friend of the Pneumatomachi, it is perceived in his Book De
Synodis, where he writes in this manner; Nihil autem mirum vobis videri debet,
fratres charissimi, etc. It ought to seem no wonder unto you dear Brethren,
etc. As for the objection of the Prayers of the Church called the Collects,
that in them the Holy Spirit is not called upon by name: we oppose and set
against them the Songs of the Church, wherein the said Spirit is called upon.
But the Collects are more ancient than the Songs, Hymns, and Anthems. I will
not now contend about ancientness, neither will I compare Songs and Collects
together; but I say thus much only, to wit, that in the most ancient times of
the Church the Holy Spirit has been openly called upon in the Congregation.
Now if I be charged to give an instance, let this serve. Collecta in die domin.
sanctae Trinit.
In the Collect upon Trinity Sunday it is thus said; Almighty and everlasting
God, which have given unto us thy servants grace by the confession of a truth
to acknowledge the glory of the eternal Trinity, and in the power of the divine
Majesty to worship the Unity; we beseech thee that through the stedfastness of
this faith, we may evermore be defended from all adversity, which live and
reignest one God world without end. Now because that in this Collect, where the
Trinity is expressly called upon, the names of persons are not expressed; but
Almighty and Everlasting God invocated, who abides in Trinity and Unity; it
does easily appear elsewhere also that the persons being not named under the
Name of Almighty and Everlasting God, not only the Father is to be understood,
but God which abides in Trinity and Unity, that is, the Father, the Son, and
the Holyghost.

A third objection of theirs is this. 3. Objection. The Spirit is not be prayed
unto, but the Father only.
The Son of God oftentimes praying in the Gospels, speaking unto the Father,
promises the Holy Spirit, and does also admonish the Apostles to pray unto the
heavenly Father, but yet in the Name of the Son. Besides that, he prescribes
them this form of Prayer: Our Father which art in Heaven. Ergo The Father only
is to be called upon, and consequently the Father only is that one and very
true God, of whom it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve.

3. Answer. The consequent is denied.
Whereto I answer, first by denying the consequent, The Son prayed to the Father
only; Ergo, the Father only is of us also to be prayed unto. For the Son of God
is distinguished of us both in Person and in Office; he as a Mediator makes
Intercession for us to the Father; and although the Son and the Holy Spirit do
both together receive and take us into favor with God; yet is he said to
entreat the Father for us; because the Father is the fountain of all counsels
and divine works. Furthermore touching the form of Praying described by Christ,
it is not necessary that the Fathers name should personally be there taken,
since there is no distinction of persons made; but by the Name of Father
indefinitely we understand God, or the Essence of God, the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost. For this name has not always a respect unto the generation of
the Son of God; but God is called, 1 John 3.1:
The Father of the faithful, because of his gracious and free adopting of them;
the foundation whereof is the Son of God, in whom we be adopted: but yot so
adopted, that not the Father only receives us into his favor, but with him
also the Son and the Holy Spirit does the same. Therefore when we in the
beginning of Prayer do advertise our selves of God's goodness toward us, we do
not cast an eye to the Father alone, but also to the Son, who gave us the
Spirit of Adoption; and to the Holy Spirit in whom we cry Abba, Father. And if
so be that invocation and Prayer were restrained to the Father alone, then had
the Saints done amiss, in calling upon, invocating, and praying to the Son of
God, and with the Son the Holy Spirit in Baptism, according to the form by
Christ himself assigned and delivered.

4. Objection. Amos says, That the Spirit was created.
Another objection is out of the fourth of Amos, in this manner: For lo it is I
that make the Thunder, and create the spirit, and show unto men their Christ,
making the light and the clouds, and mounting above the high places of the
earth, the Lord God of Hosts is his Name. Now because it is read in that place,
Showing unto men their Christ; the Pneumatomachi contended that these words are
to be understood of the Holy Spirit.

4. Answer. Spirit in this place signifies Wind.
But Ambrose in his Book De Spiritu Sancto, lib. 2. cap. 7. does rightly answer,
That by Spirit in this place is meant the Wind: for if the Prophets purpose and
will had been to speak of the Holy Spirit, he would not have begun with
Thunder, nor have ended with light and clouds. Howbeit, the same father says,
If any suppose that these words are to be drawn unto the interpretation of the
Holy Spirit, because the Prophet says, Showing unto men their Christ; he ought
also to draw these words unto the mystery of the Lords incarnation: and he
expounds Thunder to be the words of the Lord, and Spirit to be the reasonable
and perfect soul. But the former interpretation is certain and convenient with
the words of the Prophet, by whom there is no mention made of Christ; but the
power of God is set forth in his works. Behold (says the Prophet) he that
forms the Mountains, Amos 4.13.
and creates the Wind, and declares unto man what is his thought, which
makes the morning darkness, and walks upon the high places of the earth, To
create is not him to be made that was not.
the Lord God of Hosts is his Name. In this sort Santes a right skilful man in
the Hebrew tongue translateth this place of the Prophet. But admit this place
were written of the Holy Spirit, and were not appliable either to the Wind, or
to the Lords Incarnation: yet does it not follow that the Holy Spirit is a
creature; Eusebius. Casariens. lib. 3. adversus Marcemull.
because this word of Creating does not always signify a making of something
out of nothing; as Eusebius dxpounding these wrrds; [The Lord created me in the
beginning of his wayes] writes thus, The Prophet in the Person of God, saying,
Behold I am he that made the Thunder, and created the Spirit, and showed unto
men their Christ: this word created is not so to be taken, as that it is to be
concluded thereby, that the same was not before. For God has not so created
the Spirit, fithence by the same he has showed and declared his Christ unto al
men. Neither was it a thing of late beginning under the Son: but it was before
all beginning, and was then sent, Act. ^.2.
when the Apostles were gathered together, When a sound like Thunder came from
Heaven, as it had been the coming of a mighty wind: this word created being
used for sent down, for appointed, ordained, etc. and the word Thunder
signifying in another kind of manner the Preaching of the Gospel. The like
saying is that of the Psalmist, A clean heart create in me O God: Psalm. 51.10.
wherein he prayed not as one having no heart, but as one that had such a heart
as needed purifying, as needed perfecting: and this phrase also of the
scripture, that he might create two in one new man; that is, that he might
join, couple, or gather together, etc.

Furthermore, 5. Objectiun. All things were made by the Son, Ergo the Spirit
was also made by him.
the Pneumatomachi by these testimonies ensuing endeavor to prove the Holy
Spirit to be a creature. Out of John the 1. chapter By this word were all things
made, and without it nothing was made. Out of 1 Cor. 8. We have one God the
Father, even he from whom are all things, and we in him, and one Lord Jesus
Christ, through whom are all things, and we by him, Out of Col. 1 By him were
all things made, things in heaven, and things in earth, visible and invisible,
etc. Now if all things were made by the Son, it follows that by him the Holy
Spirit was also made.

Whereto I answer, that when all things are said to be made by the Son, 5.
Answer. Universal propositions or speeches are to be restrained. Joh. 1.3.
that same universal proposition is restrained by John himself to a certain
kind of things. Without him (says the Evangelist) was nothing made that was
made. Therefore it is first to be showed that the Holy Spirit was made, and
then will we conclude out of John, that if he were made, he was made of the
Son. The Scripture does no where say, that the Holy Spirit was made of the
Father or of the Son, but to proceed, to come, and to be sent from them both.
Now if these universal propositions are to suffer no restraint, it shall follow
that the Father was made of the Son; than the which what is more absurd and
wicked?

Again, they object out of Mat. 11. None knows the Son but the Father, 6.
Objection. The spirit knows not the Father and the Son.
and none the Father but the Son; to wit, of and by himself; for otherwise both
the angels, and to whomsoever else it shall please the Son to reveal the
Father, these do know both the Father and the Son. Now if so be the Spirit be
not equal with the Father and the Son in knowledge, he is not only unequal and
lesser than they, but also no God; for ignorance is not incident unto God.

Whereto I answer, 6. Answer. How exclusive propositions, or speeches are to be
interpreted.
that where in holy Scripture we do meet with universal propositions negative
or exclusive, they are not to be expounded of one person, so as the rest are
excluded; but creatures or false gods are to be excluded, and whatsoever else
is without or beside the essence and being of God. Reasons to prove and
confirm this interpretation, I could bring very many, whereof I will add some
for example. In the seventh of John it is said, When Christ shall come, none
shall know from whence he is; notwithstanding which words the Jews thought that
neither God nor his Angels should be ignorant from whence Christ should be. In
the fourth to the Galatians; A man's Covenant or testament confirmed with
authority no body does abrogate, or add any thing thereunto. No just man does
so; but tyrants and truce breakers care not for covenants. In John eight, Jesus
was left alone, and the woman standing in the midst. And yet it is not to be
supposed that a multitude of people was not present, and the Disciples of
Christ likewise; but the word Solus, alone, is referred to the woman's accusers,
who withdrew themselves away every one, and departed. In the sixth of Mark, When
it was evening, the ship was in the midst of the sea, and he alone upon land:
he was not alone upon land or shore, for the same was not utterly void of
dwellers; but he had not any of his Disciples with him, nor any body to carry
him a shipboard unto his Disciples. Many phrases or forms of speeches like unto
these are to be found in the sacred scriptures, and in authors both Greek and
Latin; whereby we understand, that neither universal negative nor exclusive
particles are strictly to be urged, but to be explained in such sort as the
matter in hand will bear. When as therefore the Son alone is said to know the
Father, and it is demanded whether the holy Spirit is debarred from knowing the
Father; out of other places of Scripture judgment is to be given in this case.
In some places the Holy Spirit is counted and reckoned with the Father and the
Son jointly; wherefore he is not to be separated. Elsewhere also it is
attributed to the holy spirit that he alone does know the things which be of
God, and searches the deep secrets of God; wherefore from him the knowing of
God is not to be excluded.

They do yet further object, 7. Objection. The Spirit prays for us.
that it is not convenient or fit for God after the manner of suitors to humble
and cast down himself; but the holy Spirit does so, praying and entreating for
us with unspeakable groans, Romans 8. Ergo the holy Spirit is not God.

7. Answer. The spirit does provoke us to pray.

Genesis 22.12.


Whereunto I answer, that the Holy Spirit does pray and entreat, insomuch as he
provokes us to pray, and makes us to groan and sigh. Oftentimes also in the
Scriptures is that action or deed attributed unto God, which we being stirred
up and moved by him do bring to pass. So it is said of God unto Abraham, Now
I know that thou fear God: and yet before he would have sacrificed Isaac,
God knew the very heart of Abraham: and therefore this word Cognovi, I know, is
as much as Cognoscere feci, I have made or caused to know. And that the Spirit
to pray and entreat, is the same with that to make to pray and entreat; the
apostle teaches even there, Romans 8.15.
writing, that we have received the spirit of adoption, in whom we cry Abba
Father. Where it is manifest that it is we which cry, the Holy Ghost provoking
and forcing us thereunto.

8. Objection. The Spirit is sent from the Father and the Son.
Howbeit they go further, and frame this reason, Whosoever is sent, the same is
inferior and lesser than he of whom he is sent; and furthermore he is of a
comprehensible substance, because he passes by local motion from place to
place: but the Holy Spirit is sent of the Father and the Son, John 14, 15. and
16. It is poured forth and shed upon men. Acts 10. Ergo, the Holy Spirit is
lesser than the Father and the Son, and of a comprehensible nature, and
consequently not very God.

8. Answer. How the Spirit is sent.
Whereto I answer, first, that he which is sent is not always lesser than he
that sends: to prove which position any mean wit may infer many instances.
Furthermore, touching the sending of the Holy Spirit, we are here to imagine no
changing or shifting of place. For if the Spirit when he goes from the Father
and is sent, changes his place, then must the Father also be in a place, that
he may leave it and go to another. And as for the incomprehensible nature of
the Spirit, he cannot leaving his place pass unto another. Therefore the
sending of the Spirit is the eternal and unvariable will of God, to do
something by the Holy Spirit; and the revealing and executing of this will by
the operation and working of the Spirit. The Spirit was sent to the Apostles;
which Spirit was present with them, since it is present every where; but then
according to the will of God the Father he showed himself present and powerful.

Some man may say, If sending be a revealing and laying open of presence and
power, then may the Father be said to be sent, because he himself is also
revealed. I answer, that when the Spirit is said to be sent, not only the
revealing, but the order also of his revealing is declared; because the will of
the Father and of the Son, of whom he is sent, going before, not in time, but
in order of persons, the Spirit does reveal himself, the Father, and also the
Son. The Father reveals himself by others, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, so
that his will goes before. Therefore sending is the common work of all the
three persons; howbeit, for order of doing, it is distinguished by diverse
names. The Father will reveal himself unto men with the Son and the Spirit, and
be powerful in them, and therefo^^ is said to send. The Son does assent unto
the will of the Father, and will that (...) be done by themselves, which God
will to be done by them; these are said to be sent. And because the will of the
Son does go before the Spirit in order of persons, he is also said to send the
Spirit.

9. Objection. The Spirit speaks not of himself.
Yet for all this they allege, That if the Spirit had perfection, then would he
speak of himself, and not stand in need always of another admonishment: but
he speaks not of himself, but speaks what he hears, as Christ expressly
testifies, John 16. Ergo he is unperfect, and whatsoever he has, it is by
partaking, and consequently he is not God.

The 9. answer. Cyrill. lib. 13. the saur. cap. 3.
Whereto I answer, that this argument is stale: for it was objected by
Heretics long ago against them that held the true opinion, as Cyrill says;
who answers, that by the words of Christ is rather to be gathered, that the
Son and the Spirit are of the same substance. For, the Spirit is named the
mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2. and therefore he speaks not of his own proper
will, or against his will in whom and from whom he is; but has all his will
and working naturally proceeding from the substance as it were of him.

10. Objection.
Lastly they argue thus; Every thing is either unbegotten or unborn, or begotten
and created; the Spirit is not unbegotten, for then he were the Father; and so
there should be two without boginning; neither is he begotten, for then he is
begotter of the Father, and so there shall be two Sons, both Brothers; or he is
begotten of the Son, and then shall he be Gods Nephew, than the which what can
be imagined more absurd? Ergo, he is created.

Whereto I answer, that the division or distribution is unperfect; 10 Answer.
The Spirit proceeds.
for that member is omitted which is noted of the very best Divine that ever
was, even Jesus Christ our Savior; namely, to have proceeded, or proceeding:
That same Holy Spirit (says he) which proceeds from the Father. Joh. 15.26.
Which place Nazianzen does thus interpret. The Spirit, because he proceeds
from thence, is not a creature; and because he is not begotten, he is not the
Son; but because he is the mean of begotten and unbegotten, he shall be God,
etc.

And thus having avoided all these cavils of the Such were the Arrians,
Tritheits, Samosatenians, etc.
Pneumatomachi, a Sect of Heretics too too injurious to the Holy Spirit,
insomuch as they seek what they can, to rob and pull from him the right of his
divinity; I will all Christians to take heed of their pestilent opinions, the
poison whereof though to them that be resolved in the Truth it can do little
hurt, yet to such as stand upon a wavering point it can do no great good.
Having thus far waded against, and overthrown their opinons; I must needs
exhort all to whom the reading hereof shall come, that first they consider with
themselves what a reverend mystery all that hitherto has been said in this
chapter concerns; namely, The Spirit of Sanctification, and that they so
ponder places to and fro, as that they reserve unto the holy Spirit the
glorious title of Divinity, which by nature is to him appropriate; esteeming of
those Pneumatomachi or Theomachi, as of Swine, Sus magis in coelo gaudet quam
font sereno.
delighting more in the durty draffe of their devices than in the fair Fountain
water of Golds Word; yea, condemning them of grosser ignorance than the old
Philosophers, who though they favored little of heavenly Theology, yet some
illumination they had of the Holy and Divine Spirit; marry it was somewhat
misty, dark, lame, and limping; nevertheless, what it was, and how much or
little soever it was, they gave thereunto a due reverence, in that they
acknowledged and entitled it Animam Mundi, The soul or life of the World, and
(as Nazianzen witnesses) (...), The mind of the universal, and the outward
breath, or the breath that comes from without. The Heathenish Philosophers
acknowledged the Holy Spirit.

Cyril. lib. 1. contra Julianum.


Porphyrie expounding the opinion of Plato, who was not utterly blind in this
mystery, says, That the divine substance does proceed and extend to three
subsistencies and beings; and that God is chiefly and principally good, next
him the second Creator, and the third to be the soul of the world; for he
holds, that the divinity does exttend even to this foul. As for Hermes
Trismegistus, he says, That all things have need of this Spirit; for according
to his worthiness he supporteth all, he quickneth and sustaineth all, and he is
derived from the holy Fountain, giving breath and life unto all, and evermore
remains continual, plentiful, and unemptyed.

And here by the way I give you a note worth reading and considering; namely,
how all Nations in a manner, by a kind of heavenly influence, agree in writing
and speaking the Name of God with no more than four letters. As for example,
Marfilius Ficinus in arg. in Cratyl. Plat.
the Egyptians do call him Theut, the Persians call him Sire, the Jews express
his unspeakable name as well as they can by the word Adonai consisting of four
vowels; the Arabians call him Alla, the Mahometists call him Abdi, the Greeks
call him Theos, the Latins call him Deus, etc. This although it be not so
proper to our present purpose, (yet because we are in hand with the Holy
Spirits Deity) is not altogether impertinent. But why God would have his Name
as it were universally bounded within the number of four letters, I can give
sundry reasons, which requires too long a discourse of words by digression: and
therefore I will conceal them for this time. These opinions of Philosophers I
have willingly remembered, that it might appear, that the doctrine concerning
the Holy Spirit is very ancient; which they have taken either out of Moses
writings, or out of the works of the old Fathers, published in and set forth in
Books, though not wholly, fully, and perfectly understood and known; and also
that our Pneumatomachi may see themselves to be more doltish in divine matters
than the Heathen, who will not acknowledge that essential and working power of
the divinity whereby all things are quickened: which the Heathen did after a
sort see; after a sort (I say) because they separated the soul of the world
(which they also call the begotten mind) from the most sovereign and unbegotten
God, and imagined certain differences of degrees, and (as Cyrill says) did
Arrianize in the Trinity.

So then I conclude against these Pneumatomachi, that in so much as they
imitate the old Giants, Ovid. lib. Metamorph. 1. fab. 5. de gigantib. taelum
obfident.
who piling up Pelion upon Ossa, and them both upon Olympus, attempted by
scaling the Heavens to pull Jupiter out of his Throne of Estate, and to spoil
him of his principality, and were notwithstanding their strength whereby they
were able to carry huge Hills on their shoulders, overwhelmed with those
Mountains and squeized under the weight of them even to the death; so these
Pneumatomachi, being Enemies both to the Holy Spirit, and no friends to the
Holy Church (for then would they confess the Trinity in Unity, and the Unity in
Trinity) and consequently also the Deity of the Holy Spirit) deserve to be
consumed with the fire of his mouth, the heat whereof by no means can be
slacked, quenched, or avoided. For there is nothing more unnatural, nothing
more monstrous, then against the Person of the Deity (I mean the Spirit of
Sanctification) to oppose man's power, man's wit, man's policy, etc. which was
well signified by that Poetical fiction of the Giants, who were termed
Anguipedes, Snake-footed; which as Joachimus Camerarius expounds of wicked
Counselors, to whose filthy persuasions Tyrants do trust as unto their feet;
and James Sadolet interprets of Philosophers, who trusting overmuch unto
their own wits, become so bold in challenging praise for their wisdom, that in
fine all turns to folly and confusion; so I expound of Heretics and
Schismatics, who either by corrupt doctrine, or by maintaining precise
opinions, or by open violence, etc. assay to overthrow the true Religion, to
break the unity of the Church, to deny Caesar his homage, Jacob. Sadol. in lib.
de laud. philosoph. inscrip. Phedrus.
and God his duty, etc. and therefore let Jovis fulmem, wherewith they were
slain, assure these that there is Divina ultio due to all such, as dare in the
fickleness of their fancies arrear themselves against the Holy Spirit; of whom
since they are ashamed hereupon earth (otherwise they would confidently and
boldly confess him both with mouth and pen) he will be ashamed of them in
Heaven, where they are like to be so far from having any society with the
Saints, that their portion shall be even in full and shaken measure with
miscreants and Infidels. And therefore let us, if we will discern and try the
Spirits whether they be of God or no, seek for illumination of this inlightning
Spirit, which as it brings light with it to discover all Spirits, so it
gives such a fiery heat, as that no false spirit can abide by it for fear of
burning. Howbeit the Holy Spirit must be in us, otherwise this prerogative of
trying spirits will not fall to our lot.

Peter Mart. in loc. com. part. 2. cap. 18. sect, 33. page 6.28.
But here some will peradventure move a demand, and do ask, How the Holy Spirit
is in us, considering that Infiniti ad finitum nulla est proportio, neque loci
angustia quod immensum est potest circumscribi: of that which is infinite, to
that which is finite there is no proportion; neither can that which is
unmeasurable be limited or bounded within any precinct of place, etc.

Joh. 14.26.
I answer, That the most excellent Father for Christ's sake sends him unto us,
according as Christ promised us in the person of his Apostles; The Comforter
(says he) which is the Holy Spirit, whom my Father will send in my Name. And
as for proportion of that which is infinite to that which is finite, etc. I
will in no case have it thought, that the Holy Spirit is in us, as a body
placed in a place terminably; Joh. 16.14. and 14.16.
but to attribute thereunto, as duly belongs to the Deity, an ubiquity, or
universal presence; not coporally and palpably; but effectually, mightily,
mystically, divinely, etc. Yea, and this I may bodldly add, that Christ Jesus
sends him unto us from the Father: neither is he given us for any other end,
but to enrich us abundantly with all good gifts and excellent graces; and
(among the rest) with the discerning of Spirits aright, that we be not
deceived. And here an end of the first Book.

BOOK II.
CHAP. I.
Of Spirits in General; What they are and how to be considered: Also how far
the Power of Magitians and Witches is able to operate in Diabolical Magic.

1. BEcause the Author in his foregoing Treatise, The reason of this Addition.
upon the Nature of Spirits and Devils, has only touched the subject thereof
superficially, omitting the more material part; and with a brief and cursory
Tractar, has concluded to speak the least of this subject which indeed
requires most amply to be illustrared; therefore I thought fit to adjoyn this
subsequent discourse; as succedaneous to the foregoing, and conducing to the
completing of the whole work.

2. The Nature of Spirits is variously to be considered, The nature of Sprits.
according to the source to which each Caterva does belong: for as some are
altogether of a divine and celestial nature; not subject to the abominable
Enchantments and Conjurations of vicious mankind; so others are the grand
Instigators, stirring up man's heart to attempt the inquiry after the darkest,
and most mysterious part of Magic, or Witchcraft: neither is this their
suggestion without its secret end: that is, that by the private insinuation,
and as it were incorporating themselves into the affection, or desire of the
Witch, or Magician; they may totally convert him into their own nature:
reducing him at last by constant practice, to such obdurateness and hardness of
heart, that he becomes one with them, and delighted with their association,
being altogether dead to any motions in himself that may be called good.

3. And if we may credit example, which is the surest proof; The original of
evil essences.
the very imaginations, and affection of a Magician, does create an evil
Essence or Devil; which was not before in being: for, as the Astral Spirits are
believed by many to Germinate and procreate one another, so likewise are the
infernal Spirits capable of multiplication in their power and essence,
according to their Orders, Ranks and Thrones; by means of the strong
imagination in a Witch, or malevolous person, earnestly desiring their
assistance.

4. Not that the Spirits or Devils so begotten do any whit add or contribute to
the number in general; Their Germination.
for as they are capable of increasing into distinct and separated substances,
so are they likewise again contracted, and as it were annihilated; when the
force of that Imagination is gone, which was the cause of their production: The
nature of a spirit, whither heavenly or hellish, being to dilate, or contract
themselves into as narrow compass, as they please; so that in a moment they can
be as big in circumference as an hundred worlds, and on a sudden reduce
themselves to the compass of an atome.

5. Neither are they so much limited as Tradition would have them; Their
Habitation.
for they are not at all shut up in any separated place: but can remove
millions of miles in the twinkling of an eye, yet are they still where they
were at first: for, out of their own element, or quality, they can never come:
go whither they will, they are in darkness: and the cause is within them, not
without them: as one whose mind is troubled here in England, can remove his
Carcass from the place where it was before; but should he go to the utmost
bounds of the Earth, he cannot leave his perplexed and tormented mind behind
him.

Their shapes.
6. As for the shapes and various likenesses of Devils, It is generally
believed, that according to their various capacities in wickedness, so their
shapes are answerable after a Magical manner: resembling spiritually some
horrid and ugly monsters, as their conspiracies against the power of God, were
high and monstrous, when they fell from Heaven: for the condition of some of
them is nothing, but continual horror and despair; others triumph in fiery
might and pomp, attempting to pluck God from out of his Throne; but the quality
of Heaven is shut from them, that they can never find it, which does greatly
add to their torment and misery.

Their place of pleasure or torment.
7. But that they are materially vexed and scorched in flames of fire, is
inferior to any to give credit to, who is thoroughly verst in their nature and
existence: for their substance is spiritual; yea their power is greater, then
to be detained or tormented with any thing without them: doubtless their misery
is sufficiently great, but not through outward flames; for their Bodies are
able to pierce through Wood and Iron, Stone, and all Terrestrial things:
Neither is all the fire, or fuel of this World able to torment them; for in a
moment they can pierce it through and through. But the infinite source of their
misery is in themselves, and is continually before them, so that they can never
enjoy any rest, being absent from the presence of God: which torment is greater
to them, then all the tortures of this world combined together.

The cause of their torment.
8. The wicked souls that are departed this life, are also capable of appearing
again, and answering the Conjurations of Witches, and Magicians, for a time:
according to Nagar the Indian, and the Pythagoreans. And it cannot be easily
conceived, that their torment is much different stom the rest of the Devils:
for the Scripture says: every one is rewarded according to their works. And,
that which a man sows, that he shall reap. Now as the damned Spirits, when they
lived on earth, did heap up vanity, and load their souls with iniquity, as a
treasure to carry with them into that Kingdom, which sin does naturally lead
into: so when they are there, the same abominations which here they committed,
do they ruminate and feed upon; and the greater they have been, the greater is
the torment, that arises before them every moment.

How Magicians deal with them.
9. And although these Infernal Spirits, are open Enemies to the very means
which God has appointed for man's salvation; yet such is the degenerate and
corrupted mind of mankind, that there is in the same an itching after them for
converse and familiarity, to procure their assistance, in any thing that their
vain imagination suggesteth them with: to effect which, they inform themselves
in every Tradition of Conjuration and Exorcism; as also in the names, natures
and powers of Devils in general, and are ever restless, till their souls be
totally devoted to that accursed and detestable nature, which is at enmity with
God and goodness.

The Orders of heavenly Beings.
10. Now to proceed in the description of these Infernal Spirits and separated
Demons, or Astral Beings, as also of those in the Angelical Kingdom; they that
pertain to the Kingdom of Heaven, are either Angels which are divided into
their degrees and orders; or else the righteous souls departed, who are entered
into rest: And it cannot be, but that the life of Angels and Souls departed, is
the same in Heaven, as also the food that nourishes them, and the fruits that
spring before them: Nor is it possible for any, how expert so ever in Magical
Arts, to compel either of them, of what degree soever they be, to present
themselves, or appear before them: Although many have written large Discourses
and Forms of Convocation, to compel the Angels unto communication with them by
Magical Rites and Ceremonies.

That they are not subject to conjurations.
11. It may indeed be believed, that seeing there are infinite numbers of
Angels, they are also employed for the glory of God, and protection of mankind,
(but not subject to Conjurations.) And that they accompany many righteous men
Invisibly, and protect Cities and Countries from Plagues, War, and infestings
of wicked Spirits, against which Principalities and Powers of Darkness, it is
their place to contend and war, to the confusion of the Kingdom of Darkness.

12. But such Spirits as belong to this outward World, What Spirits may be
conjured.
and are of the Elemental quality, subject to a beginning and ending, and to
degrees of continuance; These may be solicited by Conjurations, and can also
inform Magicians in all the secrets of Nature; yet so darkly, (because they
want the outward organ); that it is hardly possible for any that has
fellowship with them, to learn any manual operation perfectly and distinctly
from them.

13. Many have insisted upon the Natures of these Astral Spirits: The nature of
the Astral Spirits.
some alleging, That they are part of the fallen Angels, and consequently
subject to the torments of Hell at the last Judgment: Others, That they are the
departed souls of men and women, confined to these outward Elements until the
Consummation: Lastly, others, As Del rio, Nagar the Indian Magician, and the
Platonists affirm, That their nature is middle between Heaven and Hell; and
that they reign in a third Kingdom from both, having no other judgment or doom
to expect for ever.

14. But to speak more nearly unto their natures, Their degrees.
they are of the source of the Stars, and have their degrees of continuance,
where of some live hundreds, some thousands of years: Their food is the Gas of
the Water, and the Blas of the Air: And in their Aspects, or countenances, they
differ as to vigor and cheerfulness: They occupy various places of this world;
as Woods, Mountains, Waters, Air, fiery Flames, Clouds, Stars, Mines, and hid
Treasures: as also ancient Buildings, and places of the slain. Some again are
familiar in Houses, and do frequently converse with, and appear unto mortals.

15. They are capable of hunger, grief, passion, and vexation: Their actions
and affections.
they have not any thing in them that should bring them unto God: being merely
composed of the most spiritual part of the Elements: And when they are worn
out, they return into their proper essence or primary quality again; as Ice
when it is resolved into Water: They meet in mighty Troops, and wage war one
with another: They do also procreate one another; and have power sometimes to
make great commotions in the Air, and in the Clouds, and also to cloth
themselves with visible bodies, out of the four Elements, appearing in
Companies upon Hills and Mountains, and do often deceive and delude the
observers of Apparitions, who take such for portents of great alterations,
which are nothing but the sports and pastime of these frolic Spirits: as
Armies in the Air, Troops marching on the Land, noises and slaughter, Tempest
and Lightning, etc.

16. These Astral Spirits are variously to be considered; The distinct orders
of starry Spirits.
some are beings separate and absolute, that are not constitute to any work or
service: Others are subservient to the Angels, that have dominion over the
Influences of the Stars: Others are the Astral Spirits of men departed, which
(if the party deceased was disturbed and troubled at his decease,) do for many
years, continue in the source of this world; amongst these airy Spirits, to the
great disquietness of the soul of the person, to whom they belong: Besides the
causes are various that such Spirits rest not; 1. When by Witchcraft they are
enchanted, and bound to wander so many years; as thrice or fourtimes seven,
before they can be resolved into nothing. 2. When the person has been
murdered; so that the Spirit can never be at rest, till the crime be
discovered. 3. When desires and lusts, after Wife, or Children, House, Lands,
or Money, is very strong at their departure; it is a certain truth, that this
same spirit belonging to the Stars will be hanckering after these things, and
drawn back by the strong desires and fixation of the Imagination, which is left
behind it: Nor can it ever be at rest, till the thing be accomplished, for
which it is disturbed. 4. When Treasure has been hid, or any secret thing has
been committed by the party; there is a magical cause of something attracting
the starry spirit back again, to the manifestation of that thing. Upon all
which, the following Chapters do insist more largely and particularly.

CHAP. II.
Of the Good and Evil Demons or Genii: Whither they are; what they are, and
how they are manifested; also of their names, powers, faculties, offices; how
thy are to be considered.

The office of Demons or Genii.
1. ACcording to the disposition of the mind, or soul, there is a good or evil
Demon that accompanies the party visibly, or invisibly; and these are of such
rancks and orders, and names, as the capacity of the persons soul is, to whom
they belong: Their Office is said to be, fore-warning the person of eminent
danger, sometimes by inward instinct, sometimes by dreams in the night, and
sometimes by appearing outwardly. The Demon or Genius changes its nature and
power, as the person changes his: and if from good, the party degenerate to
iniquity; then by degrees the good Angel leaves him, and an evil Demon does
naturally succeed: for each thing draws after that which is like it self.

Three ways of enjoying their society.

The first way.


2. Magicians mention three several ways of enjoying the society of the Bonus
Genius; first by intellectual association, when secret and mental instigations
do arise in their hearts, to do this or that, and to forbear the other: as in
the Manuscript of Nagar the Indian, his own testimony of himself is to this
effect: My blessed Guardian Damilkar, has now so sweetly communicated himself
unto me; That by all the manifestations, whereby a holy Demon can attend and
converse with mankind, he appears unto me: first in the intellectual way, he
is ever present, and every moment prompts me, what to act, what to forbear from
acting: Ah had he not rushed up through the powers of my soul, and suddenly
warned me in my Travel to Quiansi in China, through the airy Region, to turn
nimbly to the right hand, at an instant, a mighty Troop of Devils, whose Leader
was Grachnoek, coming through that tract of air, had crushed me into a thousand
pieces: This is the first degree of its appearing.

The second way.
3. Then he proceeds in the language of Sina, describing the second way of its
manifestation: And when the deepest sleep has over-poured we, I am never
without him; sometimes my Damilkar stands before me like a glorious Virgin,
administering to me a Cup of the drink of the Gods, which my Intellectual man
exhausteth: sometimes he brings caelestial Companies, and danceth round about
me; and when after the weariness of the Senses, through contemplation I fell
into gentle sleep on the holy Mountain of Convocation, which is called Adan, he
showed me the motion of the Heavens, the nature of all things, and the power of
every evil Demon.

The third way of their appearance.
4. Thirdly, he continues to describe the External appearance of the Genius, to
this effect: Damilkar appears before me at my desire; for my desires are as his
desires: When I slept a long space in my private dwelling, he appeared
outwardly, and watering me with the dew of the fourth Heaven, I awakned, when
he had thrice said Nankin Nagar; so the time being come, we mounted through the
Air, unto the holy Mountain of Convocation.

Their number.
5. In this Example the three degrees of the Apparition of the Bonus Genius, or
Good Demon are excellently deciphered, which is also the same in the
appearance of the bad Genius: and according to the deepest Magicians, there be
seven good Angels, who do most frequently become particular Guardians, of all
others, each to their respective capacities; and also seven evil Demons, that
are most frequent in association with depraved persons, as Guardians to them.

6. These are the seven good Angels, or Demons. The seven good Angels.


Iubanladace a mighty Prince in the Dominion of Thrones, he comes unto such as
follow national affairs, and are carried forth unto war and conquest; he
bears always a flaming Sword, and is girded about, having a helmet upon his
head, and appearing still before the party in the Air: he must be solicited
and invocated with Chastity, Vows, Fumes, and Prayers: and this his is
Character to be worn as a Lamin.

^

Yah-li-Yah one of the Powers, accompanying such as are Virgins, and devoted to
Religion, and a Hetmits life: he teaches all the names and powers of Angels,
and gives holy Charms against the assaults of Evil Demons: he must be addressed
unto by Prayer, resignation, and fasting, with a celestial Song out of the
Canto's of Nagar: this is his Character.

^

Nal-gah appearing to those that are devoted to the knowledge of Magic;
teaching them how to exercise Infernal Witchcraft without danger, and in
despite to the Devils: he must be sought by hours, minutes, constellations,
privacy and blood, etc. He has a bow bent in his hand, and a Crown of Gold
upon his head: this is his Character.

^

Maynom, one of the Powers who has the ability of subservient administration;
that is, at one time to be present with many; he resembles a Ew with Lamb,
typifying his nature in that appearance.

Gaonim an Angel, causing his Pupil to go invisible, and transporting him at
his pleasure in a moment, to the outmost parts of the earth.

Halanu the Instructor in Manual operations, by whom Bezaliah, and Aholibah
were divinely inspired for the structure of the Tabernacle.

Rama-umi who is the Instructor in Cabalistical Magic, and reveals the secrets
of numbers, the names of Angels, and the virtue of Boim.

7. These are the seven bad Angels or Demons.

As the power and capacity of the good, proceeds from the strength of God, The
nature of both.
in the quality of heaven; so is the force of the evil Genii, in the hellish
quality correspondent: for it is to be noted, that these evil Angels did before
their fall, enjoy the same places and degrees that now the good or holy Angels
do: so that as their power is to instruct men in Government, Abstinence,
Philosophy, Magic, and Mechanic Arts, for a good intent, and for the glory of
God: The power of the evil ones is the very same to inform and instigate unto
the same seize, as far as they may be instrumental for the Devil, or the
Kingdom of Darkness therein.

8. Their names are 1. Panalcarp, like a Crocodile with two heads. The seven
evil Genii, and the manner of their appearances.
2. Baratron appearing like a Conjurer in a Priestly habit. 3 Sondennah like a
Hunts-man. 4. Greizmodal accompanying his Pupil like a Spaniel-Dog. 5.
Ballisargon the grand Inticer to theeving and robbery, till he has brought his
followers to destruction. 6. Morborgran who can put on various likenesses,
especially appearing as a Serving-man. 7. Barman who most commonly possesses
the soul of those that are joined unto him.

9. These are the names of the 7 good and evil Demons; according to the
ancient writing, on the Magical Art: who do also to many particular Cities and
Countries, ascribe certain good and evil Angels; the one whereof protects and
defends, An example.
the other inflicts Pestilence and Famine upon them: Like unto which is the
story recorded by Sigbertus in Chronicis: That in the 11th year of the reign of
Constans, a good Angel and a bad were seen by the whole City of Constantinople,
nightly to fly about the City; and as often as by the command of the good
Angel, the other smote any house with a dart in his hand, such was the number
that dyed in that house, according to the strokes given.

The uncertainty of communicating with Angels.
10. And indeed it is to be feared, that whosoever have ever pretended, or do at
present allege, that they enjoy familiarity with a familiar Spirit; I say its
greatly to be suspected, that all such familiars belong to the Kingdom of
Darkness; for such are too too officious, and ready to attend the depraved
desires of mortal men; whereas if communication with Angels, or good and holy
Guardians be at all attainable, yet such is the difficulty of the attainment,
that the examples thereof, if true, are exceeding rare: But in general, the
writings of Magicians and Naturallists do plentifully abound with examples of
this nature; whether good or evil, is yet to be determined. I have been told of
a certain Countryman, in these days, who was continually pestered with the
company of a woman, discerned by none but by himself: If he was upon
Horseback, she would be behind him: if at dinner, she sat at his elbow; if
lying on his bed, there she was also present; And if at any time he had taken a
journey, or gone about some unprofitable business, at such a time she
accompanied him not; and seldom escaped he some mischief when she was absent:
But at last, for all her dutiful pretenses, as she accompanied him, riding
through a deep and swift running River, she tumbled him into the deepest part,
and lay upon him till she had strangled or drowned him.

Familiars in the time of the Jews.
11. Amongst the Jews this kind of Idolatry was frequent, to consult with and
associate themselves unto familiar Spirits, whom they compelled to do them
domestic service, dressing their Camels, lifting their burdens, and doing
their messages: for the attaining their service they had many blasphemous
Forms, and superstitious Ceremonies and Sacrifices; making the holy Names of
God subservient to their accursed practices: one whose name was Baal-Ben-ammim,
was adjudged by the Law of Moses to be burnt for the like practices; being
condemned in the time of one Judah a high Priest in the Captivity for killing
an Infant, and with its blood performing Sacrifice to Baalzebub, with various
ceremonies intermixed; by which means his God had bequeathed unto him a certain
Lacky from the Infernal Troop to attend and serve him for his whole life time:
this is to be found in Zoar's Coment upon Berosus, and Belus, who affirms, That
at his trial he endeavored to prove, that the same was the good Angel or
Genius given unto him by the mercy of God.

Several men have wrote and methodized the Art of Conjuration.
12. Both the Hebrew Cabalists and Heathen Magicians, as also those addicted to
Magic in Christianity, have all of them laid down certain forms of attaining
the company of a good, or evil Angel, by number and astrological Observations,
fitted to the rules of Conjuration and Invocations: And many of the
superstitious Rabbi's have affirmed, That they were able by such practices, to
cause the ghost of Adam, Eve, or any of the holy Patriarchs to appear unto
them: which was surely the delusion of Satan to harden their hearts. But in the
Addition to the 15th Book of the Discovery, this Subject is more practically
handled; where many forms of obtaining the Society of the Bonus, or Malus
Genius, are plainly decyphered: so far as with safety and convenience they
could be described.

Chap. III.
Of the Astral Spirits of men departed: What they are: And why they appear
again: And what Witchcraft may be wrought by them.

1. AS the Astral Spirits separate, which belong not to any deceased person, do
for many years survive, or continue; The spirits of men return again.
so if the party deceased has departed in discontent, and melancholy, it is
often known that they return again, and causing terror to families and houses,
do wait for opportunity to disburthen themselves, that at length they may come
into their desired rest.

2. The opinion of many is, That the Devil in their likeness is all that
appears: All men have starry Spirits.
But the more Learned have sufficiently demonstrated, through Example, and
Experience; That the apparition is really proper to the person deceased. Nor
can it easily be denyd, That to every man, and woman, while they live the
natural Life, there belongs a Syderial, or starry Spirit; which takes its
original wholly from the Elemental property: And according to the weaker, or
stronger capacity of the party, it has the longer, or shorter continuance,
after the bodies decease.

3. Such persons as are secretly murdered, What sort of persons most
frequently reappear.
and such as secretly murder themselves, do most frequently appear again, and
wander hear the place where their Carcass is, till the radical moisture be
totally consumed: according to the opinion of Paracelsus, after the consumption
whereof, they can re-appear no longer, but are resolved into their first being,
or Astrum, after a certain term of months, or years, according to the vigor,
or force of that first attraction which was the only cause of their returning.

4. The manner and seasons of their appearing are various: The manner and time
of their appearance.
Sometimes before the person, unto whom they do belong, depart this life, they
do by external presentations forewarn him, near the time, that the day of death
approaches. As it is reported of Codrus Laaenus, to whom an empty, meager
Ghost appeared at midnight, signifying unto him, how sad and lachrymable a
Tragedy was shortly to attend him; and also adding, that he would visit him in
the Execution thereof: which proved not contrary to the words of the
apparition; for at the very instant, when his Treacherous Wife had stabbed him
at the heart, on a sudden he beheld the same, with preparations for his
interment, whilst he yet survived, after the fatal wound was given.

5. Sometimes the starry spirit of a person appears to his beloved Companion,
The reason thereof.
many hundred of miles asunder, who was ignorant of the death of the party: And
it has often been heard, that when none of the kindred or family of the said
party deceased, have ever been disturbed by it, or in the least been sensible
of its appearing; yet to some of its most intimate acquaintance, it discovers
it self, and importunes them to perform some ceremony, or other, that it may be
returned into rest; or else discovers some treasure, which was hid by the party
whilst alive, or else some murder which it had committed: But the most
frequent cause of their returning, is when the party has himself been
privately murdered.

6. For such is the poisonous malice, and bloody spirit of the murderers, The
power of Magitians over them.
that it suffices them not to have privately bereaved them of their Lives; but
also by certain earnest Wishes, Curses, and Conjurations, they do afterward
adjure them, that for such a term of years, they shall never have power to
appear again: Which wishes, being earnestly given forth, from the hellish root
in the murderer, do exceedingly torment the murdered parties spirit, taking
deep impression thereon; so that it is always in continual sorrow, and
anguish, till the term of years be expired, and till the murder be made
manifest to the world: after which discovery, it returns to perfect rest; This
is well known to those that are exercised in Witchcraft, and cruel Murders,
though not common to those that murder but once.

7. There be many Ancient families in Europe, to whom the Ghost of their first
Progenitor, or Ancestor appears immediately before the departure of some Heir,
or chief in the same family: which assertion is confirmed by Cardan, Example.
in an Example of an Ancient family, in the Dukedom of Parma, called the
Tortells, to whom there belongs an ancient Castle, with a spacious Hall; near
the Chimney of the said Hall an old decrepit Woman, for these hundreds of
years, is wonted to appear, when any of the Family is about to dye: And it is
reported amongst them that the same is the Ghost of one belonging to the same
name, and family, who for her Riches, was murdered by some of her Nephews, and
thrown into a pit.

The cause the difficulty and paucity of appearances.
8. Many such apparitions do for many years continue to be seen in one
particular place; ever watching for opportunity, to discover some murder, or
Treasure hid: And the cause of the difficulty of the said discovery, consists
in the nature of their substance; for could they make use of the organ of the
Tongue, they might quickly discover it: or if they had the outward benefit of
Hands, they might produce the said Treasure, or Carcass murdered, but this
they are seldom able to accomplish; being destitute of the outward Organs, and
mediation of Hands to hold withal, or Tongue to vent their grievances: And
that this is true, the manner of their appearance does confirm it: For all that
they are able to effect, if they have been murdered, is commonly to appear
near the very place, where their body lies, and to seem as if they sunk down,
or vanished in the same; or else to appear in the posture of a murdered
person, with mangled, and bloody wounds, and hair disheveled: But it is rarely
known, that any such apparitions have plainly spoken, or uttered by words, the
time of their murder, with the cause, the persons name, or place; unless the
murder, by circumstances has been more then ordinary, horrid, and execrable:
then the remembrance of the same does sometimes enable the apparition to frame
a voice, by the assistance of the Air, and discover the fact.

More particularly of the same.
9. But to speak in general concerning apparitions, why they are so seldom
seen; and why such spirits as appear, can not without man's assistance
accomplish their design; It may easily be apprehended, that all Spirits, or
spiritual Substances, and Devils, have their life, breath, and motion in
another source, or Element then this external world; And as any creature, whom
the Element of Water has nourished, and bred, can live but short while upon
the Land; So its with them, when they come out of their proper habitations:
which is the cause of the rarity of apparition; it being as difficult for any
spirit to manifest it self in this outward principle, of the four Elements, as
for a man to continue with his head under water: yea it is rather pain, then
pleasure for any spirit, whether good, or bad, to come into this outward world.

The nefarious practices of Necromancers in an example.
10. Great is the villainy of Necromancers, and wicked Magicians, in dealing with
the spirits of men departed; whom they invocate, with certain forms, and
conjurations, digging up their Carcasses again, or by the help of Sacrifices,
and Oblations to the infernal Gods; compelling the Ghost to present it self
before them: how this was performed in ancient times, by Hags, and Witches, is
notably described in the Ethiopian History of Heliodorus, in the practice of
an ancient woman, who coming into the Camp, in the dead of night; where amongst
many slaughtered bodies, the body of her Son was also slain; whose carkase she
laid before her, digging a hole, and making a fire on each side, with the body
in the midst; Then taking an earthen pot from a three footed stool, she poured
honey out of it, into the pit; then out of another pot, she poured milk; and
likewise out of the third: Lastly, she cast a Lump of hardened dough, in the
form of a man into the pit; the Image was Crowned with Laurel: then she threw
in some of the shrub called Bdellium: This done, with a sword she ran
frantickly up and down, cutting her self; and with a Laurel branch sprinkled
of her blood into the fire: at length whispering at her Sons ear, she caused
him to arise, and questioning him of the fortune of his Brother, what was
become of him, he answered dubiously speaking prosperity to two persons that
secretly beheld her, and telling her, That sudden death for her impiety
attended her, which came to pass ere she left the place; after all these
predictions, the Carcass ceased to answer any more: and tumbled grovelling on
the ground again.

11. And although by most men, Example.
as also by the Author in his foregoing Discovery, it is constantly believed,
that the Witch of Endor raised not Samuel, nor the Ghost of Samuel, as not
believing that there is an Astral Spirit or Ghost belonging unto every Man; yet
it is very probable, that by her conjurations she caused his Sydereal Spirit to
appear: which is possible to be effected: and has been often done: as Weaver
in his Funeral Monuments records of Edward Kelly, who in the Park of Walton
Ledale, in the County Lancaster, with one Paul Waring, Invocated a Devil, and
afterward dug up the Corpse of a poor man, that had been buried that very
day, in a place near the same, called Law Churchyard: whom he compelled by
Incantations, and Conjurations to speak, and utter prophetical words,
concerning the master of one of his Assistants.

12. According to the state and condition wherein a person dies, The state of
the Starry Spirit.
so is it with their Astral Spirit: for if they died in perfect peace, and had
come through the valley of true Repentance; being dead to this Life before it
left them; then their starry Spirit does enter into rest, in its proper source,
or quality at the instant of their Decease: nor is it possible for all the
Conjurations in Hell, to cause them to return, or appear again.

13. But some might object, That Samuel was an Holy Prophet, Why the Ghost of
Samuel appeared.
and attaind unto a perfect Life; which is thus to be answered, that before
Christ came into the world, none of the most Holy Prophets of God, did ever
attain to that degree of blessedness, that the Christians after Christ
possessed: for in the time of the Law, a covering, or vail was spread over the
faces of all people: and something there was that let, or hindered their
souls from any plain and perfect vision, and fruition of God; otherwise then
through types, and shaddows, which partition wall, the end of Christ's
Incarnation was to break down.

14. In the writings of Plato, The opinions of Plato.
there be many strange Relations of the apparitions of Souls, of their
torments, and purgations, of the cause of their returning, what their nature
is, what their substance and property is, and what their food, and nourishment
is: but he mistakes the Soul for the Astral Spirit: for the Soul in its
returning and apparition is far different; if a Holy Soul appear, it is to
persons like it self, and that in sleep, warning them of dangers, and
discovering heavenly secrets unto them: And if a Damned Soul appear, it is
likewise to such as are of a nature like it self: whom it instigates, asleep,
teaching them notorious Villainies in Dreams; and provoking them to every wicked
cogitation.

15. The sect of Pythagoras have strange and antic opinions, Of Phythagoras.
concerning Souls, and Ghosts, or starry Spirits: whom they allege to be
frequently converted into Gods, or Demons, or Demigods, and Heroes: (as the
Platonicks do,) And that there is a continual traduction, and transmigration of
Souls, from one to another, till they attain to be deify'd at last; and then
that they do frequently appear, to those that be like themselves; instructing,
and forewarning them: It was also the belief of many wise, and ancient
Philosophers, that the Oracles were from such Demons, as had been the Ghosts,
or Souls of wise and excellent men: as Apollo's Oracle, and the Oracle of
Pallas, or Minerva: which opinions have much of reason and probability.

16. It is also the opinion of some, Of other Philosophers.
that the particular Spirits of famous men do after the death of the body, take
up some particular habitations, near such places Cities, Towns, or Countries,
as they most do affect, as Tutelaries, and Guardians unto them; Which is
reported by Vopiscus, of Apollonius Thyaneus; That when his City Thyana was
taken by Aurelianus the Emperor: and when he was in his Tent, pondering
furiously how to destroy the same; the Ghost of Apollonius appeared unto him
saying, Aurelianus, if thou desire to be a Conqueror, suppose not to slay
these my Citezens: Aurelianus, if thou will be a Ruler, shed no innocent blood;
Aurelianus, be meek, and gentle, if thou would be a Conqueror.

The Raptures of Lunaticks.
17. I have heard many wonderful Relations from Lunaticks or such as are almost
natural fools, who have asserted, That being for many days together conversant
amongst Faeries in Woods, Mountains, and Caverns of the Earth, they have
feasted with them, and been magnificently Entertaind with variety of dainties,
where they have seen several of their Neighbors or Familiar Acquaintance in
the habit they were wont to wear, notwithstanding they were know to have been
dead some years before.

Their Entertainments.
18. And many Learned Authors have also insisted upon this particular, alleging
That when such as the Faeryes have brought into their Society do feast and
junket with them, though they have a real and perfect knowledge of their
neighbors and acquaintance amongst the rest, yet their Language they are not
able to understand, neither do these Acqaaintance of theirs acknowledge or take
notice of them at all, but do either sit (both they and all the rest) in a
profound and tedious silence, or else discourse in a most stupendous kind of
Gibberish, not intelligible to strangers.

A strange example.
19. But more particularly to illustrate this conjecture, I could name the
person who has lately appeared thrice since his Decease, at least some Ghostly
being or other, that calls it self by the name of such a person who was dead
above an hundred years ago, and in his life time accounted as a Prophet or
Praedicter by the assistance of Sublunary Spirits. And now at his appearance
did also give out strange Praedictions concerning Famine, and Plenty, Wars,
and Bloodshed, and the end of this world.

20. By the affirmation of the person that had Communication with him, the last
of his Appearances was on this following manner; I had been, said he, to sell a
Horse at the next Market Town, but not attaining my price, as I returned home
by the way I met this man aforesaid who began to be familiar with me, asking
what news, and how affairs moved throughout the Country; I answered as I
thought fit; withal I told him of my Horse whom he began to cheapen, and
proceeded with me so far, that the price was agreed upon; so he turned back
with me and told me, that if I would go along with him, I should receive my
Money; on our way we went, I upon my Horse, and he on another milk white beast;
after much discourse I asked him where he dwelt, and what his name was; he told
me, That his dwelling was about a mile off, at a place called Farran; of which
place I had never heard though I knew all the Country round about; he also told
me, That he himself was that person of the Family of Learmonts so much spoken
off for a Prophet; At which I began to be somewhat fearful, perceiving us in a
road which I had never been in before, which increased my fear and admiration
more. Well on we went till he brought me under ground I know not how into the
presence of a beautiful woman that paid me the moneys without a word speaking;
he conducted me out again through a large and long entry, where I saw above 600
men in Armor laid prostrate on the ground as if asleep; at last I found my
self in the open field by the help of Moonlight in that very place where first
I met him, and made shift to get home by three in the morning, but the money I
received was just double of what I esteemed it, and what the woman paid me, of
which at this instant I have several pieces to show consisting of nine pences,
thirteen pence halfpennies, etc.

Apparitions before Christianity, were frequent.
21. The variety of Examples throughout the writings of Learned men may serve as
strong inducements to confirm this particular of Astral Spirits, or Ghosts
that belong unto Mortal men, returning after death until the cause of their
returning be taken away. In Ancient times before the name of Christianity,
there was nothing more frequent then millions of Apparitions in fields where
battails had been fought, seeming to fight as they had done at first, which the
Ancient Heathens believed to proceed from the want of Burying. And from this
arose the Poetical Romance of the wandering of Ghosts besides the River Styx for
an hundred years. And the custom of Solemn Interment amongst them.

Why Funeral Piles were instituted.
22. But with more probability, The Custom of the Funeral Piles used by the
Romans, and the Urns to reduce their Corpses into Ashes, was instituted at
first to prevent the torment of the Deceased, least his Ghost should wander, or
return, which doubtless from a natural cause may have the same effect, that
the reducing of the carcass into Ashes suddenly after its decease may prevent
the return of the Astral Spirit; for if it be true what is affirmed by
Paracelsus, that the starry Spirit can continue no longer then the radical
moisture in the body; it will naturally follow that its appearance is at an end
when the body is burnt, seeing that the moisture is totally exterminate and
consumed thereby. And in some sense the Ceremony may be said to be Laudable and
Judicious, having so beneficial a consequence.

23. As there is some semblance of a natural cause in the custom of the
Ancient urns, What the want of Burial causes.
so likewise may the Interment of slaughtered bodies by the like cause prevent
the like Appearances; for many are the examples that I have read of such as
appeared to their surviving kindred and acquaintance, after they had been
slaughtered in the Wars, beseeching them to perform unto their bodies the
Sacred Funeral Rites that their Ghosts might return into Rest, for which many
have consulted with the Oracles to be informed whether the deceased deserved
Burial, because they held it unlawful to bury Murderers, Inecestuous and
Sacriligious, persons, which Nature her self does also seem to hold if this
following Relation be not false: which was, That some Learned men returning
from Persia where they had been to see the King Cosroes, by the way interred a
dead Carcass which they found unburied: And in the following night the Ghost of
an Ancient Matron, as if it had been the Spirit of the World or Madam Nature
her self, appeard unto them, saying, Why Interr ye that nefarious Carcass? let
the Dogs devour it; The Earth who is the Mother of us all admitts not of that
man that depraves his Mother: So returning they found the Carcass yet unburied.

24. To confirm the verity of Astral Spirits proper, and their returning, The
conclusion of this Chapter with an example.
I shall conclude this Chapter with the Example of the famous Aristeus the Poet
who in the Isle Marmora dyed suddenly, at which instant a certain Philosopher
of Athens arriving there, affirmed, That he had lately been in Company and
discourst with him. In the mean time going to Bury him they found him yet
alive, but never after that had he any constant residence amongst Mortals.
Seven years after that he was seen at Proconnesus his native Town, and remaind
a while composing several Poems and Verses called Arimaspei, and then vanished.
In Metapontis he was seen 300 years after that, charging that Apollo's Altar
should be erected by the name of Aristeus Praconnesius. The like stories are
reported of Apollonius, and Pythagoras, whom their followers would have to be
Ubiquitaryes, affirming, That at one instant of time they were seen in several
places thousands of miles in distance. And though in Iamblichus who has wrote
the Life of Pythagoras, in Philostratus that wrote the Life of Apollonius
Tyanus, there be many fabulous things reported as to the Astral Spirits
separation, and return unto the body; Yet I have sufficiently here endeavored
to separate the true from the more Poetical part in this particular Subject of
the starry Spirits belonging to every individual man and woman, and their
returning after the body falls away.

CHAP. IV.
Of Astral Spirits or separate Demons in all their distinctions, names, and
natures, and places of Habitation, and what may be wrought by their Assistance.

1. HAving in the foregoing Chapter sufficiently illustrated the nature of the
Astral Spirits proper, that belong to every individual; Astral Spirits common.
The subject of this present Chapter shall be to Astral Spirits separate; which
are not constitute to any peculiar work or service, but do only, according to
their nature and temper, haunt such places in the sublunary world as are most
correspendent to their natures, and existence.

The Spirits of the Planets.
2. According to the Judgment of Magicians, the Seven Planets have seven starry
Spirits peculiar to themselves, whose natures are answerable to that peculiar
Planet under which they are constitute. And they are said to be substitute
under the seven Caelestial Angels that govern the influences of the superior
Spheres, being equal in their name and continuance with that planet whose
Spirit they are, that is, till the Consummation of all things visible.

The Power of the Planets.
3. And in that hour, month, day or year, wherein their Planet has the most
dominion, then is their efficacy most prevalent, and their operation the most
powerful upon inferior bodies, whether to the destruction or prosperity of
that animal vegitative or mineral subject to their Influences, according to the
dignification of the Planet at that instant Dominion; for if ill affected,
their nature is to blast with Mildew, Lightning, and Thunder any Vegetative
proper to their Planet; To deprive any Animal of sight or the motion of the
nerves under their Dominion; And lastly, bring Plagues, Pestilence, and Famine,
Storms, and Tempests, or on the Contrary to bring sweet and excellent
Influences upon Animals, or Vegetatives under their Planetary Regiment, if well
and honorably dignified.

Spirits the Air.
4. Innumerable are the Spirits that inhabit the Aerie Region, germinating
amongst themselves as Magicians affirm, and begetting one another after a
Mystical manner. It is their property to be instant in storms and boistrous
weather, which is said to be joy and delight unto them; And in such a season
they may with most facility be called upon, and make their appearance, which
they do accordingly to their age, and youthfulness, seeming young or old at
their appearance answerable to their years. Besides they march in mighty Troops
through the Aerie Region, waging war amongst themselves, and destroying one
another beings or Existences, after which they are reduced to the primary
source or nature of the Stars. This is likewise to be observed that according
to the Language, Vigor, Life, and Habit of that Region wherein they live, such
is their Habit, Language, and Ability, one Caterva or Company being ignorant of
their Neighbors, or Enemies Language, so that they have need of the Assistance
of such Spirits as dwell in omnibus Elementis, to be their Interpreters.

Their Actions.
5. And doubtless from hence arise the various deceptions thut men are incident
unto in their judgments of Apparitions, persuading themselves that they are
portents and foretokens of War and Famine, when such numerous Spirits are
beheld Fighting or Marching either in the Air, Earth, or Water: whereas it is
nothing else but the bare effect of the Natures and Tempers of such Aerial
beings to fight and randevouse immediately after sunset, or else later in the
Summer evenings, which is their principal time of such Conventions. And though
it must be confessed that such Spirits may be, and are the Devils Instruments as
appertaining to the Kingdom whereof he is Ruler; Yet considered in themselves,
their Nature is wholly harmless, as to ought that may be called innate Evil,
having nothing in them that is eternal as the Soul of Man: and consequently
nothing in them that is able to make them capable of enjoying Heaven, or
enduring the torments of Hell.

Spirits appropriate to the Spheres.
6. And it is believed by some, that according to the motion of the spheres,
there are certain companies of Aerial Spirits good and bad that follow them in
their motions round the earth, the good distilling influences that are good,
and the bad, such influences as are destructive to every thing that is under
their Dominion. It is also believed that by the assistance of Devils, and
damned Spirits, such Aerial Spirits are given for Familiars to some Magicians
add Witches with whom they are said to have actual copulation, and the
enjoyment of every dainty meat through their assistance, being able thereby to
go invisible, to fly through the air, and steal Treasures and Jewels from the
Coffers of Princes, as also carouse in Wine-sellers, and Pantries of those that
are most amply provided with the choicest Daynties.

Terrestrial Spirits.
7. Subordinate unto these of the Air, are the Terrestrial Spirits, which are of
several degrees according to the places which they occupy, as Woods, Mountains,
Caves, Fens, Mines, Ruins, Desolate places, and Ancient Buildings, called by the
Ancient Heathens after various names, as Nymphs, Satyrs, Lamii, Dryades,
Sylvanes, Cobali, etc. And more particularly the Faeries, who do principally
inhabit the Mountains, and Caverns of the Earth, whose nature is to make
strange Apparitions on the Earth in Meddows, or on Mountains being like Men,
and Women, Soldiers, Kings, and Ladies Children, and Horsemen clothed in
green, to which purpose they do in the night steal hempen stalks from the
fields where they grow, to Convert them into Horses as the Story goes. Besides,
it is credibly affirmed and believed by many, That such as are real Changlings,
or Lunaticks, have been brought by such Spirits and Hobgoblins, the true Child
being taken away by them in the place whereof such are left, being commonly
half out of their wits, and given to many Antic practices, and extravagant
fancies, which passions do indeed proceed from the powerful influence of the
Planet in their nativity, and not from such foolish conjectures.

8. Such jocund and facetious Spirits are said to sport themselves in the night
by tumbling and fooling with Servants aad Shepherds in Country houses, Faeries.
pinching them black and blew, and leaving Bread, Butter, and Cheese sometimes
with them, which if they refuse to eat, some mischief shall undoubtedly befall
them by the means of these Faeries. And many such have been taken away by the
said Spirits, for a fortnight, or a month together, being carried with them in
Chariots through the Air, over Hills, and Dales, Rocks and Precipices, till at
last they have been found lying in some Meddow or Mountain bereaved of their
senses, and commonly of one of their Members to boot.

9. Certainly the Lares and Penates, Lares, and Domestic Spirits.
or household Gods of the ancient Heathens were no other then such like Spirits
who for several years would keep their residence in one house till upon some
displeasure offered, or offenses done by any of the said Family, they departed
and were never afterward heard of. There are plenty of such examples to be
found in Olaus magnus, and Hector Boethus in his History of Scotland, relating
wonderful passages of Robin-good fellows, and such as have been familiar
amongst mankind.

10. Luridan a familiar of this kind did for many years inhabit the Island
Pomonia, the largest of the Orcades in Scotland, Luridan a famaliar Spirit.
suplying the place of Manservant and Maidservant with wonderful diligence to
these Families whom he did haunt, sweeping their rooms, and washing their
dashes and making their fires before any were up in the morning. This Luridan
affirmed, That he was the genius Astral, of that Island that his place or
residence in the days of Solomon and David was at Jerusalem; That then he was
called, by the Jews Belelah, and after that he remaind Long in the Dominion of
Wales, instructing their Bards in British Poesy and Prophesies being called
Vrthin, Wadd, Elgin: And now said he, I have removed hither, and alas my
continuance is but short, for in 70 years I must resign my place to Balkin
Lord of the Northern mountains.

11. Many wonderful and incredible things did he also relate of this Balkin,
Balkin a Familiar.
whom he called the Lord of the Northern Mountains, affirming that he was
shaped like a Satyr and fed upon the Air, having Wife and Children to the
number of 12 thousand which were the brood of the Northern Faeries inhabiting
Southerland and Catenes with the adjacent Islands; And that these were the
Companies of Spirits that hold continual wars with the Fiery Spirits in the
Mountain Heckla that vomits fire in Islandia. That their speech was ancient
Irish, and their dwelling the Caverns of the Rocks, and Mountains, which
relation is recorded in the Antiquities of Pomonia.

12. I have read another wonderful relation in a book de Annulis Antiquorum, A
strange example.
Concerning a young man from whom the power of Venus was taken away so that he
could not Company with his new married Wife. The Story is briefly thus; Being
busy at play or exercise with some of his Companions on his marriage day, he
put his weddng Ring on the finger of the Statue of Venus that stood besides the
place least it should be lost; when he had done, returning to take his Ring,
the finger was bended inward, so that he could by no means pluck off the Ring
to his great amazement, at which instant he forsook the place, and in the
night the Image of Venus appeared unto him, saying, Thou have espoused me, and
shall not meddle with any other: in the morning returning, the Ring was gone,
and the finger made straight again, which troubled him mightily, so that he
consulted with a Magician, who wrote a Letter to some Principal Spirit in that
Dominion to which Venus belonged, bidding the party stand watching at such a
place at such an hour till he saw many troops of Spirits pass by him, and
describing one in a Chariot, of stern and terrible Countenance, to whom he bad
him deliver the Letter; All which he performed, and after the person in the
Chariot had read the contents thereof, he broke out into this expression, great
God, how long shall we be subject to the insolences of this accursed Rascal,
naming the Magitian: But withal calling to a most beauteous Woman from amongst
the Company, he charged her to deliver back the Ring which at length she did
with much aversness, and after that he injoyd his Marriage rites without
impediment.

Spirits of Woods, and Mountains.
13. Besides the innumerable Troops of Terrestrial Spirits called Faeryes there
are also Nymphs of the Woods, Mountains, Groves, and Fountains, as Eagle,
Arethusa, Io, Menippa, Irene, etc. who are said to be altogether of the
faeminine kind, sporting and dancing, and feasting amongst the trees in Woods,
and bathing in clean and limpid Fountains; such have been seen by many, and are
often alluded to, by the Roman and Greek Poets. There is also a relation of a
German Prince, who being exceeding thirsty and weary with hunting and hawking,
lost his Company in the Woods, on a sudden beheld an opening at a little
hillock amongst the trees, and a most beautiful Maiden offering a Golden Morn
full of Liquor, which he received and drunk, and after rid quite away with the
said Horn, not regarding the Virgins tears, who lamented after him; it is said
that having spilt some of the said Liquor, it fetched the hair from off his
Horses skin, and the horn is yet to be seen in Germany, which I have been told
by one that has seen and handled it, affirming, That the Gold for purity
cannot ba paralleled.

Incubi, and Succubi.
14. Another sort are the Incubi, and Succubi, of whom it is reported, that the
Hanns have the original, being begotten betwixt these Incubi, and certain
Magical women whom Philimer the King of the Goths banished into the deserts,
whence arose that savage and untamed Nation, whose speech seemed rather the
mute attempts of brute Beasts, then any articulate sound and well distinguished
words. To these Incubi are attributed the diseases of the blood called the
Night-hag, which certainly have a natural cause, although at the instant of
time when the party is oppressed, it is probable that certain malevolent
Spirits may mix themselves therein and terrify the soul and mind of the
afflicted party.

A froward kind of Spirit.
15. And amongst such Spirits as are resident amongst mortals, there is a very
froward kind, who take delight to pull down what man has builded, who have
been seen at the building of strong and mighty Castles to come in the night and
tumble all to the ground that the workmen had reared the day before; of this
sort were Horon, Stilkon, Glaura, and Ribbolla, four pestiferous, and turbulent
Animals that for many years infested the first founders of the Emperors
Seraglio: Till one of the holy Musselmans did by certain Charms, and Exorcisms
constrain and bind them, to tell their names, and the cause of their
disturbing, which they declared, and were by him confined to destroy the mines
of Copper in Hungaria.

Example.
16. There is also a Relation extant in the Life of Paul the Hermit of a Satyr
appearing to him in the Woods, and discoursing with him that it was a mortal
Creature as he, and served the same God, dehorting the people to worship them
for Demigods, as they had been accustomed to; Like unto this is the Story of
the Death of the great God Pan; That a Mariner sailing by the Island of
Cicilia, was called by his name from the shore, Example.
and by a certain voice was bid to tell the Inhabitants of the next Island,
that the great God Pan was dead, which he obeyed, and though in the next Island
there were no Inhabitants, yet when he approached he proclaimed, toward the
shore that Pan was deceased, immediately after which Proclamation he could
sensibly hear most doleful and lachrymable Cries, and noyses, as of those that
lamented his departure.

17. Ianthe, is said by Magitians, to be a water Spirit, Janthe a Spirit of the
water,
who is ever present when any are drowned in the water, being delighted much in
the destruction of mankind, that it may enjoy the Company of their Astral
Spirits after their decease; for according to the four Complexions or
Constitutions of the body of Man, The Astral Spirit associates it self with
separated substances; The Phlegmatic, to the watery Spirits: The Sanguine, to
those of the Air; The Choleric, to the Fire; and the Melancholy, to the
Terrestrial Spirits. But this is only to be supposed of such persons as dyed in
discontent, and restlesness.

18. Of another sort are such Aquatick Animals as in former times have
conversed, and procreated with mankind bearing diverse Children; Watery Spirits
that procreate.
And at length snatching all away into the watery Element again, whereof there
are variety of Examples in Cardanus and Bodin. Of this sort was the Familiar of
Paulus a Mendicant Friar, called by him Florimella, and entertaind as his
Bedfellow for forty years, though unknown and unseen to any but himself, till
upon some unhandsome carriage of the Friar, his Companion accompanying him over
the Danube, leapt into the River and was never after seen.

19. Innumerable are the reports and accidents incident unto such as frequent
the seas, as fishermen and sailers who discourse of noises, flashes, shadows,
Apparitions on the water.
echoes, and other visible appearances nightly seen, and heard, upon the
surface of the water. And as the disposition of the Heavens is according to the
constellations, and climates, so are these specter appropriate to particular
parts, and coasts, from the North to the Southern pole. But more especially,
abounding in the North, about Norweigh Isleland, Green Land, and Nova Zembla.

20. Neither are the Stories of the Greek, Prophetical rivers, and vocal
fountains.
and Latin Poets all together to be slighted in this particular; for many
verities are inter-woven with their fictions, they speak of vocal Forests, as
Dodona, of Talkative Rivers, as Seamander, of sensitive Fountains as Arethusa,
Menippa, and Aegle; Which more credible Historians have partly confirmed in the
Relation of Dodona, asserting that the trees do seem to speak by reason of the
various Apparitions, Phantasms, that attend the Forest. And also in the Story
of the River Scamander, which is said at this day to afford plenty of specter,
and prophetical Spirits, that have nightly conversation with the Turkish
Sailers coming by that way with Gallyes into the Mediterranean.

21. The like is reported of a Castle in Norweigh standing over a Lake wherein
a Satyr appears sounding a Trumpet before the death of any Soldier, or
Governor belonging to the same, Example.
it is said to be the Ghost of some murdered Captain that has become so Fatal,
and Ominous to his Successors. But with more probability may be called a
Spectre proper to the place according to the Constellation.

22. And it has been the conjecture of eminent speculators that from the Loins
of such arise the numerous brood of Elves, Faeryes, Lycanthropi; Spirits in
Green-Land.
And Pigmyes, sometimes visible, sometimes invisible in Green-Land and the
adjacent rocks where they have no concomitants, but bears and scurvy grass to
mix, and make merry withal, except they pass from thence to the Northern parts
of America, where they shall find their offspring adored for Gods, and
Goddesses, by the ignorant Inhabitants about new Albion, and as far South as
Mexico, as is amply related in the discourses of Drake, Cortes and Purchase
concerning the conquest and discovery of these Territoryes.

23. By Apparitions upon the water many have been tempted to leap into the Sea
in pursuit thereof till they were drowned, Destroying Spirits.
of which specter there is a sort called by Psellus, Ordales, who do appear
like Ducks or other Water fouls, till they by fluttering upon the water, do
entice their followers to pursue them so far that many perish in the attempt,
which does greatly delight these faithless Spirits who (as we have said before)
do long to accompany their Astral Spirits after their decease. An Example of
this kind I my self knew, besides the numerous relations I have had from the
mouths of others, which confirm the opinions of the ancient Magicians
concerning these water Spirits, that of all the rest they are the most
deceitful, and dangerous, like the flattering Seas, and swift gliding Torrents,
that when they have wonn any thing, to admire, and sound them, do carry them
violently into the abyss of their own Element.

Fiery Spirits.
24. But we will leave the waters and insist a little on the nature of Igneous
or Fiery Spirits that inhabit the Mountains in Hecla, Aetna, Propo Champ, and
Poconzi; Where the Courts, and Castles of these puissant Champions are kept.
The opinion of some is, What these Spirits are.
That they are not Astral, but Infernal Spirits, and D^mned Souls, that for a
term of years are confined to these burning Mountains for their Iniquities:
Which opinion although it be granted, yet we may assert, That for the most part
the apparitions, sounds, noices, clangors, and clamors, that are heard about
the Mountan Hecla in Island and other places, are the effects of separated
Starry beings, who are neither capable of good nor evil, but are of a middle
vegetative nature, and at the dissolution of the Media Natura shall be again
reduced into their primary Ether.

Why they delight in the fiery element.
25. And from natural Causes, it may be easily demonstrated, That there is great
Correspondence betwixt such substances, and the Element of fire, by reason of
the Internal Flagrat and Central Life proceeding from the Quintessence or one
only Element which upholds them, in Motion, Life, and Nourishment. As every
natural, and supernatural being is upheld, and maintained out of the self-same
root from whence it had its original, or rise; So the Angels feed upon the
Caelestial Manna, The Devils of the fruits of Hell, which is natural to their
appetite, as trash for swine; the Astral beings; of the source of the stars,
the Beasts, Birds, or, Reptiles of the fruits of the Earth, and the gas of the
Air, the fishes of the blass of the Water; But more particularly, every thing
is nourished by its Mother, as Infants at the Breast, either by exhausting or
fomentation.

Spirits that burn Cities.
26. Such Spirits are very officious in the burnings of Towns, or Cole-pits,
delighting much to dance and exult amidst the flames, and become Incendiaries
worse then the material Cause of the Combustion, often tempting men in
drukenness, to burn their own Houses, and causing Servants carelessly to sleep,
that such unlucky accidents may happen. As the Story of Kzarwilwui a Town in
Poland does confirm, which was reduced to ashes by three of these pestilentious
Animals, called Saggos, Broundal, and Baldwin, who after many open Threatenings
for six months together, that they would destroy the City, and Citizens, did on
a dark and stormy night, set all on fire on a sudden in twenty or thirty
several places, which irrecoverably destroyed the Inhabitants.

Their food and pastime.
27. As for the nourishment of fiery Spirits, it is radical heat, and the
influence of the Aerie Region; their sport and pastime consists for the most
part in tumbling, and fooling one with another when the flames are most
impetuous, and violent in the Mountains: And it is likewise credited by some
that their office is to cruciate and punish some Evil Livers, retaining, and
tormenting their Souls, or Astral Spirits for many years after the Bodies
decease, which is too empty a notion to be hearkened unto by any that are well
informed of their natures.

Why they delight in the fiery quality.
28. Neither is it to be wondered at that they are so much delighted with the
fiery quality in regard of their affinity and appropriation with infernal
spirits, whose state and being is altogether damnable and deplorable; for
although they have not the ability of attaining either the Heavenly or Infernal
quality, by reason that they are utterly void of the innermost Center, and may
be rather called bruits, then rational Animals, yet because they belong to the
outermost principle, such is their innate Affinity, and Unity with the dark
World, or infernal Kingdom that they do often become the Devils Agents to
propagate his works upon the face of the Earth.

29. By the Instigations of infernal Spirits they are often sent to terrify
men with nocturnal visions, Astral Spirits ministers to the devil.
in the likeness of monstrous Beasts or Ghosts of their deceased Friends. They
are moreover often abetted to tempt and provoke melancholy people to execute
themselves; besides innumerable ways they have of executing the pleasures of
iniquous Spirits through malicious Instigations, and secret Stratagems
projected by them to the destruction of mortal men, especially when the work to
be effected by the Devil is too too hard for his subtle and spiritual nature to
bring to pass, because the same belongs to the Astral source or outward
principle to which these dubious Spirits do properly belong; then are they
frequently solicited to mediate in such treacherous actions, as the hellish
Spirits have conspired against the Lives of mortal men.

30. More particularly, These Spirits that belong to the fiery Element, Why the
devil requires their help.
are most officious in this kind of service, being naturally such as the
Antecedent matter has sufficiently demonstrated; but according to the ranks
and Categoryes to which they belong, some of them are more inveterate, and
malicious in their undertakings then the rest. But every kind of Astral Spirit
is obsequious to the Kingdom of darkness, that the devilish Spirits can effect
little or nothing without their assistance in this external principle of the
Stars and Elements upon the bodies or possessions of Mankind; because their
bodies are too crude and rough for the conveyance of their influence, either in
Dreams, Raptures, Philtres, Charms, or Constellations, as the following Chapter
of the nature of Infernal beings shall make plain, wherein the nature and
capacity of every damned Spirit is decyphered according to the truth of the
ancient Philosophy.

31. Leave we now the Spirits of the fire, Subterranean Spirits.
to illustrate the natures of subterranean Beings, whose Orders, Species, and
Degrees, are various; for they consist in these distinctions, viz. Spirits of
men deceased, Souls of men deceased, separated Spirits Astral, separate Spirits
semi-Infernal, Spirits appropriate to the Constellations where any of the seven
metals, viz. Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Luna Venus, Mercury, are found in the
bowels of the Earth; and as far as the natures of Minerals are distinct one
from the other, so much distant are these Subterranean Spirits in Nature and
Faculty in respect of their places, shapes, names, and qualities.

32. But they are not all confined unto the metallic Kingdom; Spirits of the
Mountains, Caves, and Tombs.
for there are also Spirits of the Mountains, Valleys, Caves, Deeps, Hiata's,
or Chasma's of the Earth, hidden Treasures, Tombs, Vaults, and Sepultures of
the Dead. To the last belong the Astral Spirits of deceased Mortals, that
delight to hover over the ancient Carcases to which they belonged, seeking
still to be dissolved, and diligently enquiring the Cause of their retention;
such are resident in silent Caves, and solitary Vaults, where the deceased lie
till the Humidum Radicale be exciccate, and totally dryd up, after which their
tricks are no more manifest, but are utterly extinguished, and annihilated.

33. To the next, belong such Spirits as are Protectors of hidden Treasures,
Spirits of hidden Treasures.
from a natural Cause, from whence they do exceedingly envy man's benefit, and
accommodation in the discovery thereof, ever haunting such places where money
is concealed, and retaining malevolent and poisonous Influences, to blast the
Lives and Limbs of those that dare to attempt the discovery thereof: Peter's of
Devonshire with his confederates, who by Conjuration attempted to dig for such
defended Treasures, was crumbled into Atoms, as it were, being reduced to
Ashes with his Companions in the twinkling of an eye.

34. And upon this particular, we have plenty of Examples of the destruction of
such as by Magical experiments have discovered hidden Treasures; The nature of
such Spirits.
which instances do rather seem to prove, That such as haunt these places do
more nearly belong to the Infernal, then to the Astral Hierarchy, in regard
that they are so infesting and inveterate to Mortal men, that the Grand
Intention of the Prince of darkness may be accomplished in their designs.

Spirits that infest Mines and Miners.
35. But of all the rest such as haunt Mines and mettle men, are the most
pernicious, and frequent from the same Cause with the former. The nature of
such is very violent; they do often slay whole Companies of Laborers, they do
sometimes send inundations that destroy both the Mines, and Miners, they bring
noxious and malignant vapors to stifle the laborious workmen; briefly, their
whole delight and faculty consists in tormenting, killing, and crushing men
that seek such Treasures, that mankind may never partake thereof to relieve
their Cares, and worldly necessities.

An Example of a turbulent Spirit.
36. Such was Anaebergius a most virulent Animal that did utterly confound the
undertakings of those that labored in the richest Silver mine in Germany,
called Corona Rosacea. He would often show himself in the likeness of a he-goat
with Golden horns, pushing down the workmen with great violence, sometimes like
a Horse breathing flames, and pestilence at his Nostrils. At other times he
represented a Monk in all his Pontificalilus, flouting at their Labor, and
imitating their Actions with scorn and dedignation, till by his daily and
continued molestation he gave them no further ability of perseverance.

Conclusion.
37. Thus, I have hinted the various distinctions, and sub-distinctions of
Astral Spirits proper or common, illustrating their natures according to the
opinions of the Learned; from thence I proceed to say what the Infernal
Hierarchy is, and whereof it does consist in this fifth Chapter following.

CHAP. V.
Of the Infernal Spirits, or Devils, and damned Souls treating, what their
Natures, Names, and Powers are, etc.

What this Chapter treats of.
1. LEaving the Astral Kingdom, I will now proceed to describe the natures, and
distinctions of Infernal Spirits or Devils, and damned Souls, who are to be
considered according to their ranks, and orders, exactly correspondent to the
Quires, and Hierarchies of the Angels, or Celestial beings, wherein I will
insist upon their names, shapes, places, times, orders, powers, and capacities,
proceeding gradually from a general narration, to a particular Anatomy of every
sort of Spirit in its proper place and order.

The place of hell or the habitation of devils.
2. As for the Locality or Circumscription of the Kingdom of darkness, it is
far otherwise to be considered then the vulgar account it, who esteem the
hellish habitation, a distinct Chasma or Gulf in a certain place, above,
under, or in the Center of the Earth, where innumerable Devils, and wicked
Souls inhabit, who are perpetually scorched, and tormented with material flames
of fire. This is the opinion which naturally all men are addicted and prone
unto. But if we will rightly consider the Kingdom of Heaven and Hell, in
respect of one another, we must look upon the similitude of light and darkness
in this outward world, who are not circumscribed, nor separate as to Locality
from one another; for when the sun arises, the darkness of the night
disappeareth, not that it removes it self to some other place or Country, but
the brightness of the light overpowereth it, and swallows it up, so that though
it disappeareth, yet it is as really there as the light is.

Illustrated by a similitude.
3. This is also to be considered in the description of the Habitations of good,
or evil beings, that they are really in one another, yet not comprehended of
one another, neither indeed can they be, for the evil Spirits if they should
remove ten thousand miles, yet are they in the same quality and source, never
able to find out or discover where the Kingdom of Heaven is to be found,
though it be really through, and through with the dark Kingdom, but in another
quality which makes them strangers to one another.

The differerence betwixt heaven and hell.
4. A similitude hereof we have in the faculties of the humane Life, as to the
indowments of the Soul considered in the just, and in the wicked; for to be
good, pure, and holy, is really present as a quality in potentia with the
depraved soul, although at that instant the Soul be clothed with Abominations,
so that the eye which should behold God or Goodness is put out. Yet if the soul
would but come out of it self, and enter into another source or principle, in
the center it might come to see the Kingdom of Heaven within it self,
according to the Scripture, and Moses, The word is nigh thee, in thy Heart, and
in thy Mouth.

5. True it is that the Devils and damned Souls cannot sometimes manifest
themselves in this Astral World, How the Devils can come into this World.
because the nature of some of them is more near unto the external quality then
of others, so that although properly the very innermost and outermost darkness
be their proximate abode, yet they do frequently flourish, live, move, and
germinate in the Aerie Region, being some of them finite and determinate
Creatures.

6. But according to their fiery nature, The great difficulty of their
appearance.
it is very difficult for them to appear in this outward world, because there
is a whole principle or gulf betwixt them, to wit, they are shut up in another
quality or existence, so that they can with greater difficulty find out the
being of this World, or come with their presence into the same, then we can
remove into the Kingdom of Heaven, or Hell with our intellectual man; for if
it were otherwise, and that the Devils had power to appear unto Mortals as they
list, how many Towns, Cities, etc. should be destroyed, and burnt to the
ground, how many Infants should be killed by their malicious power! yea few or
none might then escape in Lives, or Possessions, and sound minds, whereas now
all these enjoyments are free amongst mortals, which proves, that it is
exceeding hard for evil Spirits to appear in the third principle of this
world, as for a man to live under water, and fishes on the Land. Yet must we
grant, that when the imaginations, and earnest desires of some particular
Wizards, and envious Creatures have stirred up the center of Hell within
themselves, that then the Devil has sometimes access to this world in their
desires, and continues here to vex, and torment so long as the strength of that
desire remains which was the first attractive Cause.

7. For the very cause of the paucity of appearances in these days, The cause
of few appearances now.
is the fullness of time, and the brightness of Christianity, dispelling such
mists, as the sun does cause the clouds to vanish, not by any violence or
compulsion, but from a natural cause; even so the Kingdom of Light as it grows
over man's soul, in power and dominion, does naturally close up the Center of
darkness, and scatter the influences of the Devil so that his tricks lie in the
dust, and his will at length becomes wholly passive as to man.

8. In the time of the Law, when the wrath and jealousy of the Father, The
Devils power in the time of the Law.
had the dominion in the Kingdom of Nature, all Infernal Spirits had more easy
access unto mankind then now they have; for before the Incarnation of Christ,
the anger of God had more dominion over the soul of Man, and was more near in
nature unto the same; so that the Devils could with more facility spring up in
the element of Wrath, to manifest themselves in this outward principle, because
the very Basis and Foundation of Hell beneath, is built and composed of the
Wrath of God, which is the channel to convey the Devil into this sublunary
World.

9. But when Christ began to be manifest unto the World, His power under Christ
in the flesh.
the multiplicity of Appearances, and possessed with Devils, began insensibly
to decay and vanish. And if any should object, That betwixt the space of his
Incarnation and his Suffering, such accidents were rather more frequent than in
the times before: To this I answer, That the Devil knowing well that his time
was but short; and also knowing, that till the great Sacrifice was offered up,
he had leave to range and rove abroad the Kingdom of this World; therefore he
employed all his forces and endeavors to torment those miserable souls and
captives to whom Christ came to Preach Deliverance.

10. But after the Partition wall was broken down, and the vail of Moses, Under
Christianity.
and of the anger of God from off the soul in the death of Christ, there was a
sensible and visible decay of the Devils prancks amongst mortals, and that
little remnant of Lunaticks and Possessed, which continued after Christ, did
the Apostles relieve and set at liberty, through the influence and virtue of
the promise of the Son of God (to wit) the Holy Ghost, or the Comforter, which
could not come until he went away: And on the day of Pentecost, whilst they
waited in humility for the fulfilling of his promise, the very effect of
Christ's birth and sufferings did first manifest it self, when the Holy Ghost
sprung up amongst them, to the destruction of Sin and Satan.

Under Apostacies.
11. And so long as the purity of Christianity continued in the Primitive
Church, there were very few that the Devil could personally or actually lay
hold of in the Astral Man, for the space of two hundred years after the death
of Christ, until that from Meekness and Abstinence, the Christians began to
exalt themselves in Loftiness and Worldly Honors; then the Devil began to
exalt his head amongst the Lip-Christians, bewitching them into every Lust; and
captivating their inward and outward faculties at his pleasure. As all along in
Popery is clearly seen.

Under Idolatry.
12. Yet notwithstanding, the coming of Christ has prevented the Devils force
in general. Such Nations as have never embraced the Christian Faith, are still
deluded and bewitched by him; because the center has never been actually
awakened in any of them, so that the Devils power prevails over them mightily,
to seduce them to worship things visible, and not the true God: For where the
most darkness is in Religion and Worship, or in natural understanding, there
his power is most predominant; As in Tartary, China, and the East Indies; also
in Lapland, Finland, and the Northern Islands.

How power in new discovered Lands.
13. In the West Indies or America, his access is very facil and freequent to
the Inhabitants, so that by custom and continuance they were at the first
discovery thereof, become so much substitute and obsequious to his power, that
though they knew him to be a power of Darkness, yet they adored him lest he
should destroy them and their Children. And unto such a height were they come
at the Landing of Cortes, Drake, and Vandernort, that they could familiarly
convert themselves into Wolves, Bears, and other furious Beasts; in which
Metamorphosis their Enthusiasms and Divinations were suggested, and such were
held in greatest esteem.

His power in America.
14. Till upon the Invasion of the Spaniards, the greater evil drove out the
less, and the cruel Murders of that Antichristian tradition, did both
depopulate the Islands and most of the Continent; and also by accident, though
not through any good intention, extirpate the race of such as addicted
themselves to this infamous sort of Divination. In which devastation, and
bloody inquisition, their Idols were discovered with their Oracles and
Enchantments, far different from the European Conjurers, and any of their
Ceremonies.

The variety of Conjurations according to the Countries.
15. But that which is the most remarkable in the Infernal proceedings, is this,
That there is not any Nation under the Sun, but the Devil has introduced
himself amongst them through their Ceremonies and Worship, though quite
opposite to one another: For in the Kingdom of China, by the sacrifice of Blood
and Panaak, he is Conjured and Exorcized through the repetitions of several
Superstitious Invocations to the Sun and Moon. In Tartary the Magicians go
quite another way to work, with Offerings to the Ocean, to the Mountains, and
the Rivers, fuming Incense, and diverse sorts of Feathers; by which means the
Devils are compelled to appear. So that we see how this Proteus can dispose
himself in the diverse Kingdoms of this World; being called by other names in
Tartary, China, the East and West Indies, etc. then amongst the European
Conjurers. Likewise the Greeks and Romans could Invocate Spirits by Prayers
unto the Moon, and diverse Sacrifices of Milk, Honey, Vervine, and Blood. And
those that are addicted to Conjurations in Christianity, have attained to a
more lofty and ample manner of Incantation and Conjuring with Magical Garments,
Fire, Candles, Circles, Astrological Observations, Invocations, and holy Names
of God, according to the Kaballa of the Jews.

16. So that every distinct Nation has conformed its Conjuration unto the
Ceremonies of that Religion which it professes: Why few are able to raise
Spirits.
And it is to be observed, That from a natural cause every Nation has its
Conjurations and Names of Devils, from the Constellation under which the
Country lies, and from the Air or Wind to which such particular Dominations
do belong; so that no effect would follow, if one Country should traditionally
inure themselves to the Forms and Exorcisms that are used by another Nation.
And therefore is it that so many attempts are offered in vain amongst professed
Christians to raise Spirits, because they have little or nothing from their own
Constellation, but make use of what they have borrowed from the Greeks and
Romans, or the ancient Imbecility of the Egyptians Priests; I mean, their
simple forms of Invocation.

17. But because we are rather upon the discovery of the Infernal Kingdom, The
Names of Devils in the time of the Law.
as it has no dependence upon the doings of mortal Men; therefore we will
proceed to discover what the Ancients have said concerning it: So the next
which we fall upon after the description of their Habitations, and the manner
of their Appearances, is their Names and Appellations diversely considered.
First, from the Creation of the World to the coming of Christ, they retained
the Hebrew names, as Belial, Baal, Baalzebub, Lelah, Ador, Abaddon, etc.
according to the seculum under which they were Invocated; assuming names
according to the present occasion about which they were employed.

18. Under the Constellation of China, Their Names in China.
they are Invocated by the Names Ran, Sinoam, Nantam, Bal, Baltal, Sheall, the
six Governors or Presidents: Chancangian, the chief of the Devils: Po, Paym,
Nalkin, Nebo, the Devils of the four Winds: Tean, Tan, Pan, Adal, the Devils of
the four Elements. And according to the nature of their language or words which
do all consist of no more then one syllable, so are the Devils named. Yea, as
it is conjectured by many learned Magicians, this language of the Chinenses is
more Magical and adapted to Conjurations, then all the Oriental Tongues,
because of the consonancy and copiousness thereof, together with the numerous
and various Characters used by them.

19. In the East Indies, and in Tartary, In the East Indies.

Tartaria.


the Names are the same with those of China, though the Ceremonies differ. In
Persia, Arabia, Natolia, Egypt, Aethiopia, the Names are the same with the
Jewish Rabbis. Greece.
But the Greeks and Romans have different from the rest, according to their
Language and Superstitions. The Turks, Muscovites, Russians, Lapponians, and
Norwegians, Italy.
make use of the Sclavonian tongue in all their Conjurations. West Indies.
The West-Indians have very strange and antic Names and Ceremonies of their
own, nothing depending on the Traditions and Practices of the old World; for,
as is related before, the Devil is sufficiently capable of introducing himself
through the Religious Superstitions of any Nation whomsoever, according to the
Constellations, although strangers to the Rites and Ceremonies of others.

20. But though their Names be conformable to the Language and Climate of that
Nation where they are raised or called; yet have they diverse Names, The nature
of their Names.
suppose twenty or thirty to one Devil, according to the several ministrations
they have had from the Creation to this day, leaving a several name behind
them at each of their appearances upon the earth; for, according to the
testimony of the Devil himself, if credit may be given to Devils, they, as they
are abstractively considered in their own Kingdom, have no imposed Names of
distinction, but are forced to assume them when they rise up in the external
principle of this World: although in some measure it must be granted, that
there be some principal Kings and Dukes in the Infernal Hierarchy, that have
Names established upon them which cannot be transferred or altered.

21. As for the Names that are recorded in this precedent Discovery of
Witchcraft by Reginald Scot Esquire being a Catalogue of Devils in their Rancks The
names of of Devils in Scot.
and Hierarchies, they are supposed to be fictitious and totally imaginary,
being taken out of Bodin or Wyerus, which they recorded from the mouth of
Tradition, and obscure Manuscrips: And indeed were there any certainty in this
List of Devils, it were to be preferred as the most ample and exact delineation
that is extant. But it is the rather to be suspected, because of the little
coherence it has with the former received Names of Devils eitheir in Europe,
Asia, Africa, or America.

The names of Damned souls.
22. But if we would speak of Damned Souls and their Names or Appellations, they
are far otherwise to be considered then the Devils; for such as their imposed
Names were here on earth, such is the Name they have in the Kingdom of
Darkness, after a Magical manner, according to the language of nature in the
first principle of Darkness; as the Saints in heaven retain their Names in a
Celestial manner: And also, as the Astral Spirit of a Man deceased, retains
its ancient Name according to the Astral source in the principle of the one
only Element.

Whence the names of Devils are.
23. For as the language of Nature is found in the second Principle, it is
likewise manifest in the dark Worlds property, according to the first Principle
of Wrath; as also the monstrous shapes of Devils and Damned Souls is
correspondent to the Magical postures of their Souls whilst they were alive; of
which I shall speak more largely when their Shapes are to be described.
According unto which, as also according to the rest of their attributes, viz.
their Rancks, Numbers, Times, Powers, Places, etc. their Names are fitted and
conformed according to the uniformity of name and thing in the principles of
the eternal and external nature.

The names of Devils in the Kingdom of Fiacim.
24. And as all other Nations have their various Appellations for Devils and
Damned Souls, like their natural tone or language; so we can mention one
Kingdom more admirable then the rest, viz. the Kingdom of Fiacim at the
Northern Pole, where all the Counselors are Magicians; and the Names which
they use in Invocations, are Mathematically disposed in a wonderful harmony and
efficacy, to the performance of Magical operations. So much of the Places and
Names of Infernal Beings; the next to be considered is their Shapes and
Likenesses.

The Shapes of Devils.
25. The Shapes of Devils are answerable to the cause of their Fall, and the
Dominions to which they belong. Those that belong to the Supreme Hierarchy,
when they are called by Magicians, do at first appear in the form of fierce and
terrible Lions, vomiting fire, and roaring hideously about the Circle; from
thence they convert themselves into Serpents, Monkies, and other Animals, till
the Magician do repeat the form of Constriction or Confinement to a Trine or
Triangle, as before is mentioned in the Fifteenth Book of the Discovery.

As they appear to Magicians in the highest ranks.
26. After the Conjuration is repeated, they forsake these bestial shapes, and
indow the humane form at first like troops of Armed Men; till at last by
frequent repetitions of other Ceremonies, they appear as naked Men of gentle
countenance and behavior. Yet is the Magician to take care that they deceive
him not by insinuations; for their fraudulency is unspeakable in their
appearance and dealings with Mankind; because we may be assured they appear not
willingly, but are by forceable Conjurations compelled: so that they will ever
mind their own ends in meddling with man; that is, to deprave his mind, or
subvert the Lives and Estates of others through his means and assistance.

In the lower orders.
27. The rest of the Infernal Dominions have various appearances. The two next
Orders affect to represent the beautiful colors of Birds, and Beasts, as
Leopards, Tigers, Pecocks, etc. But by Conjurations they may be likewise
reduced to a Manlike form, wherein they will readily answer every demand within
the compass of their capacity, answerable to the Order unto which they belong:
Yet many of them appear in Monstrous forms, and can hardly be conjured to
desert them. Though the Exorcist Charm them never so wisely, they will show him
a pair of Crocodiles jaws, or a Lions paw, with other dreadful menaces, enough
to terrify any Novice from such Damnable Injunctions as the practice of Magic.

28. But more especially, the opinion of the ancients is, That the Devils are
answerable to the unclean Beasts.
That according to the division of the clean and unclean Beasts in the Law
given unto Moses, the Shapes of Devils are disposed in the Infernal Kingdom: So
that the most perverse and potent amongst the Devils represent the most ugly
and mischievous amongst the Beasts, according to this following division: viz.
such Devils as Astaroth, Lucifer, Bardon, Pownok, who incline men and instigate
them to pride and presumptuousness, have the shapes of Horses, Lions, Tygars,
Wolves. Such as instigate to Lust and Covetousness have the forms of Hogs,
Serpents, and other filthy reptiles or envious Beasts, as Dogs, Cats, Vultures,
Snakes, etc. Such as incline to Murder, have the shapes of every Bird and
Beast of prey. Such as Answer Questions humane in Philosophy, or Religion, have
more tolerable shapes, almost manly, but with crooked Noses, like Mermaids, or
Satyrs. And of all the rest it is to be observed, that as not one single Lust
or Vice has dominion without mixture in the evil Spirits, so they are not of a
distinct shape lik one single Beast, but compounded into Monsters, with
Serpents-tails, four eyes, many feet and horns, etc.

29. And as in general, these are the shapes of Devils, The shapes of Damned
Souls.
so the particular shapes of Damned Souls are to be considered in the same
manner with the rest, only with this difference, that they are more addicted to
metamorphose themselves and vary their appearances. Though, for the most part,
the Damned Souls retain the humane shape after a Magical manner, so that the
greatest part of that numberless number are in their ancient shapes, especially
when they appear in sleep to their surviving acquaintance. Their aspects are
very dismal and melancholy like the Ghosts of the Astral source.

30. Now to speak of the Times and Seasons of their Appearance. Their times and
seasons.
The better sort of Magicians do square their times with Astrological hours,
especially of Saturn, Luna, and Venus, in the Moons increase, and the middle of
the night, or twelve a clock at noon: In which hours they do likewise compose
their Garments, Caps, Candlesticks, Figures, Lamins, Pentacles, and Circles for
Conjuration. As for the Times in respect of their Infernal Courses, the fittest
are when they spring up in the Wrath, or when they sink in the Despair, which
is a mystery to the learned Conjurers of Europe.

31. In respect of this exterior World, Their places of appearance.
they can most easily appear in solitary places, when the Sun is down; for they
are naturally at enmity with the Sun, because it stands as a type of the
Mediator, or Heart and Center which they lost utterly in their fall, and now
are destitute of, like a wheel without an axletree. And indeed, the want of
this is the chief cause of all their torment, and of the rising of the gnawing
Worm, when they consider of their irrevocable sentence, and irrecoverable loss.

32. In storms of Hail, or Snow, Wind, Tempest, and Lightning, When Tempests
reign.
is accounted amongst Magicians, a time for Conjuring at an easy rate. And
they say, That such Ceremonies will prove very effectual, if a Conjurer begin
his Exorcisms in the hour and day of Luna, in the midst of a furious storm of
Lightning, Rain, and Thunder, in a low Vault or Celler that is close and
retired. Also when the Wind blows high, without Rain, they say, the Devils are
more near the Kingdom of this World, and may with great facility be solicited
or raised at such a season, because they delight in all extremities of weather,
being themselves the first cause of the disorder of the properties in the
Kingdom of Nature.

33. But in some Countries they can more easily appear then in others,
According to the situation of Regions.
according to the Constellations, for they delight much in the extremities of
the two Poles toward Lapland, Nova Zembla, Greenland, Tartary; and in the South
toward the Islands scattered about the confines of Terra Incognita. They are
likewise easily Invocated on the shore amongst lofty Rocks and Precipices, or
in Deserts and Wildernesses far from Towns or Inhabitan^^* And it is said, they
do much respect the motion of the Seas in their appearance unto such as
solicit them in places Maritime or Plagiary.

Their Ranks and Orders.
34. As for their Rancks or Orders, there is some difficulty in the true
discovery thereof, by reason that we know not certainly of what Orders they
were that Fell. The opinion of most men is, That of every Order many fell. But
those that better know the nature of the Heavenly Hierarchies, have
sufficiently proved, That of any Rank or Order none can fall unless all do
follow. Therefore with more reason may it be judged, That before the Devils
fell, the Hierarchy of Heaven did consist of three Rancks or Orders; to wit,
the Order of Vriel, of Michael, of Lucifer: That of Lucifer is totally in Hell:
The other which is under Michael, is the dominion of Heaven: The last which is
Vriels, are more in the dominion of this third principle of the Stars, having
the Planets in their dominion, with the influences thereof.

In three distinctions.
35. So that the foregoing Catalogue, transcribed by the Author of this
Discovery, is utterly feigned and fictitious, because it makes these many sorts
of Devils to have Dominion over several Legions in several distinctions of
Seraphims, Powers, Thrones, Dominations, Cherubims, etc. Whereas the whole
Kingdom of Hell consists but of one only Hierarchy, which is that of Lucifer
and his Legions, reduced by their exorbitances into that Lacrymable posture
wherein they now are and shall be for ever. Which Doctrine seriously weighed
will prove the attempts of Conjurers and Magicians to be utterly vain, and
their forms of Invocation vanity and falsehood.

Their numbers.
36. Their number may be thought upon more narrowly, if we consider that they
consist of one Hierarchy and no more; yet must we confess that the limit is not
to be put thereunto, because their nature is to Germinate and Multiply as they
please, contracting and dilating themselves according to the force of their
imaginative powers and faculties. But although this be granted, yet there is a
settled number of Devils that varyeth not. Though of Damned Souls the number is
numberless and unfathomable; yet as to their extent of room or place, it is
never the more because of their multitude, they being able to truss a thousand
Legions into the carcass of a man. As for the opinions of Authors, they are
various; it is believed by some, That the Stars are answerable to their
number; others speak of the Sands upon the Seashore: however it be, this is
certain, They are even innumerable in respect of humane Capacities.

Their natures and properties.
37. Their Natures are now to be considered as they belong to the hellish source
or quality. In themselves they rest nor, neither are they capable of the length
or shortness of time, nor of the alternate courses of day and night. The
wickedness which they committed in this life, are their continual torment,
which do Magically gnaw and corrode them, rising and boiling up perpetually
within them, all the refrigeration which they have, is by intercourse when the
height of Wickedness begins to stir them in blasphemies against God, and
towering up above heaven and goodness, in their adulterated Imaginations, which
is unto them as sport and pastime with one another, and lasts such a space as
with us makes up forty minutes. Neither does this any whit advantage them, but
rather adds to their torment; Their torments.
for pain discontinued is the greater: neither would vexation be vexation, if
it had no respite or forbearance; That the contrary might be also manifest, Nam
contraria juxta se posita majus elucescunt. Yet is their torment exceedingly
different, so that the torment of one, in respect of another, is but a Dream or
Fancy; I mean, amongst the Damned Souls, and not the Devils, for the pain and
sorrow of the Devils is greater then the greatest of the lost Souls, by many
thousand degrees, according to the course of nature and reason; for that which
falls highest, suffers most, and optima corrupta fiunt pessima.

38. But wonderful and manifold are the torments which all in general of the
Infernal troops, The Variety thereof.
do suffer according to the various lusts they reigned in whilst they lived
upon the earth. The cruel Murderers that died in the boiling source of blood
and envy, their torment is the greatest, they are continually Murdering in
their imaginations, and seeking, like dreaming men, to do what the want of the
Organ will not suffer them; for according to the saying of the wisest upon this
Subject, this is the torment and misery of all the Damned, That they are
continually wishing and woulding; and in wouldings they generate Ideas and
representations, which are the species of their continual aggravations and
deceiving phansies.

39. Those that were buried in Lust and Gluttony, The Nature thereof.
Drunkenness and Lasciviousness, are also in miserable torments, yet much
inferior to the first; they are continually, imagining their former pleasures
in the Magia as in a dream, which when they wake, torments them cruelly; they
are often hanging, stabbing, and mangling themselves for love, and perpetually
sinking down in sorrow and despair, if they were such as died in love, or in
the height of their Astral affections, leaving behind them a heap of desires
and lusts, which are the only cause of all their torment. And we may well
compare the passions of Melancholy persons, or such as in Deserts, Woods, and
Mountains, pine away for love of Women, unto their torments; which indeed being
the trouble of the mind, are absolutely the greatest and heaviest that the
source or property of this World affords, I mean, the perturbations of the
mind in general.

40. Such souls in whom the boiling source of Anger and Rage, Their torment in
the source of Anger.
has had a dwelling or receptacle, if they depart unmortified, do also enter
into a most dreadful kind of torment, which continually arises as a biting
Worm and hungry fire to double and accumulate the excess of despair upon them,
if they have much domineered therein whilst they lived in this World. Also
these that reigned in Pride and Envy, are ever seeking to pluck God from his
Throne, and towering up in their Imaginations, as men that dream, still seeking
for the Kingdom of heaven, to insult and boast therein; but the quality thereof
is utterly occult and estranged from them; so that they can never find, taste,
hear, nor see it, though it be through and through with their own peculiar
principle. This adds perpetually to their misery, and arises at times with
horrible pangs and gnawings, like the irksome and vexatious pains and aches
subject to Man's body, which cease a while and then begin to shoot and ache by
intercourse, as the Gowt, Toothache, Headache, Convulsion, Gripings, and the
Stone.

41. Thus their torments are in brief described, but indeed the capacity of Man
is not able to reach the description of their cruel miseries, In all the five
Senses.
and continual pangs which they contracted upon themselves; for every faculty
is sufficiently plagued. The Sense of Hearing is disturbed with harsh and
rugged sounds, which are as an antipathy to that Organ; as rough and scraping
sounds externally offend the ears, and set the teeth on edge, by affecting the
tender fibers of the same. Their Sight is likewise cruelly offended and
affirighted with monstrous appearances and Ideas represented continually to
their imaginations. And there is not any loathsome taste in the Kingdom of
this World, either Animal, Vegetative, or Mineral, which they are at any time
void of, being continually pestered and suffocated with filthy fumes and smoaks
of hellish fruits, as of Sulphurean stinks, and abominations.

42. Neither are the other Senses of the Touch and Smell behind in
participation of the like Torments, By their acquaintance on earth.
which their own iniquities do perpetually excite and create unto them;
besides, they are ever vexing one another; and if any be in the same misery
with whom they had acquaintance here on eath, the very Magical knowledge, and
perceivance, or remembrance thereof, does beyond utterance or conception, most
miserably afflict and macerate their Souls and all their Senses.

The Nature of Hell.
43. For the nature of their habitation is such, that their torment is
exceedingly aggravated thereby, because the extremity of the four Elements is
there converted into a whole Principle of wrath and vexation. The excess of
cold and heat, drought and moisture, are continually raging amongst them by
intercourse. Neither is there any light or luster to be seen within their
Courts, but that which comes from their fiery Eyes, as a deadly glance or
glimmering, being sudden fiery flashes and sparkling, as the enkindling of
Gunpowder, or Aurum fulminans for a similitude.

The food of Devils.
44. And as every kind of Being feeds upon somewhat of its own nature,
property, and element, whither it be Plant, Animal, or Metalline kind; so the
Devils are neither destitute of meat, drink, nor clothing, according to their
own Kingdom and quality, having fruits springing and growing before them of
hellish, sour and poisonous natures, which are real and palpable unto them, and
not imaginary or typical, though to us magical and invisible; neither is this
to be wondered at, if we consider the nature of Man's Soul, In Media Natura;
for if it feed not upon the internal and substantial Word, which is the very
Bread of Life it self, it must of necessity ruminate on something else, viz.
the fruits of Iniquity, which it takes in and drinks up as the Ox drinks
water, so that to the soul the sin becomes palpable, glutting, and satiuting;
yea, so substantial unto the Soul, as Dirt or Ink upon fair white Linen is to
our external Eyes; neither can the Soul be freed from these spots till the
water above the Firmament wash them away.

Their food in the Astral source.
45. Also in respect of the Astral source they are not destitute of food, when
they bring themselves into the same; for the gas of the air and blas of the
water is their nourishment, while they stay here, as is before alleged: These
influences of the air and water they take into their Limbus, and convert into
their own poisonous natures; as of sweet and wholesome herbs the filthy Toads
and other venomous Beasts do make their poison, converting them into a nature
like themselves. And on the contrary, the poisonous herbs are converted into
good and wholesome nourishment by other cleanly Beasts.

Their Speech.
46. And as the Infernal Troops are considered in respect of the four Elements,
they have a distinct and peculiar tone or language, which they exercise and
speak one amongst one another, as mortals do. But they have utterly lost the
dignity of their sounds according to the eternal nature. And are likewise
totally corrupted in their pronouncing, or Dialect, since they fell from their
first caelestial glory; so that their speech is harsh, doleful, and terrible,
like the fruits they feed upon, and the life they dwell in. Which depravation
is very apparent in the Kingdom of this World in the divided Languages of every
Region, according to the Constellation under which they are situated: The true
and magical Language of nature being hid from all the Countries of the earth.

What Language they affect.
47. But when they appear in the outward Elements, they do many times express
themselves in Irish, Welsh, Latin, or Russian, which are the Languages most
affected by them to answer unto Conjurations, or Compacts. So that if any
Magician, who is ignorant of these aforesaid Languages do at any time Raise or
Exorcise such Spirits, he must be mindful to confine them to his mother tongue;
least their gibberish prove altogether unintelligible; for as every thing
appears in what it most affects, or is addicted to; even so the Spirits have
their distinct affections, passions, and postures, both in word, habit, shape,
and gesture; so that the Magician must be wary in Exorcizing with them, that he
confine them to a different place, posture, shape, and language, to answer
their intentions without impediment.

Their unconstancy.
48. For they are very variable and unconstant in their dealings with mankind,
nor will they stand to any thing that has not bound them by the obligations of
Words, Characters, and Imprecations, except the skill of the Exorcist be such,
that he is able to confine them into a Magical Triad, which has the certain
force of obliging or compelling them to utter truth, and nothing false in all
their Answers, or Informations. But with such miserable men and women as they
have made Covenants and Indentures for body, soul, and works; with such I say,
they keep no faith, nor are they liable to their commands; but on the contrary,
have them hampered and subjected to their will and power, till they have
terminated their lives in their destruction.

49. Yet have not any of the most potent Princes in the Hellish Power, Their
Power.
the least ability to destroy the least of the sons of men, without the consent
of the mind and senses of the Soul; for until the will of the Soul be opened
unto him, his threatenings, sleights and stratagems are without any power or
force, as the nerves of a dead man. Although naturally every evil Spirit
boasts, as if all the world were at its command, and every Soul were subject
to its authority and beck, with the Goods or Possessions of the external World.

50. When any evil Spirit is raised up by Conjurations, without League, When
they are called up.
or Compact; these Spirits so raised, are exceeding fraudulent and deceitful,
as stubborn servants that do their Masters will by constraint, and not by any
natural act of obedience unto his Commands. But with such as they have
compacted, they are frequent and officious, employing them as Agents for the
destruction of others and their substance: and being married unto such, they
are even become one with them, being incorporated into them, so that they are
nothing different from incarnate Devils, save that the spark of divine Light,
which was the gift of God unto repentance, is not totally eradicated until the
body fall away.

51. From such as Covenant with these unconstant Spirits, Fumigations made unto
them.
do they daily obtain Fumigations, Odours, and Offerings, or Sacrifices of
Blood, Fire, Wine, Ointments, Incense, Fruits, Excrements, Herbs, Gums,
Minerals, and other Ingredients, by which from a Magical cause, they have more
influence and authority over the bewitched party to insinuate into their
affection, peircing even through their bones and marrow, till they have so
habituated them to their service, that the same becomes their daily bread and
sole delight in accomplishing every villainy and abomination which the malicious
and subtle instigation of Satan leads them to.

52. Thus have I Essayed to illustrate the Natures of Infernal Beings, The
Conclusion.
which notwithstanding is a Subject so intricate and copious in it self, that
great difficulty accompanies the Explication thereof; by reason of the variety
of their natures in the source of darkness, wherein they live, move, eat,
breath, and inhabit, having qualities, actions, and passions innumerable, to us
men-kinde utterly unknown and incomprehensible: So that to attempt an ample
demonstration of this present Subject, would require deeper speculation then
the matter does deserve, in regard that there be so many Protei and Changlings
in that gloomy Kingdom, who do never stay or continue in the same nature,
property, and form for an hour together; but may be compared to the swiftness
of the Winds, or the likeness and form of swift running Waters, that pass away
as a thought; and are no more remembered: so it is with the Spirits of
Darkness, whose life is a mere anguish and inconstancy from one sorrow to
another unto all Eternity.

CHAP. VI.
Treating of the Nature, Force and Forms of Charms, Periapts, Amulets,
Pentacles, Conjurations, Ceremonies, etc.

Shows before Spirits appear.
1. BEfore Appearances are made, after forms of Conjuration are repeated, the
Infernal Spirits make various and wonderful shows, noises, and attempts as
forerunners to their appearance: At the first attempts of novices in
Conjuration, they are accompanied with noises, tremblings, flashes, howlings,
and most dreadful shriekes, till after further progress and experience therein
they approach nearer unto this Elemental nature, till by degrees they can
manifestly be apparent unto their Exorcist.

A Relation of a Magician.
2. When Chiancungi, and his sister Napala, did first attempt to call up
Spirits, they begun with the Spirit Bokim, in the twentieth degree: they hung a
vault under ground with black both on the top and bottom, lining it therewith;
and having drawn the Circle of the Order of Thrones, with the seven Planets,
and their Magical Characters in the Center, they proceeded to the Ceremonies of
Conjuration after they had frequently repeated the forms of calling, and
nothing as yet appeared; they were grown so desperate therein, that forsaking
the Circle, and every defensive Character or Ceremony, they at last betook
themselves to the most accursed and detestable branch of Magic, which consists
of Compacts, or Confederacy; and having by a solemn League summoned the
aforesaid Spirit Bokim, they obtained 155. years from the Spirit, Covenanting
therewith for body, soul, and works.

His Actions.
3. In which damned life they continued exercising strange wonders in every
Country. By the help of this Magician the Tartars did destroy above 100 sail
of Ships belonging unto China; many losses did he bring upon that Kingdom in
their Children, Fruits, Corn, Silk, and Navigation; he could frequently
transport himself through the Air, and carry in one hand a thousand pound
weight, to the astonishment of all that knew him. He had many public contests
with Magicians of other Countries, being trials of skill in Magical Art,
wherein he was said to excel all that ever went before him.

Another Magician.
4. Such another was Lewis Gaufridi a French Priest, who had compacted with the
Devil, and served him 14 years in these detestable works, sacrificing Infants
unto him, worshipping him in a filthy shape, and tempting others to their
Magical society or nocturnal Conventions; in which, as it is reported, they did
ever feast and junket with varieties and dainties, which though they did seem
delectable, were yet notwithstanding gustless and unsavory.

What Charms are.
5. Leaving these relations, something shall be said of Charms and Spells, as
they are divided in this following manner; first, such Amulets as being
engraven and molded in the fashion of Money, or Coin, do serve to provoke any
one desired unto love and familiarity, being hung about the neck in certain
Planetary hours. Secondly, Spells or Charms in Parchment with Magical
Characters, as Periapts to Cure diseases; to make one valiant, memorative, and
constant. Thirdly, Corselets, which are an ancient Danish Charm of Neck-laces,
composed of Thunderstones engraven with Magical Letters, to resist all noxious
influences, and the danger of Lightning.

Pentacles.
6. Pentacles are a fourth sort of appendix, which Conjurers, Charmers, and
Magicians use, being made with five corners, according to the five Senses, and
the operation thereof inscribed upon the corners; the matter whereof they are
composed, is fine Linen doubled, and done with Cere-cloth between. This figure
the Magician holds in his hand, lifting it up from the skirt of his Garment to
which it is annexed, when Spirits that are raised are stubborn and rebellious,
refusing to be conformable unto the Ceremonies and Rites of Magic.

Their force.
7. Also by the holding forth of Pentacles, with these words, Glauron, Amor,
Amorula, Beor, Beorka, Beroald, Anephexaron, repeated at the instant. The evil
Spirits that possess the bodies of bewitched people are cruelly tortured and
amazed, being by the frequent repetition thereof forced at last to depart by
the assistance of the Exorcism of the sixth Cannon for the order of Seraphims.

8. When Magicians exercise Conjuration by Moonlight in the Mountains or
Valleys, they have another sort of Charm by way of Telesms, Telesms.
which they bury within a hundred paces of the place where the Circle is
composed toward the East, West, North, and South; for such spells have the
secret power to hinder any living creature for coming near them, till their
Exercize be done, except the Infernal Spirit, whose presence they do so
ardently desire.

9. Such Spells as are made in some Edible matter, with Characters upon them,
For Diseases.
are given for Agues, Headache, Epilepsie, Mother, etc. Especially being
powerful in operation, when the party is ignorant of the Charm taken in; many
such I know have taken wonderful effect. But as for Philtres, Potions, and
Love-cups, they proceed rather from a natural cause; whether their effects be
to afflict with Diseases to Poison, or to provoke unto Love of a Party whom
they disdain: Neither are such to be numbered amongst Charms; because their
effect is merely natural, from a natural cause.

10. But to insist further upon the nature of Conjuration, Fumigations.
Magicians do much exercise their time in Fumigations unto those Spirits whom
they are about to provoke; their fumes being distributed according to the
nature of the Spirit under any of the seven Planets, which the ancient
Conjurers were very punctual in observing, though in these days it be much
forgot, as superfluous, or rather dangerous to insert amongst the Ceremonies of
Conjuration. A division of Fumigations according to the Influence of the
Planets, and Orders of Spirits, we will here set down in this manner.

11. Fumigations for Saturn are made of Frankincense Trees, For Saturn.
Pepper-wort Rooots, Storax, and Galbanum; by these the Spirits Marbas, Corban,
Stilkon, Idos, etc. And all of the first order in the astringency are appeased
and provoked, when the fumes are put upon a Tripod in the hour of Saturn
according to the Planetary division. These Fumigations make these Spirits
appear like old men, with promiss beards, and meager looks; like Serpents,
Cats, Wolves, Badgers, Panthers; like old Men in Armor; like Trumpeters in
many ranks and divisions.

12. For Spirits under Jupiter, they take Lignum Aloes, Ashen-Keys, Jupiter.
Benjamin, Storax, Peacocks-feathers, and Lapis Lazuli, mixing the same with
the blood of a Stork, a Swallow, or a Heart; the brains being also added. The
fumes are kindled in Jupiters hour, and in a place appropriate to his nature.
And by this sacrifice the Spirits of the next order are called up, like
glorious Kings with many attendants, and mighty pomp; with Heralds before them,
and Ensign-bearers, Trumpeters, Guards, and all sorts of musical Instruments.

13. They make Fumigations unto such Spirits of the order of Powers, Mars.
as are under Mars, in the Planetary division with Aromatic Gum, Bdellium,
Euphorbium, Lodestone, Hellebore white and black, and an addition of Sulphur
to make them into an Amalgama, with Man's blood, and the blood of a black Cat;
which mixtures are said to be exceeding magical: so that without any other
addition, they say, this fumigation is able of it self to make such Spirits to
appear before the Exorcist; at their appearance they come with weapons
brandishing, and shining Armor, being terrible in their looks; yet of power
inferior to the Spirits of Saturn, though they can likewise show themselves as
Lions, Wolves, Tigers, Bears, and all other cruel or ravenous Beasts.

14. They do likewise unto the Spirits under Sol, being of the order of
Thrones, Sol.
Suffumigate Saffron, Musk, Laurel, Cinnamon, Ambergriece, Cloves, Myrrh, and
Frankincense, Musk, and the Balsamic Tree mixed up together with the brain of
an Eagle, and the blood of a white Cock, being made up like Pills, or little
Balls, and put upon the Tripod; their appearances are Castles, Gardens,
Mountains, Rivers, Fishermen, Hunters, Reapers, Dogs, Sheep, Oxen, and other
domestic Beasts.

Venus.
15. Under Venus are the Spirits of the sixth order in the Powers; their
appearances are very stately, like the nature of the Planet; like Courtiers,
Ladies, Princes, Queens, Infants, Children, and fragrant smells. The
fumigations appropriate unto them are Roses, Coral, Lignum Aloes, and Sperma
Ceti, made up with Sparrows, brains and blood of Pigeons to be fumigated with
a Song.

Mercury.
16. Mercury sends Horsemen, Fishers, Laborers, Priests, Students, Servants,
etc. Also, Foxes, Serpents, Dogs, Hares, Hyena's, Hydra's, and other Monstrous
Animals; unto him they fumigate Frankincense, Mastick, Cinkfoyl, incorporated
with the brain of a Fox, and the blood of a Mag-Pye.

Luna.
17. Spirits under Luna are like Ghosts and shadows, very ghastly to behold;
though in humane shape sometimes male, sometimes female. Fumigations are
offered unto them of Frogs dried, white Poppy-seed, Bulls Eyes, Camphire, and
Frankincense, incorporated with Gooses blood, and the menstruous blood of Women.

Why such Ceremonies are of force.
18. These are the divisions of fumigations, neither can it be denied, but that
in many Ceremonies of this kind, there is great inherent virtue according to
the Doctrines of Sympathy and Antipathy, whereby every thing is drawn by its
like in the Idea, whither by words or actions, according to the saying, In
verbis, herbis and lapidibus latet virtus, so that the Ceremonies and Charms,
with other circumstances used by Magicians, are doubtless prevalent to the
accomplishment of that work which they undertake; to wit, The calling up and
Exorcizing of Infernal Spirits by Conjurations.

CHAP. VII.
Being the Conclusion of the Whole; wherein diverse ancient Spells, Charms,
Incantations and Exorcisms are briefly spoken of.

Charms.
1. BEsides what the Author has set down, there be many other Spells and
Charms, which Tradition has left unto Posterity, being many of them effectual
for the thing intended by them, as in the precedent Chapter is set down,
wherein the Orders of Fumigations are described. Besides there are Magical
Characters attributed to the Planets, whereof Telesms, Periapts, Amulets, and
Philters, are composed by buryings, writings, bindings, engravings,
alligations, etc. to effect various purposes in Astrological hours. To conquer
Enemies, cure diseases, overturn Cities, stop Inundations, render bodies
Invulnerable, and the like; which are all effected by medium's of this kind,
with the assistance of Imagination.

Natural Operations.
2. Yet are there many natural Compositions, which have very stupendous effects
of themselves, without assistance of Superstition; for the commixtion of things
is of twofold force or virtue: First, When the Celestial virtues are duly
disposed in any natural body; so that in one thing are couched various
Influences of superior Powers. The second is, from Artificial mixtures and
Compositions of natural things amongst themselves, in a certain proportion to
agree with the Heavens under certain Constellations. This proceeds from the
correspondence of natural things amongst themselves, whereby things are
effected even unto admiration, as Agrippa declares, Cap. 35. lib. 1.

Places ascribed to the seven Planets.
3. And as unto every Planet certain fumigations are ascribed; so unto such
Spirits as are under them, certain Places are adopted for the Ceromonies of
Conjuration, which Magicians chose when they set upon their works of Darkness.
Unto Saturn are ascribed dark melancholy Places, Vaults, Tombs, Monasteries,
empty Houses, Dens, Caves, Pits. Unto Jupiter, Theaters, Schools, Music
houses, Judgment seats. To Mars, Fields where Battles have been fought,
Bake-houses, Glass-houses, Shambles, Places, of Execution. To Sol, Palaces,
Mountains, Meddows, Sunshine, Groves, and upper Rooms. To Venus, Fountains,
Meadows, Gardens, and the Seashore. Unto Mercury, all public places belonging
unto Cities. To Luna, Wildernesses, Woods, Rocks, Forests, Ships, Highways,
etc.

4. In like manner are Spells and Charms adapted to the thing which they must
effect, according to the matter, form and place of their composition; Spells.
as for the procuring of Love, they bury Rings, Ribbons, Seals, Pictures,
Looking-Glasses, etc. in Stews, Baths, Beds, that in such places they may
contract some Venereal faculty: When they gather Herbs or other Ingredients;
they choose the hour and place, when such Planets have Dominion as are over
these Herbs, which they collect, ever remembering to turn their faces to the
East, or South, when Saturnine, Martial or Jovial Herbs are gathered, because
their Principal houses are Southern signs; for Venereal, Mercurial, or Lunary
herbs, they must look toward the West or North, because their houses are
chiefly Northern signs. Yet in any Solar or Lunar operations the body of the
Sun and Moon must be respected in the operation.

5. Colors are also much regarded amongst Magicians, Secret Conclusions.
according to the Planet, as black, leaden, brown, unto Saturn; sapphire,
vernal, green, purple, golden, unto Jupiter; red, burning, violet, bloody, and
iron colors unto Mars; golden, saffron, scarlet, etc. unto the Sun; white,
fair, green, ruddy, pleasant mixed colors unto Venus, Mercury, and Luna. In
like manner they ascribe colors unto the twelve Houses, and according to the
Planets have also certain compositions for fire that produce wonderful
operations; as Lamps of Serpents skins will make Serpents to appear. Oil that
has stood under Grapes, being lighted, presents the Chamber full of Grapes.
Centaury and the Lapwings blood makes people seem like Giants, and in the open
air will make the Stars seem to move up and down in the Elements. The fat of a
Hare lighted in a Lamp, will cause Women to be exceeding merry and facetious.
And Candles composed of things that are Saturnine, raise terrors and
melancholy in the party that lights them, and in those that are lighted by them.

6. Such wonderful effects have natural things being fitted unto their Hours
and Constellations, The Candle of life.
as also when they are used to prove such effects as the nature of the things
does produce of it self, though in a weaker degree. To raise Tempests Magicians
burn the Liver of a Camaelion on the house top. To cause strange sights they
hang the Gall of an Ox over their Beds; to bring Apparitions and Spirits, they
make a strange fume of a Man's Gall, and the Eyes of a black Cat; Which, Agrippa
says, he has often made experience of. There is also a strange Magical Candle
described amongst Chemical Authors, which being lighted, foretells the death of
the party to whom it belongs: The manner thereof is thus; They take a good
quantity of the venal blood lukewarm as it came out of the vein, which being
Chymically prepared with Spirit of Wine and other Ingredients, is at last made
up into a Candle, which being once kindled, never goes out till the death of
the party whose blood it is composed of; for when he is sick, or in danger, it
burns dim and troubled; and when he is dead, it is quite extinguished; of which
Composition a Learned man has wrote an entire Tractate, De Biolychnio, or, The
Lamp of Life.

7. But to proceed to the nature of Characters, Sigils, and other Ceremonies,
That Characters are compacts.
we find that not only such as pretend to command over all sorts of Spirits;
but also they that do make Compacts, and have sold themselves unto him, do make
use of such; which instance is sufficient to prove what a wise man has
asserted, that although Evil Spirits have so blinded Men's Eyes, as to make them
believe they are defended by such Ceremonies, and that these Characters are as
Munitions against the Devils malignancy; Yet these very Characters, Sigils,
Lamins, etc. are Compacts themselves, which the Devils did at first cunningly
disguise with strange Repetitions in uncouth Language.

8. So that we have grounds to believe, that none is able absolutely without
Compact to call up any Spirit. But that whosoever has pretended to be famous
in the Art of Magic or Conjuration, has (to himself unknown) compacted with
and worshipped the Devil, under strange Repetitions and mystical Characters,
which to him seemed to have effects quite contrary to what they really had.

The force of Words and Characters.
9. Neither is this to be admired, that without the Knowledge or Consent of the
Magician, a Contract is made with Evil Spirits; when we consider the magical
strength of Words and Characters, which of themselves can cure Diseases, pull
down, infect, save, destroy, charm and inchant without the Parties assistance,
either in knowledge of the Cause, or in belief of the Consequence or Effect.

The vanity of Conjuration.
10. But on the contrary, I could instance a multitude of Examples of such as
have spent much time in Conjurations to no purpose, still attempting by
Exorcisms and Defensive Prayers to conjure a Spirit, or cause Personal
Appearances, with severe Imprecations and powerful Charges, and yet
notwithstanding have never attained their purpose, nor at any time heard, or
seen any Being, which may be called Spectre, or Apparition.

By Similitude.
11. Which is nothing wonderful, if we mind the sympathy of things in Nature,
how each desires its like, and hunteth after it as the Loadstone draws Iron;
the male coveteth the female; the evil after the evil, and the good after the
good; which is seen in wicked Men and their Association, in Birds and Beasts of
prey; while on the contrary, the Lamb delights not in the Lion, nor the Sheep
in the society of the Wolf; neither does the nature which is totally depraved
and estranged from God, care to be forced or drawn compulsively by another
contrary nature, viz. innocent, just, and harmless.

Exorcising, or casting out.
12. Neither does it consist with natural reason, That Evil Spirits should
affect the society of those that are their Enemies, who make use of the
dreadful and holy Names of God in Conjurations to call them up; whereas they
are rather antidotes against Apparations, as may be seen in various Examples of
holy Men, who by Prayers and Exorcisms have banished Evil Spirits in all Ages,
which is also further evident, in that the very form of Dispossessing and
Exorcising is made up of diverse Prayers and Defensive Blessings against the
obnoxious influences of Infernal Spirits.

Like desires its like.
13. Therefore though I would be far from describing an undeniable course of
Conjuring Spirits, or of causing Apparitions: Yet this I must assert
conclusively from what is before alleged, That if any thing would be called or
wrought upon, it must be with something which is of its own nature, as a bait
to catch or tempt it; for in catching Birds, Beasts, or Fishes, such esculents
as are properly for these Animals, are made use of to allure them, neither can
mankind command them by any threats to come into his custody.

Nothing is compelled by contraries.
14. How much less is mankind able to compel the Infernal Spirits, the very
least of which Kingdom, is able, if let loose, to exterminate a thousand lives,
and utterly over-turn poor mortals and their doings, as various bypast
accidents can evince: But whosoever has compacted with them for body, soul,
and works, such they are at unity with, and unto such they appear for the
advancement of their Kingdom in the destruction of others; for they are grafted
into them and incorporated into their very heart and soul, which unavoidably
becomes their wages when the body falls away.

15. Yet many ways there be by Images, Telesms, and Amulets, which have little
or no dependence upon Conjuration, or the strength thereof, being rather
effectual from sympathetical Causes, as many natural conclusions prove. And
Paracelsus speaks of a way by the Image of any Bird or Beast to destroy that
Animal, though at a distance; so by hair, fat, blood, excrements, excrescences,
etc. of any Animal or Vegetable, the ruin or cure of that thing may be effected.

16. Which is seen in the Armary Unguent, and the Sympathetical Powder. In the
instance of diverse Histories, of such as used Waxen Images, composed in diverse
postures, and under certain Constellations, whereby several have been tormented
and macerated even unto death; and according to the punishment or torment which
the Magician intends to afflict, accordingly do they dispose the hour of the
Composition, and the posture or semblance of the Image.

17. For if a malicious minded Witch intends to consume and pine away the Life
or Estate of any miserable Man or Woman, Of Images of Wax, and what is wrought
by them.
she makes his Image of Wax in such an ominous aspect as may conduce to her
design, making several magical Characters upon the sides of the head,
describing the Character of the hour or Planetary time upon the breast of the
Image; the name of the party on his forehead; the intended effect to be wrought
upon him upon his back. When they cause aches, pains, and violent pangs in the
sinews and the flesh, they stick thorns and pins in diverse places of their
arms, breasts, and legs. When they cast them into Fevers and Consumptions,
they spend an hour in every day to warm and turn the Image before a doleful and
lingering fire, composed of diverse exotic Gums, and magical Ingredients of
sweet Odours, and strange Roots of shrubs, efficient for their purpose.

18. Wonderful are the various postures and pranks which Magicians play with
Images; Further concerning Images.
neither will I mention the most perfect and prevalent part of the practice of
Images, and the powerful operations thereof, least the evil minded should work
abominations therewith upon the Persons or Possessions of their neighbors.

19. According to the nature of what they would effect they frame their Images;
if by Images they would provoke two parties to love, Of Images provoking Love.
or be enamoured on one another, they frame their Images naked, with
Astrological Observations and Embraces of those that are Venereal; to provoke
unto enmity they place malignant Characters and Aspects, and the Images in a
fighting posture.

20. If their intentions be for good, all their Characters are engraven upon
the foreparts of the body. But if they would afflict the party with
Consumption, or with death, they thrust Needles through the hearts, and engrave
their Characters upon their Posteriors, or upon their shoulders, using all
their Conjurations retrograde, and repeating every Charm opposite to the former.

21. Thousands of strange and uncouth Charms might be here described, according
to the exact form wherein Tradition has left them; But I have only insisted
upon the description of the natures in General; And as by Images and Telesms,
the Europeans have effected admirable things: so the Tartars have a wonderful
ways of producing the like effects, by Botles, Sheepskins, Forms of Charms in
Tartary.
Rods, Basins, Letters, or Missives, unto certain Spirits, and many otherwise
unheard of in Europe.

22. As for the Tying of the Point, The tying of the Point.
which is a strong impediment in Conjugal Rites, to restrain the acts of
secrecy betwixt two married persons; This knot or ligament is become so
notorious both in the practice and effect throughout France, Italy, and Spain,
as also in all the Eastern Countries, that the Laws of several Nations have
prohibited the performance thereof; neither is it fit to be openly described in
this place.

23. Other stratagems they have by turning the Sive with a pair of Sizzers by
voices uttered out of skins, Charming by the Sive.
which is in common amongst the Turks by Letters wrote unto certain Spirits, By
Bottles, Skins, Letters, Cords, Lots.
which by due appointments will have their answers returned. By the Turning of
the Cord with several names wrapped round the same, which with certain
repetitions will of it self be tied into several strange knots which unty
themselves again. Besides the many ways by Lots, in extractings Scrolls,
consulting with the Staff and the empty Pot, with others tedious to be
ennumerated.

24. The Art of Transplantation is also reckoned amongst Charms with the
vulgar. And indeed one member thereof, Transplantation, Ceremonious.
viz. the Transferring of Diseases is really Magical, and much in practice
amongst Witches; for by certain baits given to any domestic Beasts they remove
Fevers, Agues, and Consumptions from Martial men, or from one to another by
burying certain Images in their neighbors ground they bring all evil fortune
to the owner of the ground, yet though they add strange Words and Conjurations
in the practice, the effects thereof are more from Nature then Conjuration.

And merely natural.
25. For, by the same Cause, those that are profound, can destroy diseases, take
off Warts, and other Excrescences, kill, cure, purge and poison at a distance
from the party, by their hair, fatt, blood, nails, excrements etc. or by any
root, or carnuous substance, rubbed upon their hands, breasts or legs, by
burying which, they free them from Diseases, which experiments take effect
according to the Mediums and their Consumption under ground.

Magical Instruments:
26. And as by natural reason every Magical Charm or Receipt had its first
institution; In like manner have Magicians disposed the Matter and Manner
together with the times of their Utensils and Instruments, according to the
Principles of Nature: As the Hour wherein they compose their Garments, must
either be in the hour of Luna, or else of Saturn, in the Moons increase.

Their matter,
27. Their Garments they compose of White Linen, black Cloth, black Cat-skins,
Wolves, Bears, or Swines skins. The Linen because of its abstracted Quality
for Magic delights not to have any Utensils that are put to common uses. The
skins of the aforesaid Animals are by reason of the Saturnine and Magical
qualities in the particles of these beasts: Their sowing thread is of silk,
Cats-guts, man's Nerves, Asses hairs, Thongs of skins from Men, Cats, Bats,
Owls, Moles, and all which are enjoined from the like Magical cause.

Substance,
28. Their Needles are made of Hedgehog prickles, or bones of any of the
abovesaid Animals: Their Writing-pens are of Owls or Ravens, their Ink of Man's
blood: Their Ointments Man's fat, Blood, Usnea, Hoggs-grease, Oil of Whales.
Their Characters are ancient Hebrew or Samaritan: Their Speech is Hebrew or
Latin. Their Paper must be of the Membranes of Infants, which they call
Virgin-parchment, or of the skins of Cats, or Kids. Besides, they compose their
Fires of sweet Wood, Oil or Rosin: And their Candles of the Fatt or Marrow of
Men or Children: Their Vessels are Earthen, their Candlesticks with three feet,
of dead men's bones: Their Swords are steel, without guards, the points being
reversed. These are their Materials, which they do particularly choose from the
Magical qualities whereof they are composed.

And Form.
29. Neither are the peculiar shapes without a natural cause. Their Caps are
Oval, or like Pyramids with Lappets on each side, and furr within: Their Gowns
reach to the ground, being furred with white Fox-skins, under which they have a
Linen Garment reaching to their Knee. Their Girdles are three inches broad,
and have many Caballistical Names, with Crosses, Trines and Circles inscribed
thereon. Their Knives are Dagger-fashion: and the Circles by which they defend
themselves are commonly nine fo^t in breadth, but the Eastern Magicians give
but seven. And these are the matter and manner of their Preparations, which I
thought fit here to insist upon, because of their affinity with the Instruments
of Charms, for both which a natural cause is constantly pretended.

The Conclusion.
30. Thus I have briefly spoken of the Nature of every Spirit good or evil, so
far as safety or convenience would permit; adding also this last Discourse of
Charms and Conjurations, in their speculative part, forbearing to describe the
Forms themselves, because many of them are not only facil, but also of mighty
power when they are seasonably applied: So that to describe distinctly, by what
means Magicians kill, cure, or conquer, were to strengthen the hands of the
Envious against their Neighbors Lives and Fortunes. And therefore the Readers
must rest contented with what is here related of the Nature of Astral or
Infernal Spirits.

FINIS.
The Contents of the Chapters in The Discourse concerning Devils and Spirits.
BOOK I.
Chap. I. THE Philosophers opinions concerning Devils and Spirits; their manner
of reasoning thereupon: and the same confuted. Page. 1 Chap. II. Mine own
opinion concerning this argument, to the disproof of some writers hereupon.
Page. 2 Chap. III. The opinion of Psellus touching spirits, of their several
Orders, and a confutation of his errors therein. Page. 3 Chap. IV. More absurd
assertions of Psellus and such others, concerning the actions and passions of
spirits, his definition of them, and of his experience therein. Page. 4 Chap.
V. The opinion of Fascius Cardanus touching spirits, and of his familiar devil.
Page. 5 Chap. VI. The opinion of Plato concerning spirits, devils and angels,
what sacrifices they like best, what they fear; and of Socrates his familiar
devil. Page. 6 Chap. VII. Plato's nine orders of spirits and angels, Dionysius
his division thereof not much differing from the same, all disproved by learned
Divines. Page. 7 Chap. VIII. The commencement of devils fondly gathered out the
14. of Isaiah; of Lucifer, and of his fall, the Cabalists, the Talmudists and
Schoolmens opinions of the creation of angels. ibid. Chap. IX. Of the
contention between the Greek and Latin Church touching the fall of angels, the
variance among Papists themselves herein; a conflict between Michael and
Lucifer. Page. 8 Chap. X. Where the battle between Michael and Lucifer was
sought, how long it continued, and of their power; how fondly Papists and
Infidals write of them, and how reverently Christians ought to think of them.
Page. 9 Chap. XI. Whether they became devils, which being angels kept not their
vocation, in Jude and Peter; of the fond opinions of the Rabbis touching
spirits and bugs, with a confutation thereof. Page. 10 Chap. XII. That the
Devils assaults are spiritual, and not temporal; and how grossly some
understand those parts of the scripture. Page. 11 Chap. XIII. The equivocation
of this word Spirit, how diversely it is taken in the Scriptures, where (by the
way) is taught that the Scripture is not always literally to be interpreted,
nor yet All gorically to be understood. Page. 12 Chap. XIV. That it pleased God
to manifest the power of his Son, and not of witches by miracles. Page. 13
Chap. XV. Of the possessed with devils. Page. 14 Chap. XVI. That we being not
thoroughly informed of the nature of devils and spirits, must satisfy our
selves with that which is delivered us in the Scriptures touching the same; how
this word Devil is to be understood both in the singular and plural number; of
the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of the devil; of tame spirits; of Ahab. ibid.
Chap. XVII. Whether spirits and souls can assume bodies, and of their creation
and substance, wherein Writers do extremely contend and vary. Page. 15 Chap.
XVIII. Certain Popish reasons concerning spirits made of air; of day devils,
and night devils, and why the devil loves no salt in his meat. Page. 16 Chap.
XIX. That such devils as are mentioned in the scriptures, have in their names
their nature and qualities expressed, with instances thereof. ibid Chap. XX.
Diverse names of the devil, whereby his nature and disposition is manifested.
Page. 17 Chap. XXI. That the Idols or gods of the Gentiles are devils, their
diverse names, and in what affairs their labors and authorities are employed,
wherein also the blind superstition of the heathen people is discovered. Page.
18 Chap. XXII. Of the Romans chief gods called Dii selecti, and of other
heathen gods, their names and offices. Page. 19 Chap. XXIII. Of diverse gods in
diverse Countries. Page. 20 Chap. XXIV. Of Popish provincial gods, a comparison
between them and heathen gods; of physical gods, and of what occupation every
Popish god is. ibid. Chap. XXV. A comparison between the heathen and Papists,
touching their excuses for idolatry. Page. 22 Chap. XXVI. The conceit of the
heathen and the Papists all one in Idolatry; of the Council of Trent; a notable
story of a hangman arraigned after he was dead and buried, etc. Page. 23 Chap.
XXVII. A confutation of the fable of the hangman; of many other feigned and
ridiculous tales and apparitions, with a reproof thereof. Page. 24 Chap.
XXVIII. A confutation of Johannes Laurentius, and of many others maintaining
these feigned and ridiculous tales and apparitions, and what drives them away;
of Moses and Elias their appearance in mount Tabor. Page. 25 Chap. XXIX. A
confutation of assuming of bodies, and of the serpent that seduced Eve. Page.
26 Chap. XXX. The objection concerning the devils assuming of the serpents body
answered. ibid. Chap. XXXI. Of the Curse rehearsed Genesis 3. and that place
rightly expounded. Calvin's opinion of the devil. Page. 27 Chap. XXXII. Mine own
opinion, and resolution of the nature of spirits, and of the devil with his
properties. Page. 28 Chap. XXXIII. Against fond Witchmongers, and their
opinions concerning corporal devils. Page. 29 Chap. XXXIV. A conclusion,
wherein the Spirit of spirits is described, by the illumination of which spirit
all spirits are to be tried: with a confutation of the Pneumatomachi flatly
denying the divinity of this Spirit. Page. 30
BOOK II.
Chap. I. OF Spirits in general, what they are, and how to be considered, also
how far the power of Magitians and Witches, is able to operate in Diabolical
Magic. Page. 39 Chap. II. Of the good and evil Demons or Genii; whether they
are, what they are, and how they are manifested; also of their names, powers,
faculties, offices, how they are to be considered. Page. 42 Chap. III. Of the
Astral Spirits of Men departed; what they are, and why they appear again, and
what witchcraft may be wrought by them. Page. 45 Chap. IV. Of astral spirits,
or separate demons in all their distinctions, names, and natures, and places
of habitations, and what may be wrought by their assistance. Page. 49 Chap. V.
Of the Infernal Spirits, or devils, and damned souls, treating what their
natures, names, and powers are. Page. 56 Chap. VI. Of the nature, force, and
forms of charms, periapts, amulets, pentacles, conjurations, ceremonies, etc.
Page. 66 Chap. VII. Being the conclusion of the whole, wherein diverse ancient
spells, charms, incantations, and exorcisms are briefly spoken of. Page. 68
THE END.

