A Brief, and Plain COMMENTARY, WITH NOTES: Not more useful, than seasonable,
upon the whole Prophecy of MALACHY.

Delivered, Sermon-wise, Diverse years since, at Pitmister, in Summerset.

By William Sclater, Doctor in Divinity, then Minister of that Parish,

Now, Published by his Son William Sclater, Batchelar in Divinity, late Fellow
of Kings College in Cambridg, now minister of Collompton in Devon.

Published according to Order.

LONDON. Printed by J. L. for Christopher Meredith at the sign of the Crane in
Paul's Churchyard 1650.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, Mr. HENRY WALROND of Bradfield, in the County of
Devon, Esquire, Grace, and Glory.
Sir,
ITs a maxim with the Schoolmen, (in whose volumes, amidst much superstitious
oar, some gold of precious and refined wit, is, by a Schoolmen being more
witty to raise questions, then judicious to assoyl them, are warily to be read,
at least by Novices. Dr. Sclater, p. 73. on 2 Thessalonians. c. 1. v. 11. and p. 202.
203. ib. c. 2. v. 15.
wary searcher, to be found) That charity is the form of every Theological
virtue: Not, that it gives them al their several natures, or distinct
individuations; but for that it forms them al unto acceptability before God, in
whose repute even 1 Cor. 13.1.
Angelical excellencies, without love, are but as a tinkling cymbal, or an
empty found: It is, indeed, that royal grace, wherein, above other, God himself
does, in a sort, reciprocate with his Saints; If we fear God, he fears not us;
if we obey God, he obeyes not us, etc. But if we love God, he sweetly closes
with us in the 1 John 4.19.
same kind, and returns it with advantage into our bosoms. A clear Joh. 13.35.
proof of this affection was expected from none more, (...) I fidor.
Pelusiota, l. 1. Ep. 356.
then from Apostles; wherefore our Savior, to make experiment, puts Saint
Peter, a Gal. 2.9. A pillar.
chief amongst them, to an interogatory, in the same terms thrice repeated,
Joh. 21.15, 16, 17. Simon, Redditur trinae Negationi trina confessio, ne minus
amori lingua serviat, quam timori. S. August. tract. 127. in Jobannem.
Son of Jonas, Love thou me? Who likewise thrice appealing to Christ's
Omnisciency, for the truth of his inward love toward him, is required to show
it forth, by feeding of his lambs, and sheep; by that confession, or engagment,
as it is were salving the wound of his threefold denial of him; and causing
his tongue (as Augustine observes) to serve him no less to declare his love,
then it had done in disclosing his fear: To wave the mention of what
heterogeneous glosses the soothing Parasites of the grand 3 Epist. Joh. 9.
Diotrephes of Rome, (that Antichristian 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
man of sin) impose upon this text, making what was meant only as as the Du
Moulin. Art. 23. Defense of K. Ja. against Caeefteu.
strengthening of Peter's infirmity, Dico, quod nullu^ Apostolorum, fact^s est a
Christo Episcopus; Petrus depalude, de potestat. Apost. Art. 2.
(for so many fallings, so many Beza, Annot. on Matthew. 16. v. 19.
restorings, says Beza) to to be a raising of him, with exclusion of all
others, unto dignity; that, on this occasion, by the great cheat of a pretended
personal (not by any intended truly Jud. v. 3. (...)
primitive Romans 1.8.
doctrinal) succession, they might, with an usurped triple crown, enthronize
their visible head, and Monarch of the universal Church; and enstate him in a
Primacy of Jurisdiction, and supreme Domination over all other Pastors, and
souls whatsoever, or wheresoever; (whereby it appears, he is like 1 Pet. 5.3.
conferr 2 Cor. 1.24.
Peter in nothing more, then in the denial of his master,) whereas, as St. Hoc
erant utique and caeteri Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti,
and honoris, and potestatis -- exordium ab unitate proficiscitur. S. Cyprian,
de unitate Ecclesiae, sect. 3. confer Whitaker contra Duraeum, l. 9. s. 7. Juel
against Harding, part. 2. c. 3. Divis. 3. Mr. Edw. Reynolds, on Psa. 110. p.
88. Dieteric in Festo St. Pauli: with all the full Chorus of reformed,
Protestant Divines.
Cyprian truly, (excepting Matthew. 10.2.
sometimes, but not Gal. 2.9. 2 Cor. 11.28.
always, a priority of order in his nomination before them) the very same what
St. Peter was, in point both of honor, Matthew. 28.19.
commission, and Matthew. 18.18. Ioh. 20.21. S^t primus ante omnes, non
primarius, King James, In Apology to all Christian Monarchs, p. 306. 307. etc.
power, were all the other Apostles.

To wave, I say, all this, (as being now enditing an Epistle, not writing a
treatise,) allowing to Peter, and the Apostles, as to the first
Representatives, their extraordinary Circumstantials, and unimitable The
Personal Privileges of the Apostles Calling, see in Mr. Perkins, on Jude v.
17. and in Bilson Praef. p. 11. and c. 5. and 10. of the Perpetual govern. of
the Church. Davenant. on Coloss. c. 1. v. 1. and p. 130, 131, 137, 152, 170.
ib. Dr. Fe^ld, l. 1. c. 5. l. 3. c. 4. Of the Church; and Dr. Sclater on Psalm.
116. p. 48, 104, 142.
privileges, fixed to their persons only: all other * faithful Jer. 3.15.
Pastors, lawfully See Perkins on Isa. 6.5, 6. Signs of a ministers lawful
calling, see in him, on Galat. c. 1. v. 1, and 11. and on Matthew. 7. v. 16. it:
Pet. Martyr. loc com. class. 4. c. 1. Bullinger, advers. Anabapt. l. 3. c. 4.
Non sunt audiendi, nisi vocati, Gerson. part. 3. de vita Spirit. Comad.
Dieteric. In Festo St. Andreae. Dr. Sclater, on Psalm. 116. p. 142, 143.
called, and Jer. 23.31. Joh. 17.18. Romans 10.15. Heb. 5.4.
sent, for the ordinary substantials of their Romans 11.13. 1 Timothy 3.1.
office, in Matthew. 28.19, 20. Mar. 16.15, 16. Romans 10.14. Joh. 17.20.
Preaching and Baptizing, etc. are enjoined the like manifestation of the same
love, to the 1 Pet. 5.4.
chief Shepherd, and 1 Pet. 2.25.
Bishop of souls, by the Act. 20.28.
inspection, and 1 Pet. 5.2.
feeding of his flock, the Church. 1 Cor. 4.2. Matthew. 25.21.
Joh. 14.15.


This well knew the Author of this ensuing Commentary, (my dear, and reverend
father) who seeing the way thus lead before him, strove to walk after in the
very path, though he reached not, happly, the same large steps; and has given
ample expressions, after his Ephesians. 4.7. 2 Cor. 10.13.
measure, of his love, (the chief 2 Cor. 5.14.
motive of his ministerial undertakings) to Christ, by his triple feeding both
of his lambs, and sheep; to wit. 1. By word. 2. By life. 3. By writing. For so
did this great Apostle, with the rest: To those Churches which they planted,
Preaching, Tam viva (quod aiunt) voce, quam per Epistolas, postea, as
Tertullian de Praescript. advers. Haeret. c. 21.
Tertullian speaks; as well by their Epistles, absent, as by their lively
voices, present: They delivered precepts both of doctrine, and manners, (...),
as Chrysostom says, both without writing, and with it; the which is also
insinuated by St. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. where he exhorts his Thessalonians to
stand fast, and hold the traditions (to wit of doctrine) which they had been
taught, by word, or their Epistle. And, indeed, in its degree, a man may (...),
as Clemens Alexandr. l. 1. Strom. See Eccles. 12.10.
Clemens Aexandrinus phraseth it; Preach, as, by his tongue; so, by his pen.
David compared his tongue to the Psalm. 45.1.
pen of a ready writer, that what he spoke might, as 1 Timothy 4.1. (...).
a written letter, litera scripta manet.
last; and as the Spirit is said to (speak) expressly; so is the Scripture, that
is the [written] word, to (...) Jam. 4.5.
(say): A writer is a silent, as a speaker is a vocal Orator. Either
sanctified, wins glory to the Lord, and much advantage to the Church of
Christ, faxit. Romans 6.17. So Dr. Fulk expounds it, against the Rhemists, number.
17. on 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Chrysostom. Hom. 4. in 1 Thessalonians. 2.


Now, it may be thought not well beseeming me, or, at all, my Herauldry to
blazon the coat of my fathers graces, the crest whereof is glory: Perhaps, it
might be [lawful] for me, (who knew him both in word, in life, in writings,
better, then another did, or could;) but, as the Doctor of the Gentiles, said
of his own rapture, and visions; 2 Cor. 12.1.
, (...), It is not [expedient] doubtless, for me to glory; though, after
Solomon's expression, such a Father may be my Prove. 17.6.
glory: Let his own works praise him in the Gates: he was a fair Copy for me to
write after; and, as its written of righteous Abel, He being dead, yet Heb.
11.4.
speaks; and what says he? Surely, methinks, as the ghostly Father of
Timothy, to him, 2 Timothy 3.10, 14. Thou have fully known my doctrine, manner of
life, etc. Continue thou in the things which thou have learned, and have been
assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them; now, my own desires, and
endeavors are, that, as I resemble him (they say) in Sic oculos, sic ille
manus, sic ora ferebat. Virgil. Aen. 3. de Astyanact Hectoris f^lio.
visage, as a son by natural birth; so, I may do likewise, in religious
imitation; adding only (as in all dutiful acknowledgments) of him what
Nazianzene wrote, as an Epitaph, on his Basil.

(...). His doctrine was thunder, and his life lightening; the one to startle
sinners rock't asleep in security; the other, to Matthew. 5.16.
shine before good eyes, and to dazzle others, who shunned illumination. He was
in his native disposition, as Moses, abounding in mansuetude, and Number. 12.3.
meekness; yet, in the cause of Christ, Act. 7.22.
mighty in words, and deeds: So Prove. 31.31.
Joh. 8.39. See this book. c. 2. v. 8. p. 78, 79, 80, 81. and, him also, on
Psa. 116. p. 174, 175.
that my hope is, the Prove. 10.
memory of him, as of a just man, both is, and shall be blessed.

And I am the rather induced to think so, for that in the perusal of diverse
Modern writers, I find him quoted often, as an approved Textuary, and of a
sound judgment, in those Scriptures, and Sermons, which he undertook to treat
of; some whereof were set forth and revised by himself, in his own life time;
some published by me, since his decease.

As concerning this book, which I thought meet to style, [A brief commentary,
with notes, on the Prophet Malachy,] the materials of it were meditated, and
Preached, some years before his death; (of whom, what concerns mine own
private estate, I say no more, but as Philip said of Hipparchus being gone,
Sibi mature, mihi cito, he dyed in a good time for himself, but for me,
too-soon:) but, as the Hebrews are wont to express that in the In prophetis
praeteritum pro futuro poni crebro solet. Joh. Drusius. Lect. in Obad. v. 7.
praeter-tense, which was to be accomplished in the future, thereby denoting
the certainty of what they foretell; so what was uttered by him, as in
Exposition of this Prophecy, for diverse years past, was as an apt mould for
these very times: He was no Prophet, or Prophets son, much less a favourer of
bold Contra Enthusiastas lege Bulling. l. 2. c. 1. adv. Anabapt. and Dieteric.
In feria 3a. Penecost.
Enthusiasmes, or a pretender to extraodinary 2 Cor. 12.1.
revelations, under a constitution of See Dr. Sclater, on Psalm. 116. v. 13. p.
127, 128.
ordinary means Zanch. de Divinatione. per Insomn. p. 163.
by God. Yet certainly, as Aristotle (the Patriarch of Philosophers) writes of
some, that they have (...), as it were forespeaking, and (after Zanchy's
expression) praesagient, See 1 Timothy 4.13.
conjecturing natures, peculiari vi Conrad. Dietericus Dominica post Circumcis.
Domini: number. 4.
(...)) futuros eventus praesagientes, as Conradus Dietericus has it; so
surely, (finding withal, in experience, the Psalm. 25.14. Prove. 3.32.
secret of the Lord to be with him) God gave him a Prove. 22.3.
foreseeing eye, and by a prudent, yea Political observation of Gods exemplary
dealings with other Nations, and Churches (sinning, or reforming,) seemed to
discover, how the pulse of this land began to beat, and by foregoing symptoms
guessed at the approaching disease, that was growing upon this Church, and
State; and which, since, in great measure, has broken out.

For the style, it might, in all likelihood, have been better polished, if he
had survived to have drawn his last, and smoothest hand over it; yet, to any
who have pleased to be conversant in his other writings, it shall be found
alike, that is, as himself was, somewhat after the stature of Zacheus, Luke
19.3.
short, curt, and strict, though withal full, and clear: And indeed
sententiousness, not loquacity, in serious Theology, is to be preferred. --
(...)

(...). His skill was somewhat choice in searching, and springing the mine of
an intricate, obscure scripture, sparing no devotion, or Logic, til he had
found out the right vein, where the treasure lay hid. And, in this respect, he
has been heard to say, that he would [warily] adventure to start the hare with
any man; which done, a common ingenuity may find scope enough to pursue a
text. Homer II. (...).


For the method, it is for the Chapters themselves, at large, Analytical; for
the Practical observations thence deduced, synthetical; disposed for the best
advantage, both of the memories, and hearts of those plain people that heard
him.

The scope is, to discover Gods judgments in the causes; and withal, to hold
forth means of prevention, or removal, in their due application.

Having, on these, and the like considerations, pondered in my secret thoughts
the usefullness of this work, I was fully purposed to prepare it for the press,
and to let it see the light. Yet, because (amidst so great Atheism abroad, that
now, as Jacob did Esau, has taken the general Isa. 6.10.
infatuation by the Genesis 25.26.
heel; insomuch, that the 2 Timothy 3.5.
power of godliness being long since lost, now, the very outward form is hardly
to be found;) Foggy, and (woe is me!) too much uncontrolled errors Mundus
senescens patitur phantasias; Gerson.
in this dotage of the world; arising like those Rev. 9.3.
Locusts out of the bottomless pit, have damped the ancient zeal, and, as the
Jon. 4.7.
worm in Jonah's gourd, eaten out the very sap, and vigor of almost all right
holiness:

For this cause, a patron must of necessity be sought to perfect this helpless
posthume from the injuries of an Act. 2.40. and Philip. 2.15.
untoward generation. And, to shelter a [pious] discourse, I quickly knew where
to find one, a very near neighbor; even your self, (most worthy Sir:) A
gentleman, 'twixt whom, and the Author, there did ever pass, constanly, so
dear and affectionate a reciprocation of most cordial, and religious respects.
I cannot but well hope from so much candor, and gravitie, for a courteous
entertainment of a suitor that comes thus [in his name] to Bradfield. And the
rather, for that I have been informed of your Noble acknowledgments, that
Doctor Sclater's ministry was, under God, one of the [first] means of your
calling, at least, of your firmer establishment, in your first, right ways of
truth, and godliness; insomuch, that I begin to think, on a sudden, you might
personally be an Auditor of some of these very Sermons, the sum whereof I now
crave the favor to present you with: nor do I question, but that your inward
experience of the comforts of The work of the Lord was precious in those days,
as 1 Samuel 3.1. See p. 79. of this book.
those days, occasioneth, even yet, (whereof I rejoice) so daily mention, and
so honorable a commemoration of his name, at your refections, deambulations,
conferences.

How willingly (had I any tolerable skill in the music of Oratory) could I now
strike the sweet strings, and sound the pleasant Notes of your due praises; the
garlands whereof about your Temples, like the trees of Alcinous, are ever
green, and not suffered to flag or wither through any defect of the radical
moisture of Divine graces. But herein, methinks, I am as in a strait betwixt
two; afraid, on the one side, of the Scilla of mine own insufficiencies; your
perfections, as if in the very Tropic of Cancer, are advanced to so great an
height, that if I should speak of them in a magnificent style, they would De
quo non possum ita magnifice loqui, id virtus quia superettua; Terent.
surmount the reach of my expressions: this were an alloy for an abler pen: on
the other side, of the Charybdis, of Laudator quasi, adulator. (...).
flattery, especially when as your piety is i clothed with so great Vir justus
quanto perfectior efficitur, tanto in oculis suis minuitur. Peraldus, tom. 2.
c. 5. De virtut. and vitiis.
humility; that as those who live under the Equinoctial, even at noonday, have
no shadows at all; so, in the very Meridian of your Sanctity, you decline your
[own,] that God may have [his] glory: quam magnum est nolle laudari, and esse
laudabilem? Seen-

Yet, since the self-depressing 2 Chro. 12.11.
Apostle would ca. have his Converts to mind, (...), due praise, Phil. 4.8.
and as Granatens. tom. 3. conc. de Temp. p. 460. vol. 8.
Granado observes, in praising of good men, we, in them, honor the God of such
men, when we show forth the virtues, or praises of him who has called them:
and though an humble man be shye of giving eulogies of 2 Cor. 10.18.
himself; yet, as St. Clement, (...) Ephesians. 3.8.
in his Epistle to the Corinthians (a genuine piece of antiquity lately come to
our hands) has it, (...), let him permit another to give testimony of him;
this kind of laudation being (says a reverend Davenant. exposit. in Coloss.
c. 2. v. 5. p. 170. confer p. 84. of this book.
Bishop) but an artificial, or effectual persuasion to persevere in things
already praiseworthy; thereby, withal, to testify good affection, and to
hold out the lamp of their virtuous lives unto others: In this case, (as Austin
speaks in the matter of commending the dead) nec laudantem adulatio movet, nec
laudatum tentat elatio, neither adulation may justly be imputed to the praiser,
nor Elation to the praised. p Ecclus. 43.7.
1 Pet. 5.5.
t 1 Pet. 2.9.
S. Clemens, Epist. ad Corinth. p. 50. edit. Oxon. 1633.


And, on this Apology, I must acqaint the world, that my Rhetoric would here
fail me, before matter, the Inopem me copia fecit.
copiousness whereof has brought upon me a penury of language, to embellish
it: However, since my self have seldom departed from you, without some
improvement of Holiness by you, I cannot forbear to break my box of praises, as
of so much spikenard, to perfume the Age with the mention of your Virtues; and
that, if not in proportion to your Quod si digna tua minim est mea pagina
laud, At voluisse sat est -- Lucan. in panegyr. ad Calpurn. Pisonem.
merit, yet in some measure to mine own desires.

Lo! from a living root of worthiness, there have sprang forth from you, by an
happy vegeration, various branches of very eximious qualifications, being made
conspicuous, and to be seen.

1. In Artificial inventions. 2. In Civil moralities. 3. Oeconomical decorum's.
4. In Political administrations. And (as the crown and glory of all these.) 5.
In religious devotion.
For the first, so singular in the universality of them, as if the Universal
had been but one singular: as to another Bezaleel, a spirit is given you to
Exodus 31.3.4.
devise cunning works, in all manner of workmanship; and as some Christian
Archimedes, no engine, or instrument, for contrivance, or motion, exceeds your
skill: even the most extravagant Element, the water, is taught, to make melody,
yea repast, and delight for most of the senses: Yet all this, as being far
beneath your better thoughts, is made the business but of your spare, succisive
hours; and regarded only as your recreations.



Psalm. 127, 128.
fruitful vines, so your children stand, like Olive plants, about your table;
your quiver is become full of those arrows, which the Lords is pleased to
account his own heritage, and his reward: all these, with your household, as if
by a kind of sacred (...) Abraham's religiousness had, indeed, transmigrated
into your breast, you command Genesis 18.19.
to keep the way of the Lord; and they all again, by beholding your Coloss. 2.5.
orderly, and constant ensample, are, as it were, piously charmed into a
zealous Joh. 8.39. As Ulysses of his family, to quip Ajax, neque in his
quisquam damnatus, and exul.
imitation, like those twelve tribes, Act. 26.7. Instantly serving God, day and
night: And, which is very remarkable, (as being indeed the very Diamond set in
the ring of Gods favors on you) in so fair a Pomegranate, no one grain is
found tainted: No one, among so numerous an offspring, debauched. He, I am
sure, who survives as your firstborn Mr. William Walrond.
son, and is, as Jacob said of Reuben, your Genesis 49.2.
strength, the honor of his house, and the hopes of his Country, a gentleman
of elegant learning, refined parts, and of eminent sanctity, well leads the
way to all the rest; so that I may hither apply what that Heroic Poet sang of
these golden branches z Psalm. 45.14.
plucked off; if the one failed, another sprang up forthwith in the same place.
-- Virgil. Aen. 6.
Uno avulso, non deficit alter.

Aureus, and simili frondescit virga metallo. For the fourth; you have been
known, for many years past, to resemble, in your practice, Exodus 18.21.
Jethro's magistrate, which has made you long a stay to these parts; and as
Horod was Mar. 6.20.
afraid of John Baptist, for his holiness, so has lewdness been, of your
justice; as, on the other side, religion found both countenance, and
encouragement from you: but, that which my self (and as I believe, with me,
many others) have with some specialty, noticed, is; that, as you have Eccles.
9.2.
feared an oath your self, so to persons whom you have discovered tender,
ignorant, or rash, you have forborne to load them with a public oath: which
cautelousness if some had equally observed, many consciences had, probably,
been less guilty of the breach of the Exodus 20.7.
third Commandment; and the land not Jer. 23.10.
mourned so long because of unlawful, and (alas! how often?) contradictory
swearing.

Lemuel's daughter Prove. 31.29.
excels all the former, is your religious devotion: he that runs may read
this, in your awful, yet serene Cujus vultum nec fuscavit maeror, nec levigavit
risus, Bern. de S. Martino.
countenance, the clear index of a mortified soul; God has poured upon you a
choice spirit of Zech. 12.10.
supplications; you are, in the scriptures, an Act. 18.24.
Apollos; to the 2 Timothy 3.17.2 Pet. 1.21.
men of God, faithful ministers, a q Gaius; of such guests your hospitality is
seldom unfurnished: A bemoaner, no fomenter of the great divisions of the
times, for which, (ah me!) as of old, for those of Reuben, there are so great
thoughts and impressions of heart: an honourer, promoter, and a strict observer
of Gods public ordinances; Psalm. 122.1.
glad of occasions to frequent the Heb. 10.25.
Assemblies; and not only so, [for an example] to be Matthew. 5.16.
seen; but your Matthew. 6.6.
closset is a Temple for Divinity. And now also, as Isaac had his Genesis 24.63.
field, so have you your garden of delight, a retreat for holy meditations;
that so, as Enoch, in devout soliloquy's, you might Genesis 5.24.
walk, and converse with God; having your Phil. 3.20.
conversation in Heaven, even whilst you are on Matthew. 6.10.
earth; as some Christian Scipio, nunquam minus solus, quam cum solus, being
never less alone, then when you are alone: And, as the richest Carbuncles shine
best in varied, or duskish lights; so does your sanctimony, in an age so
over-cast with black, and pitchy clouds of all variety of most fowl enormities;
as it more commended Noah to be righteous before God, even in that very Genesis
7.1.
generation, when sin as a deluge, had over-flown the whole world, and [all]
flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth, Genesis 6.12. But, this is so well
known to all, that I may seem to do a wrong, in making them only as my own
private notices.

To conclude; (for I fear my self to have exceeded the measure of an Epistle:)
thus adorned with Gods graces, it shall be your comfort, yea your glory, to
abound more and more; and though, (as you once told me your self) you are not
for the Phil. 3.9.
righteousness of works; yet persist still (I beseech you) in the works of
righteousness: Put on these; they shall be, not only as white raiment to r
Judge. 5.15.
b 1 Thessalonians. 4.1. 1 Cor. 15.58.
d 1 Pet. 2.12. Jam. 3.13.
Rev 3.18.
cloth you; but also (...), as the [ar Romans 13.12.
mour] of light, even armor of proof, to defend, and guard you against the
[hurt] of whatsoever evil may assault you; albeit they are not, as Bernard
truly, Causa Regnandi, the cause of reigning; notwithstanding you shall find
them to be, via regni, the Jam. 2.18.
evidences of your Faith, the Ephesians. 1.4. Tit. 2.14. 2 Pet. 1.10.
fruits of your Election, and the Ephesians. 2.10.
way ordained of God to walk directly in, to the Kingdom of Heaven: To the full
fruition of which kingdom, that you may full of days, and in a good old age,
accompanied with a lively faith, and a clear conscience, be advanced; (desiring
withal the favor of your Hereditary respects,) is, and shall be the Col. 4.12.
fervent prayer of, Sir, g Estius, ad Romans 13.12.
h 1 Pet. 3.13.
^ Isa. 26.12.


Your servant in the Lord Christ, to be commanded. William Sclater.
From my study in Collompton, Sept. 1. 1648.
To all Christian, and charitable Readers: but, with more specialty, to my
loving Countrymen, the Parishioners of Pitmister, in the County of Sommerset,
who yet surviving resent with due respects the memory of their too soon
deceased Pastor, Doctor Sclater, the Author of this Book.
HAving, nigh about two years since, revised some Manuscripts of my Fathers, I
found these papers, which are now exposed to the public use, written in a
small, and somewhat an obscure Character, inscribed Sermones Dominicales,
Sermons upon the Prophet Malachy, Preached on the Lords days; began February
the nineteenth, 1608. In the perusal of them, I perceived that the discourse
therein might not be impertinent, but rather seasonable for these latter times:
And, out of a serious desire to do good, having observed a fair reception of
some other of his works, published since his death, by me, (a catalogue whereof
I shall now give you) I immediately resolved upon a transcription; which being
finished, and in some order digested, was tendered to the license; but could
not, through the intervenience of new commotions, be well put the Press, till
now.

As for the Author, his other writings have made him known; and in this brief
comment, upon this Prophet, he has delivered his judgment, Orthodoxly, and so
consentient to Divine Truth, that what was written of Rabanus Maurus,
(sometimes Archbishop of Mentz) by him, who set out his Commentaries upon
Jeremy, may be hither applied; Facile est colligere, vel ex hoc uno Authore,
Spiritum sanctum nunquam suam deseruisse Ecclesiam, it may be easily collected,
though but from this one Author, that the Holy Spirit has not Psalm. 89.33.
forsaken his Church, no not in the worst times, but has 1 Timothy 1.12.
enabled, and raised up faithful Matthew. 9.37, 38.
laborers, 2 Chro. 36.15. and Matthew. 10.5.
sending them forth into his own great harvest.

Let not this posthume little Volume of his be thought spurious, for that it
has lain so long concealed; tw'as not of shame to show it is face; but for
that, perhaps, in so quaint an Age, it wanted better garments; at least, some
trimming upon it is plain cloth: in tottered times, it may hope to pass, though
in an homely, yet in an untorngarb: in short, the watch may be of good
materials, albeit the maker of it be by time preventet for to crave, or to
enamel it: I shall desire the Reader, now, to view truth, in this Book, as in
it is first naked simplicity, without the dressings, or curlings, or ornaments
of Rhetoric, which like to painted glass in a fair window, often hinder the
native beauty of the purer light.

I have, in a specialty of respect, directed it unto the place of my own
Nativity, as by a kind of natural instinct, to declare, (as Ulysses sometimes
did after his Ithaca,) how I Phil. 1.8. 2 Cor. 9.4.
long after the 3 Epist. joh 2.
prosperity thereof; and partly, for that a present of this nature, brought
them as a legacy from their dead Pastor, chiefly, when their own Gal. 3.1.
eyes have seen, or their hearts felt the actual accomplishment of what was in
these, as in other Sermons, so long agon fore-shewn them; this may happily revive
his memory afresh among them, and therewith also some new thanks to God, for
the advantage of those labors, whereby they were 1 Cor. 3.10. 2 Cor. 13.10.
Jude v. 20.
edified in the faith of Christ.

I persuade my self, that there are yet among you some, who bear in your psalm.
89 50.
bosoms a witness, that tells your fouls, what St. Paul did, sometime, to his
soon-forgetting Corinthians though you have had many instructors in Christ, yet
have you not had many 1 Cor. 4.15. and as he might have said, Isa. 8.18. Behold
me and the children whom the Lord has given me. See page 5 on 2 Thessalonians.
Fathers, for in Christ Jesus he has begotten you, through the Gospel: Now
some have thought, that men do ^owe (at least respectively) more to their Gal.
4.19.
spiritual, than to their natural Parents; by how much more heavenly the second
is, then the first Birth; and the regeneration of the precious Soul to be
preferred to the generation of the Body: what testimony or proof you have
given of such an apprehension, your selves best know.

For my self, though I cannot have personal addresses to Ezekiel. 21.2.
drop among you my word, as an Echo to the old voice; yet am I with you in the
Spirit* and my hearts desire, and prayer to God, for you all, both is, and
shall be, that you may not be shaken (no not under the strongest gusts of
temptations, in t ese speckled times of so many motly opinions) from those
ancient, fundamental truths, wherewith, under his ministrei, your souls were
once well ballasted the skill of the seaman See Gal. 4.14, 15.
2 Cor. 2 9.
Col. 2.5.
Romans 10.1.
2 Thessalonians. 2.2.
Matthew. 7.25.
Jer. 6.15.
1 Cor. 3.11.
is best discovered in a storm: As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the
Lord, so walk ye in him; rooted, and built up in him, and stablished in the
faith, as ye have been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving: I conclude
all, with that advice of St. Paul to his Philippians, Chapter the fourth; verse
the nineth: Those things which ye have learned, and received, and heard, and
seen in him, do, and the God of peace shall be with you.

What endeavors I have used in this publication, let them be entertained in
good part, Gods Name be glorified; you, and the Church of Christ benefited
thereby, so shall I be abundantly satisfied, as who am,

Your affectionate well-willer in the Lord Christ, William Sclater.
From my study in Collompton. Sept. 1. 1649.
Imprimatur, Col. 2.6, 7.


Edmond Calamy

A Catalogue of such Books, or Sermons, as were published in the Lifetime of
this Author.
1 AN Exposition on the three first Chapters to the Romans. 2 An Exposition,
with Notes, on both Epistles to the Thessalonians. 3. Three Sermons; The one
styled, the sick souls salve, on Prove. 18.14. The other, the Christians
strength, on Philip. 4.13. The^ third, the Ministers Portion, on 1 Cor. 9.13,
14. which was enlarged into a treatise, wherein is handled the question of
Tithes.
Books of his, set forth by me, since his decease.
1. THree Sermons; the one, on 1 Pet. 2.11. Styled, the Spiritual warfare; the
other, on 2 King. 9.31. Preached on the Gunpowder Treason; the third, on Heb.
9.27. A Funeral Sermon on his Patron. 2. An Analytical Exposition on both
Epistles to the Corinthians, in Latin, Printed at Oxford. 3. Sermons,
experimental, on Psalm. 116. Meditated, and Preached by him, after his recovery
from a dangerous sickness, and his being stricken with the fit of an Apoplexy,
when actually Preaching in his Pulpit, at Pitmister. 4. Now, his brief
Commentary, with Notes, on the Prophet Malachy; of which I have said a few
words, in my Epistle Dedicatory. 5. An Exposition on the fourth Chapter to the
Romans, in an addition to the former three already set out, is now prepared for
the Press, a Scholastical, and elaborate piece. 6. Some remainders there yet
are of his lucubrations upon good part of the Revelation, and some more
Scriptures competently entire, besides other things, which as the parcels of a
broken Picture, express the Authors gravity, and diligence: More may be
hereafter published, if these find welcome, or, if industry, and learning,
meet with encouragements.
Errata.
PAge 14. line 2. for works, r. makes. p. 15. l. 19. for Election, r-
Reprobation. p. 20. l. 30. for denied, r. dicreed. p. 21. l. 23. for security,
r. scarcity. p. 37. for Matthew, 21.12. r. 43. p. 41. l. 21. Of inherence,
abounds, and l. 35. for thou, r. though. p. 52. l. 24. r. all the world for a
(good) conscience. p. 66. l. 30. put, for verse, 15. v. 12. p. 71. l. 30. for
v. 28. put, v. 20, p. 74. l. 13. for Mark. 15. r. 14. and l. 26. ib. for. v.
18. put, v. 13. p. 82. l. 26. for seems, r. serves. p. 89 l. 20. r. (to)
bribery. p. 90. l. 20. r. covering p. 93. l. 28. for like, r. light esteem and,
l. 36. for pleases, r. pleased. p. 94. l. 1. for has r. had. p. 96. l. 5. for
the, r. thee. p. 97. l. 4. for heardened, r. hardened. p. 99. l. 17. for Job
21. r. 31. p. 100. l. 2. r. Psalm. 32. p. 10. l. 36. for Inferiors Authority,
r. Superiors. for p. 114, 115. r. 106, 107. p. 108. l. 21. r. I know not what.
and l. 27.1.2. Pet. 2.19, and l, 29. for oak, r. cloak. p. 109. l. 23. for And^
r. An. p. 111. l. 15. for continance, r. continuance. p. 112, l. 3. r, 2 Timothy
4.2. p. 117. l. 1. r. 2 Timothy 2.24. p. 118. l. 13. for yet, r. ye. p. 119. l.
24. for hem, r. them. p. 123. l. 35. r. and, for an. p. 126. l. 21. for workip,
r. worship. also, p. 127. l. 15. p. 135. l. 25. r. seasonable. p. 136. l. 14.
for wast. r. shall. p. 138. l. 20. r. (to) be your Savior. p. 142. l. 28. Of,
abundat. p. 148. l. 29. r. bring them up. p. 156. l. 22 is, abundat. p. 162. l.
20. for amongst, r. amongst. p. 182. l. 15. r. who is not (with) him. p. 200.
l. 19. r. converted.

A brief Commentary, with Notes, upon the Prophet Malachy.
CHAP. 1. VER. 1. The burden of the word of the Lord to Israel, by Malachy.


FOr the Argument, it matters not much to speak; it is well given in our
English Bibles.

The Book has these parts, 1 Inscription, v. 1. 2 Oracles.


And those of two sorts: 1. Comminatory: wherein 2. Consolatory, cap. 3.4.
wherein Causes, Judgments, Admonitions prescribing remedies.


In the Inscription are these particulars:

1. The Denomination of the Book; Onus verbi Jehovae, The burden of the word of
the Lord. 2. The Subject, or Persons to whom it was sent, to Israel. 3. The
Person, by whose Ministry it was delivered, Malachy.
Of the first, The name of the Prophecy; The burden of the word of the Lord;
So called, not in respect of Malachy, as Lyra, but in respect of Israel: Lyra
thus, Onus, id est, officium denunciandi verbi Divini, The office of denouncing
the word of God; but amiss, For, Israel were they that were to bear this
burden: Malachy, but the Minister to denounce it.

But so, I take it, is this Prophecy called, of the greater part of the
Contents thereof, viz. The Judgments and Afflictions which the Lord was now
about to impose upon Israel for their transgressions; Metaphora, compare Isa.
13.1. The burden of Babel. Isa. 15.1. of Moab. Isa. 17.1. of Damascus. Nah.
1.1. of Nineveh, Zech. 12.1. so the sense is this, The Judgments or
Afflictions which the Lord, by Malachy, denounces against Israel: As if he had
said,

And that they are justly called Burdens, appears, because they press, and
oppress him that they light on; See even David, Gods own Child, Thine Psalm.
32.4.
hand is heavy upon me; And again, My sins, (that is, Thy wrath which for my
sins I apprehend, is gone over my head, and) are like a sore Psalm. 38.4.
burden too heavy for me to bear; In which sense is that to be meant, Genesis
4.13. My sin, that is, my punishment, greater than I can bear. And, Gal. 6 5.
Every man shall bear his own burden.

Mat. 12. v. 36. Idle words are accountable; nay, more than this, what think ye
of gross Oaths? Words are but wind. What of whoredom? A trick of youth. What
of drunkenesse? It is merriment and good fellowship, etc. Yea, what sin so
heavy, that to our people seems not light, because they never saw the burden
of Gods wrath that is due unto it? Now Brethren, consider these light sins,
they have a burden coming after them, even the burden of Gods heavy and
intolerable wrath; and let us come to weigh it, as it is, in the balance of
Gods Sanctuary; It has made Gods Children to cry out under the sense thereof;
Yea, our Savior Himself, under the sins of others; take it with the wrath of
God, and the Curse due unto it: Children were wont to have a Riddle, What is
heavier than Lead? Here we find Sin, See Zech. 5.8.



Exodus 23. It was the Law of God, that if a man had seen his enemies Ass, v. 5.
lying under his Burden, he should not forbear to help him up: has God care of
Oxen? Or, is it not rather spoken because of us? Beloved, we have many pressed
with Afflictions: Famine, is it not a burden? shall we cease to help? Agony of
Conscience a burden, shall we cease to help? Job 6.14. but men have forsaken
the fear of the Almighty, and are readier to add affliction; See also Psalm.
69.26. They persecute him whom thou have smitten, and they talk to the grief
of those whom thou have wounded.

Jer. 8.6.
What have I done? How have I provoked the Lord, that all this wrath is come
upon me? This shows us our stupidity: And let us all be admonished to labor to
feel it, lest at length it overwhelme us. The Promise is gracious, ease, and
refreshing, Mat. 11.28. The neglect thereof heavy, it endangereth to have the
wrath of God sevenfold increased, Lev. 26.21.

Of the word of the Lord.] First, in word, before in deed, denounced ere
executd: God gives warning by his Word, before he proceeds to lay on Load for
our Offenses; By Noah, a Preacher of Righteousness, to the old World; By Lots
Example and Admonitions, to the Sodomites; By Jonah, to Nineveh; By all the
Prophets, to Jerusalem.

his word he may rouse them; that so they either may be freed from the
judgments and common afflictions, or else not hurt by them, whiles by
repentance they have labored to turn the curse into a blessing, the punishment
into a chastisement.

Isa. 5.4. Judge, says the Lord, what could I have done more; And Hos. 6.5.
What shall I do unto thee? I have cut you down by my Prophets, and hewn you by
the words of my mouth, and my judgments have been in the light plainly
revealed as the Sun it self; therefore Justly are you now afflicted, and left
without excuse; As a good Father first admonishes and threateneth; when that
serves not, takes the Rod; See Ezekiel. 2.5.

Heb. 3.8.
Harden not your hearts, be lead to Repentance by the Word of the Lord: It is
true that our sins have been grand and grievous, yet who knows, whether the
Lord will repent and leave a blessing behind him? See Jonah, where Nineveh
repented and found mercy; Learn by words, be as loath to bear, as the Lord is
to impose the burden of his wrath; If not, know for a certainty, the Lord will
not always deal by speeches; but, as he has spoken of a burden, so we shall
feel it, if we return not.

down to the place of our Iniquity, without giving us warning; but rather would
he, we should convert and live, Ezekiel. 18. If we will not hear, what excuse
shall we have in the day of his fierce wrath? what will the Swearer say, etc.
This be assured of, the word of God has his work one way; if it bring thee not
to repentance, yet it shall bring thee to just judgment; as the snow and rain.
Isa. 55.10, 11. It is the savor of life or death, 2 Cor. 2.16. It either
captivates thy thoughts to obedience, or brings vengeance on thee for thy
disobedience.

A second thing here observable, Jerusalem, etc.

Nineveh was threatened, and yet escaped.

Answ. Threatenings are all to be understood, with their condition of
Repentance, Jer. 18.7, 8 that performed, the judgment stayed, but yet God true
in his Word.

Ob. If any shall yet say, Experience is ordinary against it,

Ans. Differtur non aufertur: Job 21.19. God lays up the sorrow of the Father
for his Children: Or else, they are punished in the Equivalent, in spiritual
judgments.

What does this teach us, Jer. 23.33, etc. When the Lord had sent his
Prophets to tell them of the burden of his wrath, they began to play with the
word of the Lord, and scoffingly to say to the Prophets, what is the burden of
the Lord? Right after the fashion of our people, what is the burden of the
Lord? What is that Hell you so much talk of? Hearken what the Lord answers: The
burden of the Lord ye shall mention no more; for every man's words shall be his
burden: but thus you shall say to the Prophet, what has the Lord answered
thee, and what has the Lord spoken? That is, whereas you now scoff at the
threatening of the Lords Mouth, I will so press you with my judgments, that I
will bring you on your knees, and make you in all humility and fear glad to
hear a word of comfort, and tidings of Reconciliation from the Mouth of the
Lord. Beloved, lay this to heart; It is that every man professes, to believe
the word of the Lord: yet when we come to particulars, nothing but Atheism,
and godless Infidelity.

To Israel,] Gods own people; Pet. 4.17. Judgment begins at Gods house, So Jer.
25.29.

Reasons are these: First, because amongst them, Achan, Josh. 7. Secondly, Gods
care more over them than others, Psalm. 89.31, 32. as a good Father over his own
Child. Thirdly, To prevent scandal in the Adversaries, 2 Samuel 12.14.

Jer. 7. The Temple of the Lord, That they thought was a Bulwark against all
afflictions, fondly: And at this day, how take most men upon them Profession,
like bankrupt Debtors a Kings Protection; as those, Hest. 8. became Jews, to
enjoy their privileges and immunities: But Beloved, know we, God spares not
his own, in any age; not Jerusalem, not Israel; but as David speaks, Psalm.
89.7. God is very terrible in the assembly of his Saints; and will bear that
in an Alien, what he will not bear in his own House or People; And therefore
fear we, and be not high-minded, Romans 11.20.

Many excellent things are spoken of us in this Kingdom of England, how long we
have had the Gospel amongst us, etc. How many by it converted: and this must
thankfully be acknowledged: But it is but a weak consequence collected thence,
therefore England shall be free from Gods wrath, if it provoke him: The Lord
had a burden for Israel, and he has a burden for England also.

Jer. 25.29. 1 Pet. 4.17. And this should comfort Gods Children in their
Chastisements, through expectation of heavy vengeance to be poured down upon
the ungodly: And withal, it should terrify ungodly men, when they see the
Lords heavy wrath against his own people; of all men, the ungodly have least
cause to rejoice in the Afflictions of Gods people; See Micah 7.8, 9, 10.

Against Israel.] That is, against the whole people; because generally all
engaged in Transgression:

If any say, Answer, Lot, Genesis 14. taken Prisoner amongst the Sodomites, to
chasten his boldness in pitching his Tent amongst them, whom he knew to be such
exceeding sinners against the Lord. Thirdly, Delivered out of Temptations.
Fourthly, If more expedient, permitted unto them.

Let no man promise himself immunity from common judgments, who takes liberty
to partake in common sins; It is just with the Lord that they should be
partakers in punishment, that are partakers in transgression; And if nothing
else, yet let this teach us, to beware of the common sins of the Times.

I know it is common, especially with the multitude, to do as the most do, that
fewest may talk of them; and that also to avoid singularity, unjustly so
censured, prevails overmuch with Gods Children. Well hear, If all Israel
sin, All must bear their burden; yea, if Gods Children give way to like
corruption, and stream of the Times, let them look for a chastisement from the
hand of the Lord.

By the hand of Malachy.] Not to trouble you with the vain speculations of the
Rabbis, what this Malachi was, whether an Angel in an assumed body; whether
Ezra the Scribe, and those others, of the exceeding beauty of his body; things
that perhaps have some truth, but little use: It is generally received, that he
was the last of the Prophets, and that he prophesied in the days of Ezra and
Nehemiah, as some gather by the things he specially deals against, as
corruptions in marriages with Idolaters, whereof see Ezra 10. and Neh. 10.

By the Ministry of Malachy, not as the Executioner, but as the Denouncer.

Hence observe; Ezekiel. 3. Isa. 6. Ier. 1. etc.

And this should teach us that are Ministers, to make conscience hereof; the
judgment for omission is fearful, and a Note of unsoundness, Ier. 28.7. And
secondly, To you that are the people, Learn you to submit, not only to their
Evangelical, but also, to their Legal Preachings; sharp it may seem, but
surely it is wholesome: Sundry reasons there are of it. 1. It serves not to
inflict, but to prevent Judgments: And it is but Satan's policy to persuade the
people, there cannot be love where there is severity. Cannot a Father chasten
severely, and yet love tenderly? it serves likewise, secondly, To humble Gods
Children. Taxed here is the overmuch delicacy of our people in hearing, Amos,
so now, Amos 7.10. The Land not able to endure or bear his words: And that
exception of bringing men to despair, is frivolous; our Savior himself, how
often has he woe, in his Mouth? And again know we, That the best way to bring
to sound hope, is first to bring to a kind of despair, namely, In respect of
our selves, or of our own sufficiency to compass, as merely by our selves, our
own happiness.

VER. 2, 3. I have loved you, says the Lord, yet ye say wherein have thou
loved us? was not Esau Jacobs Brother? says the Lord; Yet I loved Jacob, and I
hated Esan, and laid his Mountains and his Heritage waste for the Dragons of
the wilderness.


THe sum; An Expostulation with the People* And an Exprobration of their
Ingratitude.

Parts three, 1. Gods Protestation. 2. The peoples Exception. 3. The
confirmation, by an argument from the effect.


I have loved you.] Schoolmen have many curious enquiries touching. Love,
whether it be in God?

Answ. The love of God, his very Essence, 1 John 4.8. Yet this love in God is
no Passion, but implies these three things: 1 Benevolence. 2. Beneficence. 3.
Oblectation: As hatred, not to will good, to will evil, to work evil, to
detest.

The peoples Exception, Wherein have thou loved us? The reason of it was their
Affliction by Captivity; as if it had been said, we see not, but we are
afflicted as much as others; therefore thou love us not.

Now mark here the corruption of Nature,

Take we heed of this Temptation: Heb. 12.6. Gods Fatherly love; not so with
the wicked, but in wrath. 2. In measure; See Isa. 27.7, 8. Ier. 30.11. and
10.24. 3. See the use and end of afflictions. 1. To prevent sin, Hos. 2.6. A
hedge of thorns, 2. To reduce, Psalm. 119.67. Before I was afflicted, I went
astray. 3. To subdue Rebellion; man's Nature is Rebellious, Afflictions tame and
subdue. 4. To quicken Gods graces in us; ease slays the foolish, Pro. 1.32.
Affliction makes grace flourish. 5. To prevent Damnation, 1 Cor. 11.32. And
Beloved, if we had the wisdom, not to stay in our sense, but to turn our eyes
to the issue, we would never thus reason.

Argument of love, thus disposed: If I have chosen you and your Fathers, and
rejected your Brethren and their Fathers, then I love you; but I have loved
Jacob, and hated Esau: Ergo. What is meant by his love, Paul best expounds,
Romans 9. of Election.

The greatest evidence of Gods love, is Election to Salvation: There is
general love to all Creatures; Saul, that he was a King; but nothing to this
that we are elected: all nothing without Election: Wealth, and Honor, and
Learning, and Authority, good Blessings, but this the depth and height of Gods
love, to be chosen to Salvation. First, It is the fountain of all graces.
Secondly, Of all blessings, so far as Blessings. Thirdly, Those only exempt
from Condemnation. Fourthly, Heirs of glory, Romans 8.17.

Now then Beloved, Eccles. 9.1. Outwardly all things alike; God has advanced
me, therefore he loved me; See Saul: called me to be a Preacher, therefore he
loved me; See Judas: till thou come to Election, thou have no sound argument
that the Lord loves thee; yea, what ever afflictions betide thee.

This then labor to be assured of: Two notes are, 2 These. 2.13. 1. Faith of
the truth; I mean not a general notice, or assent to the Truth, but believing
of the truth, in respect of thy self; when God gives thee this Particularity,
and Propriety of Assurance, that is a token of Gods love and Election. 2.
Sanctification of the Spirit, known by this, when thou have ascended higher
than Nature can reach unto; Nature attains to civil honesty; as were sundry
Heathen famous for moral virtues, of Temperance, Justice, etc. but when the
very inward affections are renewed, there is the trial of true Sanctification.

Signs of it are: 1 Hatred of sin, because it is sin; this a note of a
sanctified heart, detestation of sin because sin. 2. Purging of our selves, as
well from little, as from great sins, 1 These. 5.22. 3. Conscionable walking in
all Gods Commandments, Luke 1.6. Psalm. 119. Lastly, Hatred of the World, and
Afflictions, for Righteousness sake, Joh. 15.19. Mat. 5.11.

A second general thing, Esau Jacobs brother, of the same Parents, of the same
Birth, Conception, yet Jacob loved; The like we see in many places; two in
company, the one received, the other forsaken; two in a bed, the one received,
the other refused; Father sometimes chosen, Children refused, as Abraham and
Ishmael, Isaac and Esau, David and Absalom.

Let no man therefore please himself in this, Joh. 8.33. They had Abraham to
their Father, See Mat. 3.9. Think not to say, we have Abraham to our father;
Indeed, A blessing it is, to be born of religious Parents. 1. Because within
the outward Covenant. 2. Benefit of holy Education. 3. Virtuous Examples: but
Ezekiel. 18. If the Son shall turn from his Fathers virtuous example; It is his
curse, that ever he had such a Father, by consequent. 4. Temporal mercies thou
may partake by their means, as the Lord speaks of Ishmael, Genesis 17.20.

Now, as touching Election it self; for the unfolding of it, this order is
observable; to show, 1. That it is. 2. What it is. 3. Of whom. 4. Why, or the
Cause Motive.

For the first, that it is, Infinite are the places to prove it, Mat. 22.14.
Few chosen; Mat. 24.24. The Elect from the four corners of the World; And it
confutes that sottish error of some, otherwise learned, that will have nothing
determined certain, touching man's Election, before his Birth; but that the
Lord made man without determining any thing certain touching his final estate.
Object. Then vain Holy life? Answ. Not so, for that is the mean of attaining
the right end, Heb. 12.14. Object. Vain Exhortations? Answ. Not so, for they
also are Means. Object. Freewill taken away, and fatal necessity brought in?
Answ. Necessity of Infallibility only, not forced to believe; but God that
works the wills, knows how sweetly to frame and incline them.

For the second, What it is; It is an Act of God, whereby he chooses and
calls some out of mankind, to be Heirs of Salvation: Or, as Bellarmine well
describes it; A part of Providence, whereby some certain men are mercifully
selected out of the mass of Destruction, and directed by infallible means to
life eternal.

But, see we the cause moving God thereto: False cause, Prevision of good
works; that no cause, for we were predestined to be holy, Ephesians. 1.4. Not
because we were holy; And 2. Romans 9. directly excluded. 3. The very end of
Election crossed, which is, to show the works and glory of Gods grace. 4. The
first cause orders the secondary, not, on the contrary; not good use of
free will foreseen; See Ioh. 1.13. Jam. 1.18. Regeneration not caused thereby,
much less Election: Nor could any inclinableness of will be foreseen in
perverse man; not Faith, for that is a fruit of Election, Act. 13.48. 1 Cor.
7.25. And, not cause of vocation, but effect; much less of Election; Not Christ
himself; Reason is; for that Christ as Mediator, falls under decree of
Election; the end first thought on before the means: True cause, the good will
and pleasure of God, Mat. 11.26. even because he would; and, Romans 9.15. He has
mercy on whom he will have mercy.

It teaches us to ascribe all the glory of our Election,

Of whom.] Mat. 12.14. Of a few, as appears by the fruits, as faith,
sanctification, holy obedience; Few, not in themselves, but comparatively; as a
bag of sand has a numberless number of sand, yet in comparison of all the
sands of the Sea, even as nothing: And let no man say, This is hard in the
Lord; for, that any one is chosen, is his Free grace; and he may do with his
own what him pleases; It is his mere good pleasure, to magnify his grace upon
his own.

First then, Follow not the Multitude, for they go the broad way. 2. Strive to
enter in at the straight gate; and let this warn thee, to labor, and
endeavor the more diligently to strive to make thy Calling and Election sure.

And hated Esau.] That is, Reprobated Esau: Now, that there is Reprobation,
appears, because there is Election. 2. God has not Mercy on all. 3. There are
Vessels of wrath prepared to destruction; Romans 9.22. and Jude 4. ordained to
this Judgment. 4. Effects, denial of means to many for Salvation.

If any ask what it is? Reprobation is an Act of God, whereby he determines,
not to have mercy on some, but to leave them to destruction, for the glory of
his justice. For the moving cause of Election, that that may be known, we are
to conceive the Acts of Reprobation to be two. 1. A decree, not to have mercy;
this Absolute, and has no other cause, but the Will of God; And let none say,
this is injury, for God is bound to none, Romans 11.33. therefore, Saint Paul
refers all to Gods Will, and admires the depth of this secret, which had been
vain, if the cause thereof be foresight of sin and disobedience. 2. The second
Act, is ordination into punishment and Damnation; this has some respect unto
sin, being an Act of Justice, in respect of Execution: And therefore, though it
be true, that God refuses to show mercy, only because he will; yet he ordaines
no man to damnation, but for his Sin; Judas damned for his sin; Comparative,
why this, not that, no other cause, but Gods Will.

Of whom.] Of the greatest part of the world. Ob. Means vouchsafed to all?
Answ. Not so, Mat. 11.21, 22. and to whom vouchsafed, the end is, to deprive
them of excuse. Object. Christ ransomed all? Answ. Not so, Joh. 17.9. Inst. 1.
Pet. 2. Answ. The place to be understood, of the Power of a Master over his
Servant.

Ob. Then God cause of Damnation? Answ. Deficient, not Efficient, being not
bound; besides, betwixt the Decree and Execution comes sin. Marvel not at
this, That the most part of the world believe not, Isa. 6.10. 3. Their own
contempt of the means vouchsafed. 4. Apostasy final, Heb. 10.26, 27. These not
known to us, wherefore we hope well of all, till the Lord discover.

VER. 3, 4, 5. And I hated Esau, and laid his Mountains and his Heritage
waste, for the Dragons of the Wilderness; Whereas Edom says, we are
impoverished, but we will return and build the desolate places: Thus says the
Lord of Hosts, They shall build, but I will throw down; And they shall call
them the border of wickedness, and the people against whom the Lord has
indignation for ever. And your eyes shall see, and ye shall say, The Lord will
be magnified from the border of Israel.


1. GOds Protestation. 2. The peoples Exception. 3. The Lords Confirmation of
what he protests, by an argument from an effect, wherein he appeals to
themselves, for witnesses: De hoc supra; Hatred of Esau manifested by a sign,
their desolation; where the Antithesis is understood.

Wilderness for Dragons, that is, without Inhabitant, as Isa. 34.13.

Hence observe, That external afflictions are unto Reprobates, testimonies of
Gods hatred. Reason, Because no such are freed from the curse of the Law, Gal.
3.19. branches whereof even those outward afflictions are, Deuteronomy. 28. examples
are extant; Not the least Sickness, Infamy, Penury, Famine, Banishment, Death,
all stand unto such, in the nature of Curses, as the Law propounds them; A sign
of which is, For that they all work together for evil unto such; whereas it is
contrary in them who love God, Romans 8.28. They do but harden such, as Pharaoh;
or cause blasphemy, as in many, bringing out into the eyes of men the hidden
Corruption of the Heart. Object. If any shall say, They are made testimonies of
love? Heb. 12.6. Answ. So are they to Gods Children, not to Reprobates: To
them, they are fatherly Chastisements: To these, severe Punishments; a sign
whereof is, That they are driven, by them, the farther from God.

Hence then it will follow. Atrium inferorum: And therefore vain is that
conclusion of many, from Corrections to Gods love: As, How often hear we it,
from profane men; They doubt not, they say, but God loves them; Why? Because he
follows them with Judgments; never without one cross or another, in Children,
Goods, good Name, Body, Mind. In sum: These External things are ever to be
measured, according to Persons; not Persons according to them. It is true, That
Crosses to Gods Chosen, are tokens of his love; but crosses to a Castaway, are
Pledges of his hatred; And though it be said, That whomsoever God loves, him he
corrects; yet is it not convertible, That whomsoever God corrects, him he
loves. Saul had his punishment, as well as David his Troubles; Ishmael Famine,
as well as Isaac, etc. Yet neither beloved God.

What then is to be done, in this case, for comfort? If thou will have comfort
in a Cross, look to this; Art thou chosen? called, etc. Then Crosses are
Comfortable; If no token of Election, suspect thy self.

I might apply this unto our selves, unto many amongst us, whom the Lord has
long followed with heavy judgments external, robbing of Children, or
heartbreaking with ungracious Children: Beloved, I say not, where these are,
there the men are hated; but yet, where these things are amongst some, they are
tokens of Gods Hatred.

What then to be done in outward Crosses? First, Look to their issue, and
fruit, that they have in thee; As 1. If they humble thee for thy sins, Jer. 5
3. 2. If they bring nearer unto God, Hos. 5.15. 3. If they make thee fear
before God, not only while they are felt, but after they are removed: Pharaoh
cries peccavi, and promises amendment while the Rod is on him; Esau howls
whilst he is under the hand of God; the wicked Jews, Ezra 9. crouch, whilst
the hand of God presses them; but when a little ease is given them, they break
the Commandments, ver. 10.

God otherwise corrects his own Children, Psalm. 118.18.
So David, The Lord has chastened, and corrected me, but he has not given me
over unto death; Israelites carried Captives, as well as Edomites; but yet
Israel returns; Edom is laid waste, Isa. 27.7, 8. Not smitten, as he that smote
her; For, 1. In measure. 2. In the branches. 3. To purge sin, ver. 8.9. Not so
with the wicked; See 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. His own, for a time, Isa. 54.7, 8. His
enemies for ever, Mal. 1.3.

The Reasons may be these.

1. The Promise of God made, of love, to his people.

2. The difference of their sins: It is true, that Gods Children are sometimes
overtaken with the same sins, that others are; But, though the same sins, yet
not in like measure committed; One, with an high hand: The other, of frailty.

And this should comfort Gods Children against all common judgments, wherewith
the Lord shall chasten, Isa. 28.15. though a plague run over all, yet it shall
not come nigh them; for, they have made a Covenant with Death, etc. Gods
Children may better thus reason, though they cannot assure themselves to be
exempted from common Calamities, yet, from the measure of them; For with the
Lord, they are at agreement.

Beloved, What plagues we, in this Land, have cause to fear; The Commonness,
and height of sin, in our Multitude, and that communication with them, in a
measure, by Gods Children, who sees not? And it is good for us all, to prepare
to meet the Lord by Repentance: But yet, this is our comfort; there shall be a
difference betwixt the Righteous and Wicked; betwixt him, that serves God, and
him, that serves him not. The means, whereby the Lord provides for the
comforts of his own Servants, These: 1. He delivers them from the Temptation,
as he did Lot, Noah, etc. 2. Or else provides a mean for restitution, Ez. 9. 3.
Comforts inwardly, in afflictions. 4. Takes from evil to come, 2 Kings 22.20.

Edom says, we are impoverished, but we will return, Ver. 4. Observe.
and build the desolate places.] Mark here the nature of wicked men, opposing
themselves to the power of God, and the course of his Judgments, and
providence: We are impoverished, but we will return and build the desolate
places; Isa. 9.10. Ephraim, in the pride and presumption of their hearts, say,
The Bricks, indeed, are fallen down, but we will build it again with hewn
stones; the wild Fig Trees are cut down, but we will change them into Cedars.
Pharaoh, though he sees, the more he oppresses, the more the people grew,
through Gods blessing; yet cease not to attempt their destruction: And, when
Israel flies, yet cease not to pursue them, till he be destroyed with his
People. Exodus 14. The Scribes, and Pharisees, though they see still the
Disciples growing, and the number of Believers to be multiplied; yet, cease
they not to persecute; So was it with Saul against David.

And, Act. 5.39. Gamaliel yet could thus say, If it be of God, ye cannot
destroy it, except you will be found fighters against the Lord: But, let Gods
children learn to humble themselves for their sins, under the mighty hand of
God: more prevalent to turn away Gods wrath, is unfeigned Repentance, than all
the power and might of man: It is excellently said of Job, Cha. 9. v. 4. He is
wise in heart, and mighty in strength, who ever was seen against him, that has
prospered? And, how vain such contentions are, he shows by his might, in the
mightiest Creatures: This therefore let us do, when as we shall see the Lord
against us; humbly deprecate his judgments, but fear to stand out against him.

They shall build, but I will throw down.] When God means to destroy, no man
can withstand, or hinder desolation; The Ephraimites promised unto themselves
Resting, the Lord had denied the contrary, therefore they perish. An 130 years
after the death of Christ, the Jews, by the leave, and help of Julian the
Emperor, attempted to re-edifie their City and Temple; but mark, how the Lord,
because his Counsels must stand, and because he will be known to be true in his
threatenings, Ruffin l. 1. c. 38
causes fearful thundrings, lightnings, and Earthquakes to arise, many of
them slain, and all driven from their attempts: And other stories record many
huge hosts of Jews, attempting the recovery of their Holy Land, and their
dipersions: The like ye may see in the Lords dealing against Antichrist; many
attempts have they made to destroy, with the name of Luther, and Calvin, the
whole truth of God, and to re-establish their Kingdom of Idolatry; but yet see
we him blasted by the breath of the Lords mouth; and though an utter
consumption cannot be expected till the brightness of Christ's coming, 2 These.
2.8. Yet this they can never hope for, The recovery of their full power, and
dominion they once had in the Christian world.

What does this teach us,

And they shall call them the border of wickedness.] It may be demanded, what
was the cause of this irrecoverable desolation brought upon Edom? These
special sins we may see set down, Number. 20.18. Ezekiel. 25.13. Jer. 49. and alibi;
but specially, if ye read the Prophecy of Obadiah, where this judgment of God
is denounced against the Edomites, and the causes thereof specified.

One was unkindness to the people of God, denying them, in their passages,
common courtesies, Number. 20.18. Another was, Cruelty against his Brother Jacob,
in that, not only they helped them not against their Adversaries, but were
partakers with them in their cruelty: And thirdly, Insulting over them in their
afflictions, ver. 10.

Now then mark here, How fearful a sin it is, and how the matter of extreme
desolations, The avenger of his people, Luke 18.7, 8. and therefore, as James
has it, Chap. 5.6. Ye have condemned and killed the just, therefore howl.
Beloved, This is the common, and crying sin of this Land; unkindness, and
cruelty offered to the people of God, especially, to the Lords Prophets, and
his Anointed, and for which we have just cause to fear an heavy judgment: And
our own Congregation is not free; How many lewd miscreants tolerated in the
height of iniquity? If any man make show of Religion, he only denied common
courtesy, and happy he that is first in his Affliction; and how triumph they
in such a man's calamity? Let such fear, They become not a Byword.

Ver. 5. And your eyes shall see, and ye shall say, The Lord will be magnified
from the border of Israel.] We have here the use of this judgment, amongst the
people of God, namely, The celebrating, and praising of the great power, and
might of the Lord, in the destruction of the Enemies of his people.

Hence learn we, To have our eyes open upon the judgments of God; Cor. 20.

And here the blindness, or negligence of our people, must be blamed; seen, and
heard to be executed upon particular places. That fearful inundation, those
overthrows by thundering and lightning; the beggary of Drunkards; hardness of
heart in Persecutors: Our eyes should be open, to take notice of this judgment;
partly, for our own admonition; partly for the praise of Gods mercy, for
exempting us. And lastly, To celebrate the praise of the power, and justice of
God, in the desolation of his Adversaries.

Object. May we then rejoice in the overthrow of Gods Enemies? Answ. Not
simply, as their destruction, but as manifestations of his glory; See Exodus 15.
Judge. 5.

VER. 6,7. A Son honors his Father, and a Servant his Master: If then I be a
Father, where is mine honor? And if I be a Master, where is my fear? Says
the Lord of Hosts, unto you, O Priests, that despise my Name; ye offer polluted
bread upon mine Altar, etc.


THe second sin here taxed, is, The despising of Gods Name, that is, slight
regard of the worship of God: Where first, is proved, that greater regard is
due unto the Lord, by a reason drawn from the double power of God, Fatherly,
and of a Master: If a Father, I should be honored; but a Father: The
proposition is proved, for, A Son honors his Father. 2. The sin, and the
parties, to whose charge it is laid, despising of Gods Name, to the Priests. 3.
Their exception, and denial. 4. The Lords reply, by an instance, ver. 7.
unclean Bread. 5. The doubling of the exception by the Priests. 6. A second
reply of the Lord, likewise, by instance.

of Masters, and Fathers, etc. this is apparent; For Masters Authority, read
Genesis 16.9. To Hagar, Go and humble thy self to thy Mistress; Mat. 8.9. The
speech of the Centurion approved by our Savior; a clear point; 1 Cor. 7.21.
Ephesians. 6.5. Col. 3.22. That ancient error, in the Appostles days, reproved; and
their Reason, from the quality of Masters; If good, then equal: If evil, what
dominion? I answer, If good, the rather to be obeyed, 2 Timothy 6.2. And, though
there be equality of right to Gods Kingdom, yet disparity of power, in respect
of external state: If evil, yet to be obeyed, 1 Pet. 2.18. 1 Timothy 6.1. though
not in evil; the Reason, it hinders not faith, 1 Cor. 7.21. Contrary causes
blasphemy of Gods truth.

Pet. 1.17. Father, which judges; The Reason is, because, If without love. or
respect thereto, it is slavish; if without respect to Majesty, slightly; Best
duties done, when both are mingled, Romans 11.22. both bounty, and severity; one
causes chearefulness, the other, reverence.

Now then Beloved, Learn we to acknowledge the Lord to be such unto us, from
them some services, but slavishly performed, and therefore not acceptable unto
God: He best does duties, that mingleth both; thus hear, beholding Gods love,
that makes thee cheerful; considering his Majesty, that makes thee reverend;
Thus pray, thus live, 1 Pet. 1.17.

That despise my Name.] How, if any ask? They offered unclean bread, that is,
profaned the worship of God; Bread put, Synechdochically, for any Sacrifice;
For the understanding whereof know, that there were certain Beasts, by Gods
ordinance, unclean, some clean; the distinction we have, Genesis 6.7. some that
God had sanctified, to be offered in sacrifice; some otherwise: This their
first sin, That they offered such things, as God had forbidden to be offered.

There cannot be a greater contempt offered to the Name of God, than to offer
unto him things prohibited: Sam. 15. Saul had reserved the Amalekites Cattle,
yea, the fat of them, for sacrifice, yet, is deprived of his Kingdom, because
the Lord had cursed them with a Curse,

And therefore, Let this teach us to take heed how we,

And ye say, wherein have we despised thy Name?] Note here the nature of an
Hypocrite, ready to justify himself, when the Lord himself reproves, charge of
Pharisees, Luke 16.15. Ye are they that justify your selves before men: This
was Eves fault, Genesis 3. shifting her fault off to the Serpent, Adam, to the
woman; Saul, I have obeyed the voice of the Lord, 1 Samuel 15. The Reasons are,
1. A desire, through hypocrisy, to seem righteous; no man so vile, but would
gladly avoid the censure of Atheism, and profaneness. 2. That they forget the
Lord to be a searcher of secrets, and trier of the hearts, and reins, 3. That
opinion of righteousness, and Religion, they have obtained among men; See Luke
16.15. This sin, through their gross ignorance, rife among our People.

And, Let it teach Gods Children better things: The just man is the Accuser of
himself,

Ver. 7. Ye offer polluted Bread.] The Lord instanceth in particulars: Samuel,
1 Samuel 12.19. in asking a King: So Peter, Act. 2.23. The murder of our Lord;
So Stephen, Act. 7.51. Their resisting of the Holy Ghost, speaking in the
Prophets: John Baptist to H^rod, Mat. 14.4. Paul before Felix, of Temperance,
Acts 24.25. The Reason is, because it is natural to every man, to wind out of
general Accusations; and when reproves are ministered in gross, they do little
good; such shifting there is from generalities.

Then see we here a Ministers warrant for particularizing the sins of his own
people; A course generally distasted, and so shall ye best profit, in hearing.

A second sin laid to the charge of the Priests, and people, is slight
performance of the Worship of God: So they sacrifice, no matter how.

So then, note this as an heavy sin, For a man slightly to perform the
Worship of God, Isa. 1.12. that he had not required what they performed, that
is, held them in as little esteem, as if he had not commanded them, in regard
of their bad manner of performance: The Reason is, because the Lord looks not
so much to the outward work, as to the inward Affection of the heart; measures
Religion by sincere Affection, not by multitude, or works done, in the service
of God.

Here then,

For this cause, weigh, 1. It is Gods work; and remember, who has said, Jer.
48.10. Cursed is he that does the Lords work negligently. 2. To whom; to God
himself, a great King, Mal. 1. ult. 3. Before whom; before God, and Angels,
Act. 10.33.

Hence, learn we to humble our selves, not only for the omission of duties;
but, for the imperfect manner of our services: Thou have not all done, in
Repentance, when thou have bewailed thy gross sins, and wilful omissions; but,
in every good duty, thou have cause of humbling, in respect of the coldness of
performance; as hearing coldly, praying coldly.

VER. 8. And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye
offer the Lame, and Sick, is it not evil? offer it now unto thy Governor:
Will he be pleased with, or accept thy person, says the Lord of Hosts?


NOte here the fashion of a wicked Hypocrite, Genesis 4.3. Cain brings an
offering, but as if he cared not what, of the fruits of the groung; Abel, of
the first fruits, and of the fat of the Flock. 1. The first fruits. 2. The fat.
3. The first born. 4. The first day of the week.

And general is this sin,

a type of ignorant services; which are ever held abominable; therefore S. Paul
every where calls for knowledge to be ground of all service; pray with
understanding, 1 Cor. 14.15. Sing with understanding; and Romans 12.1. services
reasonable called for: Whence it is evident, that all blind devotion of
ignorant people, are abominable, sacrifices; See Romans 10.2. their excuse is,
God knows their mind; but he looks, thou should also know, etc.

Lameness.] Is hypocrisy, double-mindedness, Jam. 1.8. and 1 King. 18.21.
Halting betwixt two, when no consent betwixt the Affection, and Action: God did
not allow sowing of the field with seeds diverse; nor Linfiewoolsie, in
garments; nor yoaking together of an Ox, and an Ass: wherefore, damnable is
all doubling, in hypocrites; See Isa. 29.13. They honor me with their lips,
but their hearts are far from me.

Sick.] Or faint, or languishing services; that come from us faintly, without
cherrefulness: the Lord would have the very strength of our Affections, and
Intentions, the whole strength in his services given unto him: those are faint,
and languishing, that come coldly from us.

Another added, Unblemished.] Whereby, absolute innocence signified in all
those, that worship him; and not the least mixture of humane devices in Gods
service; So that the very Prayers of a wicked man are all abominable.

Last of all, observe the Amplification of their sin, what they would not dare
to do to men,

Ver. 9. And now, I pray you, beseech God, that he will be gracious unto us:
this has been by your means: Will he regard your persons, says the Lord of
Hosts?


A Denunciation of Gods judgment against both Priests, and People, in respect
of their profaning of the worship of God: The judgments denounced are these: 1.
The rejection of their Prayers, and Sacrifices. 2. The translating of his
worship, from them to the Gentiles.

The passage unto this Denunciation, by prolepsis, on this manner: It is true,
that in these things we have been faulty, but we will pray before God, that he
may have mercy upon us. Sub: By an ironicall permission, or injunction; well,
says the Prophet, do so, I pray you; pray before God for mercy; And he gives a
Reason; E manu vestra est hoc; as if he had said, you indeed, had need to pray,
for, by your means (that are the Priests,) all this profanation of the worship
of God, has been committed amongst the people: Had you better instructed them,
and rejected their lame Sacrifices, profaneness could never have grown to such
a head.

2. A correction. Will the Lord accept? (The interrogation implies the stronger
Negation) that is, He will not accept your Persons, that is, approve you, or
your Prayers.

A heavy judgment of God it is, to have our Prayers rejected from acceptance;
Isa. 1.15.

The Reasons. 1. Our own indigency of all good that may comfort. 2. Exposed to
all dangers, bodily, spiritual. 3. Prayer made the only mean, to obtain good
things, Mat. 7.7. To remove evils, Jam. 5.13. Common judgments, 2 Chro. 7.14

Take we heed of this judgment:

And as of the Judgment, so, of the causes: Many I might reckon up, as, 1.
Ignorance of the Mediator. 2. Asking things unlawful; or, to ends unlawful,
Jam. 4.3. More specially, impenitent living in any sin, Joh. 9.31. God hears
not sinners: and Psalm. 66.18. If I regard wickedness in my heart, the Lord will
not hear me; Mark the phrase, If I (regard) wickedness in my heart; if my
affections, and purposes, be to abominations: And, let them all lay it to
heart, whose hearts, and affections are entangled, in the sins of the world:
Our people, they are generally thus minded; They may whore, and swear, and
drink, and be drunken, etc. all the week; and a little Sundaies Lip-labor in
Prayer must serve to propitiate for all their week-daies abominations: But,
know, God hears no Whoremonger, etc, ordinarily such.

Particularly, Let me touch some special sins: Amongst the rest, these are
eminent.

1. Contempt of the public Ministry; See for this, Pro. 28.9. and Pro. 1.
Now then, consider what we are to think of all that Lip-labor of recusant
Papists, they pray by number, and think, for that, they shall be heard:
Recusancy in our people, in forsaking the Assemblies; either, of desperate
profaneness, or, as thinking private devotions are better services; they can
serve God at home; just like, as if some Justice of peace, when he is called to
some special service for the King, at the general Assize, or Sessions, should
answer, He would serve the King at home; And, how many present in the
Congregation, whose hearts tremble not at the Word?

A second particular sin, in this kind, is, Pro. 21.13. Lack of commiseration
of our Brethrens necessities; though men, so disposed, make long prayers, yet
the Lord will not hear.

A third, that here mentioned, Careless performance of the worship of God; this
makes all services abominable: Amongst other Sacrifices acceptable to God,
there was one especially pleasing, namely, The (whole) burnt offering;
Figuring, perhaps, that fervent affection that should show it self in every
service, performed by us to our God; See Romans 12.11. other temper better fits
in any thing, than in the service of God.

Again, Is it such a judgment, not to be accepted in praying? A heavy judgment
therefore, to be void of the spirit of Prayer, and Deprecation; as Zech. 12.10.
And, this the state of our people, that cannot pray.

This has been by your means.] That is, the offering of blind, lame, etc. And
so you shall see, in sundry Scriptures, sins of People imputed to defects of
Teachers.

If any demand, why? For default of better instruction, and neglect of duty
that way; or, 2. In regard of lewd life, causing the people to abhor the
offering, 1 Samuel 2 17. and drawing them by example. Or, 3. By admitting the
lame sacrifices, without reproof, or rejection.

But, thus we see, That the sins of the people are imputed to the Minister, ex.
gr. their ignorance laid on the Ministers, when they fail in instruction;
their profanations imputed to them, when they fail, in admonition; Ez^k. 3.16,
17, etc.

The Reason whereof, is this Principle; What sin thou hinderest not, within
bounds of calling, that sin is thine, by participation, and thine, as if thou
had committed it; the Reason, because there lay on thee a bond of duty, to
hinder it; as Neh. 13.17. What evil thing is this that (ye) do, in breaking
the Lords Shabbath? [ye] do, because ye hinder not, by authority, and power of
the sword.

And this should teach us, to take heed, 1 Timothy 5.22. that we partake not in
other men's sins;

And this, methinks, should stay the fury and malice of unreasonable, and evil
men, against Ministers, in this behalf; that they are careful not to admit,
hand over head, every man that offers himself to the Lords Table: Now, Lord be
merciful to my personal sins! I know, if he should enter into judgment for
the sins of mine own Person, I am not able to abide it; but, if the Lord will
also impute to us the neglects of our people; can any blame, if we desire to
keep off that burden?

And, let no man say, The Minister is excused, and the sin is only the Parties,
that adventureth; This plea, if it could have holden, might have been made by
the Priests of the Jews: They offered such as the people brought; had they
brought better, better they would have offered; yet this made their sin,
because the Lord had forbidden the offering of such, upon what pretense soever
brought unto them.

VER. 10. Who is there even among you, that would shut the doors, for naught?
neither do ye kindle fore on mine Altar, for naught: I have no pleasure in you,
says the Lord of Hosts, neither will I accept an offering at your hand.


REading, in our English, corrupt: Better thus, after Tremellius; who is there
amongst you, that shuts the door, on free cost? or, do you kindle the fire, on
free-cost? The Interrogation, as above, denies more strongly. For the meaning,
we are to know. That the Priests, and Levites, serving in the Sanctuary, had
their several offices, and places, to serve in, Number. 3. and 4. 1 Chro. 25. and
26. some, to bear the Arc; some, to keep the Lamp; some, to make clean the
Sanctuary, and Instruments thereof; some, to dress the Sacrifices; some, as
Porters, to keep the doors of the Temple, etc. And, to all these was appointed
a portion of Tithes, and Oblations, for recomperce of their service: The
meanest doorkeeper was to live of the Sanctuary, and to have his portion, for
attendance: The meaning, then is this: There is not the meanest of you, that
has served me, in the meanest place but I have provided him of maintenance, as
for recompense.

These words, then, contain an Amplification of those Priests, and Levites
sins: That whereas the Lord had so liberally rewarded even the meanest of them,
for their services they had no more care to honor him, and to preserve his
worship from profane contempt.

Hence then may be observed; Ephesians. 6.8. Col. 3.24. touching the offices of
Servants to their Masters.

It confutes the speech of profane men, Mal. 3.14. Job 21.25. It is in vain to
serve God; and what profit is it, that we have kept his Commandments, and
walked humbly before the Lord? Their Reason, They that work wickedness are set
up, and they that tempt God, even they are delivered: Surely, there is no
service performed unto God, but has his recompense, howsoever performed: Of
Nebuchadnezzar the Lord thus speaks, Eze. 29.20. Egypt given him for wages for
service done, (though unwittingly) against Tyrus: Of the Romans, during the
space of their first entrance into their Empire, that they were renowned for
Moral virtues; Austin well observes, that the Lord did, for that cause,
enlarge their Empire: And, at this day, who is there, that can say, He has
performed any service unto God, but he has selt the Lord a recompencer of him?
Distribute servants of God, thus* some there are, that unwittingly do God
service, at profane men; yet they lack not their reward, in temporal things;
nor yet Hypocrites, as Achab, for external humiliation, plagne deferred sound
worshippers of God, though, perhaps, in things of this life, more inferable;
yet, in inward comforts, in spiritual blessings, Ephesians 1.3. In assurance of
heavenly rewards, recompensed; for, that Principle is infallible, Heb. 11.6.
God is a rewarder of all, (chiefly) of them, that dingently seek him)

Herd then, It is not hard, Isa. 5.4. So Saul, 1. Sam. 15.17. When thou mast
(...) thine own eyes, etc. So to David, 2. (...) 10.

Take we heed, there fore, How, in duties of obedience: This shall be our just
condemnation, that the Lord having provoked us so by his blessings, we have
failed in the duties of thankfulness: Wherefore, Let us all remember to make
use of the mercies, and loving kindnesses of our God; that they may be to us so
many allurements, to sincerity, and soundness, in our service.

I will not accept an offering at your hand] What is the Reason? Namely,
because they had offered unlawfully.

Hence then observe; Rro. 21, 27.

And this may teach us what to judge of that opus operatum, taught by Papists;
contra. Heb. 11.6. Without Faith, impossible to please God; Sacrifice of wicked
abominable; for such men want the foundation of all acceptance, namely,
Reconciliation with God, Heb. 9.14. Nor can they perform services, in
acceptable manner; As, 1. Not as from the night fountain, Love. Nor, a. As to
the right and Gods glory.

Take we heed, therefore, How we corrupt ourselves, in the Worship of God;
Labor especially, to be at one with God in Christ; See Heb. 11.4. Genesis 4.4.
and repent especially of Corruptions, in the first Table.

VER. 11. For, from the rising of the Sun, even unto the going down of the
same, my name shall be great among the Gentiles; and in every place, incense
shall be offered unto my Name, and a pure offering for my Name shall be great
among the heathen, says the Lord of Hosts.


THe second judgment here threatened, is, The translating of the Kingdom of God,
and his worship, from the Jews, to the Gentiles.

A fearful judgment, to have the word of God, Mat. 21.12. Isa. 5. The Reason;
men thus deprived, sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death; Mat. 4.16. are
as without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. they become more vile, as Jews, and
Romenes; yea, from such, as the Arc from Israel, is the glory departed, 1 Samuel
4.21.

Take we heed of this judgment, and tremble at those things, that may procure
it; As, 1. Corrupting out selves in this worship of God, 2. Receiving it vain.
3. Cruel usage of the Ministers, Mat. 23.37. Surely, though I be half of his
mind, that taught; that when Antichrist's Kingdom has been runated, it shall
never again be reestablished in full power; But, first, particular
Congregations may, though not in full power; yet in some power; and, let us all
fear before God.

For the meaning of the words: Papists have thus abused the Text, to the
stablishing of their Idol of the Mass: And, Bellarmine, when he comes to
handle this place, calls it, Insigne testimonium pro sacrificio Missae.

For orderly proceeding; First, see what they call the Mass: Namely, A
Sacrifice of the New Testament, What the Popish Mass is.
wherein Christ's Body, and Blood, is, in unbloudy manner, offered to God the
Father, for propitiation for quick, and dead.

For this Sacrifice they thus reason, out of this place, viz. This Sacrifice
must either be the sacrifice, whereby Christ offered himself, on the Cross; or,
the sacrifice of the Jews; or spiritual sacrifices if Christians; or else, the
sacrifice of the Mass.

Not the Sacrifice of Christ; for, that was offered, in one place, without the
Gates of Jerusalem, Heb. 13.12. Nor Jewish Sacrifices: For, this is opposed to
Jewish Sacrifices; and they were to be abolished, and determined in Christ:
Nor, the sacrifices of Christians: It remains, therefore, that it is the
Sacrifice of the Mass.

Now, that we assume, is, That it is to be understood of the spiritual
sacrifice of Christians, 1 Pet. 2.5. But, that this cannot be here meant, they
thus reason: First, The sacrifice here spoken of, is called absolutely, Mincha,
A Sacrifice, or Incense; but, when the Scripture speaks of spiritual
Sacrifices, it uses a Term diminuent, signifying the Analogicall, and
improper use of the word. I answes, Not so always: for, Rev. 5. and 8. Prayers
called Incense absolutely, without a Term abridging; and Psalm. 51.17. The
sacrifices of God are a broken spirit.

A second Argument; Because this sacrifice was to succeed the sacrifices of the
Jews, and was never before offered; But, Prayers were offered before? Answ.
That ground is false; For, the Propher speaks only of a Sacrifice, that, in
other manner, should be offered; whereas, 1. The Jews offered them with other
Ceremonial rights; Christians should offer them, without those rights. 2.
Whereas, those Jews offered, in Hypocrisie^; Christians should offer them, in
righteousness Ma^^.

A third Argument; The Prophet speaks of in Sacrifice to be offered; by
(Priests) of the new Testament; But Prayers are offered also, by (People.) I
answer, Not so; but a Sacrifice to be offered by all the people, in the
Christian Church; who are all made Priests unto God 5 Pet. 2.5. Rev. 1.6. And
whereas they object, That the Lord promises to purge the Sons of Levi. Answer,
Though the high Priest figured Christ; yet, the common Rank figured all
Christians.

A fourth Argument; One sacrifice; but, spiritual sacrifices many. Answer,
Nomen speciei pro individuis; as man, for all men.

A fifth; A (pure) offering; but so are not spiritual Sacrifices of Christians,
according to Pro estants. Answer, Though impure in themselves; yet pure, 1, by
acceptance; because accepted as pure, for Christ's sake, 1 Pet. 2.5. In
respect, that God covers iniquity in his Children; Number. 23.21. He sees none
iniquity in Jacob; there (is) abundance; but he (sees) none, that is, takes
notice of none, 2. Pure, in comparison of hypocritical Jews, as, Hab, 1.13.
Some are said to be righteous, in comparison; The wicked devoureth him, that is
righteous, in respect of himself: So, these Sacrifices in Christians, pure; not
simply; but in respect of those, that hypocrites offered amongst the Jews, 3.
Pure, in respect of sincerity, and single heartedness; pure, from hypocrisy:
such Evangelicall purity is; every where, spoken of, as, Mat. 5.8. 1 Timothy 5.22.
And thus, we see their cavills answered.

Now, as touching their sacrifice of the Mass: These things our Divines have
disputed. 1. Against the matter. 2. The Instrument. 3. The effect of it. 1.
That it is a sacrificing of Christ, is needless, Heb. 10.14. Christ having
perfected for ever them that be sanctified, by his one Oblation of himself. 2.
Remission of sins perfectly obtained by Christ; and where remission of sin is,
there needs no more Oblation for sins, Heb. 10.12, 14.2. Against the
Priesthood; no orders of Priesthood, but Leviticall; and, after Melchizedech,
Leviticall abolished; Melchizedech(...), Heb. 7.24.4. Against Propitiation;
For, first, No shedding of blood; And, secondly, Christ, the only Propitiatory.
5. Against the manner; modo incruento, in an unbloudy manner. Answer, 1.
Absurd, that blood should be offered, in unbloudy manner. 2. How propitiatory,
if without shedding of blood? Heb. 9.22, 28. Object. Called sacrifice, by
Fathers. I answer, By representation, as Christ was said to be crucified before
the eyes of the Galatians, Gal. 3.1. So Lombard: Or, 2. Propter adjunctam
gratiarum actionem, eleemosynas, preces, corporis Oblationem.

See we then, what is here meant: Namely, The spiritual sacrifices of praise,
prayers, obedience of Christians; called Incense, by Analogy; the Type for the
thing thereby shaddowed; as also, for that it is usual with the Prophets, to
describe Christian worship, by the tenor of Jewish Religion.

This then, the drift, and meaning of the Prophet; that, whereas the Jews, like
hypocrites, had profaned and polluted the worship of God; It should come to
pass, that the Gentiles should offer pure sacrifices, that is, in pure manner,
worship and serve God, not as hypocrites.

This worship of the Gentiles is set out; 1. By the place, where. 2. By the
manner, how. 3. By the persons, whom. 4. By the ground, apprehension of the
Majesty of God.

First thing, here, observable, is, The difference of the New Testament, Tim.
2.8.

And this helps us, first, to understand many places of Scripture, before, Jews
only were his people; Now, in respect of right, all Nations are admitted; Ephesians.
2.17, 18.

Again, Mark here a benefit singular in the New Testament; that the Lord has
not tied us to the Temple, only, in his worship; but, in every place, in the
Field, in the Bed, in the Family: Joh. 4.21.

By Gentiles, the Persons; See their state, Ephesians. 2.12. Now called to be
worshippers of God; See also, Romans 15. Mat. 28.19. Go teach all Nations. And,
let not us forget to praise God for his mercy; we, who were even heathenish,
yet now admitted to be of the household of faith.

The quality, Pure.] The services of Gods Children, done in faith, and
obedience, are pure in the eyes of God, Tim. 2.8. Lift up pure hands: I say,
done in faith, for, otherwise, all unclean to the unclean, Tit. 1.15. and,
secondly, in obedience, when things are done, that God commands: I add, last of
all, by acceptance; to exclude that Doctrine of Papists, touching perfect
inherent Purity: Now, that they are not perfectly pure, by inherence of
inherence of purity, appears. 1. Because sanctification imperfect, Romans 7.20.
2. Because Gods Children pray, to be judged in mercy; So David, Psalm. 143.2. 3.
Cannot justify. Object. But it proceeds from the Spirit of God, and grace of
Christ. I answer, Yet through imperfect instruments, which defile them; The
perfectest Scrivener marrs his proportions, by an ill Pen; The perfectest soul,
though it move perfectly, yet cannot make a lame man, to walk upright; The
cunningest Musician makes not an untuned Instrument sound perfectly; The purest
water is defiled in a muddy Channel: How then pure? By acceptance, as above,
1 Pet. 2.5.

And this should comfort Gods children, in all their weak services, thou they
cannot do them, art judged (as in Christ) not, as in thy self, 2. If
apprehension of Christ, in every service. 3. If there be striving against
impurity. 4. If bewailing of imperfections.

Lastly,

Labor then to know the greatness of that God, whom thou servest; and that, by
experience; otherwise, thou can never with that humility, and reverence,
perform his services, Heb. 12.27, 28. Consider, then, the Power, the Justice,
the endless Mercy of that God, to whom thou performest thy due worship, and
service.

VER. 12. But, ye have profaned it, in that ye say; The Table of the Lord is
polluted, and the fruit thereof, even the meat is contemptible, etc.


IN the eleventh verse, A judgment denounced against the Jews; viz. the taking
from them his Word, and Worship, and giving it to the Gentiles: Here, a Reason
given of that judgment; That they had polluted the Name of the Lord; proved by
particulars, three in number, v. 12, 13. And, ver. 14. A Curse threatened.

The parts two: 1. A Crime imputed. 2. A Curse denounced. The Crime, polluting
the Name of God; amplified, by specifying particulars. 1. The Table of the Lord
is polluted. 2. His meat contemptible. 3. That under the show of devout
service, they served him with the basest. Curse, ver. 14. with other reasons;
All comprised in the description of these Hypocrites. 1. By their Title,
Deceivers. 2. By their fair promises. 3. Slender performances.

Table, for Altar; Altar, for sacrifice, and service: (...); is polluted, that
is as a common profane work, in performance whereof special reverence is not
requisite: Polluted my Name, Ezekiel. 36. Not, that any real blemish can come to
the Majesty of God; but for that their Facts were such, as, in their nature;
tended that way: So that the sense is; My Name, and Majesty, which you should
tremble at, and reverence, you have (as much as in you has layen) blemished,
and dishonored, by your unreverend, and unrespective behavior in my worship,
and by esteeming so lightly those things, that I have ordained for your
maintenance.

It is an high point of dishonouring the name of God, Cor. 11.29. speaking of
one part of the worship of God, celebrating the Lords Supper; thus notes the
sin of such as come, without due preparation, to that Sacrament; Their sin is,
that they discerned not the Body of the Lord; that is, whereas the Bread, and
Wine, at the Lords Supper, were separated from common use, and set apart to
represent the Body and Blood of Christ, and so ought, with all reverence, to be
received; They came to that holy Banquet, as to a common drinking; they
discerned not the Lords Body, that is, put no difference betwixt those holy
Elements, and other ordinary repast, but came thereto, as to an ordinary
banquet: See the hainousness of the sin, in comparison, and, in the punishment:
Ezekiel. 33.31. The Lord speaking of the sin of that people, in hearing the Word
of God, notes their vile, and unreverend practice; that they came, indeed, to
hear, but how? As if they had been to hear a Caroll, or idle Song; so far were
they from trembling at his Word.

And, mark, whether it argue not a base conceit of the Majesty of God, thus
slubberingly to do his worship? Take the Comparison, that the Prophet makes,
Offer it, now, unto thy Prince.

Name be not rife in our people: And, Beloved, consider it well; ye shall see
it general: It is a great part of the worship of God, to hear, as we ought,
the word of God read, and preached unto us, by his Ministers; yet see, whether
that the Lord complains of, by Ezekiel, chap. 33. be not the general sin of
the people; that Preaching seems to them, Prating; and the learned Sermons,
of no better esteem, than old wives Fables: The celebrating of the Sacraments
an high part of Gods worship; yet see, how those, in whom superstitious
reverence is abolished, profane contempt is evident, not only by unreverent
leaving them, but by unreverend handling them: we justly condemn Popish
Adoration, but, it is too too evident, that they scarcely sinned more, In
Idolatrous adoration, then we, in careless handling these holy mysteries; In
medio virtus: Adoration of the host we must all detest, as abominable
Idolatry; but, profane irreverence should be as much fled from. Prayer, a
principal part of the worship of God; yet, how slightly performed, that
wandering of the eye, and idle gazing, in the midst of devotions, argues
unreverence, etc, Yea, let me ask the hearts of Gods own Children, whether we
have not all cause, in in this point, to condemn our selves, and pray with
Naaman; The good Lord be merciful unto us in this. How leap many from their
ordinary Callings, into the Temple? and rush illotis manibus, ad sacra.

Paul, Heb. 12.28. Let us have grace to serve God, that we may please him; How
is that? with reverence, and fear. Mark Reasons; we cannot otherwise please
God; It is not babbling in prayer, but reverence in prayer, that God accepts;
not hearing, but trembling at his word, Isa. 66.2. Not receiving, but
discerning the body of the Lord. 2. Our God is a consuming fire, that is,
though gracious unto his Children, yet incensed even by them, his wrath burns,
though not to their (utter) destruction, yet to their heavy astonishment. 3.
Eccles. 5.1, 2. Gods Majesty, our baseness. 4. Amongst heathen, a Principle; Vt
ne quis ad sacra, illotis manibus. They had their purgings, and purifyings,
before they came to worship their Idols; and they shall stand up in judgment to
condemn us, that showed more reverence to Idols, than we to the living God. 5.
A note of a Child of God, reverently, and with fear to worship him, 1 These.
2.13. this that makes the word effectual, when a man considers, (whose) word
he hears.

Mat. 5. Some of our people, to vain swearing by the Name of God, not to
swearing, in general: Now know, that the Name of God is polluted, not only,
when thou swearest falsely; but, when thou hear unreverently; when thou
prayest unreverently: In a word, as here Malachy has expressed two
particulars: 1. By careless performing, or base opinion of the worship of God.
2. By light esteeming the works of his mercy, and providence over us, in
provision for our maintenance. If thou pray unreverently, thou have polluted
Gods Name; If thou think, or speak unreverently of the works of his providence,
etc. thou have polluted his Name.

And the fruit thereof, even his meat is contemptible.] Here is a finding fault
with the providence of God, in our maintenance; See the Text; his Provenius,
that is, those issues that come by Gods ordinance, unto the Priests, for their
sustenance, They counted it a base allowance, and contemptible meat: For the
better understanding of the words, we must know, that of the sacrifices
dedicated unto God, there was a Portion due unto the Priests; as, 1 Samuel 2.
Hos. 4. especially, in the sin offerings, where with they were maintained: Now,
this is noted as their fault, that the Lord having thus liberally provided for
them, they counted the allowance base, and not good enough for them; this their
fault: The same see in the Israelites, when God had fed them, a long time, with
Manna, meat meet for Angels, if they should eat; mark, how they murmr;
nothing but Manna, they must have flesh, and that of the daintiest: The same
Fault-finding with the Lords Portion, and allorment, is rife in our people: The
poor, he grudgeth at his hard fare, though he may live in it, feel the Lords
good providence, in giving it strength to nourish, and preserve in health,
beauty, and strength of body. The Labourer, he grudgeth at the Gentleman, that
he lives at such ease; though, as Solomon speaks, his sleep be a thousand times
more sweet, and quiet unto him. And, in a word, go over all states, and you
shall find this murmuring against the providence of God, in the means allotted
by him, for their maintenance.

Causes hereof two: 1. An over weening conceit we have of our own worth, and
deserving; we seem to our selves to have deserved better things at Gods hands,
whenas, alas! not the least morsel of the coursest bread is deserved by us. 2.
Lack of persuasion of Gods love, in our designment to our particular states: A
man persuaded of Gods fatherly love, thus easily resolves, what state God
places him in, that is best for him; knowing, that if another were better for
him, God, being a father, would not deny it him, Mat. 7.9, 10.

Well, Let us hence learn to profit our selves in the understanding of the Law
of God; surely, it is the end, why the Law entered, that sin, that is, the
knowledge of sin might abound; And, that man, that knows the infiniteness of
his own misery by the Law, is best fitted to comprehend, what is the height,
and length, and breadth, and depth of the Love of God, in Christ, revealed in
the Gospel. Learn we, therefore, by this, and the like Scriptures, to make the
full meaning of the Law familiar unto us.

It is one main cause of that sottish pride, and presumptuous opinion men carry
of themselves, as that they know not what the Law means. The First Commandment
forbids worshipping other Gods; free from this; free from all breach of the
Law; whereas, if we were acquainted with the meaning of the Law, we should find
a thousand transgressions of every Precept, besides the gross sin, in the
particular specified; See Mat. 5.

VER. 13. Ye said also, behold, what a weariness is is, and ye have snuffed at
it, says the Lord of Hosts: And, ye brought that which is torn, and the Lame,
and the sick: Thus ye brought an offering: should I accept this of your hand,
says the Lord?


HEre is the sin particular laid to the charge of these hypocrites: First, see
the meaning. Words diversely read: Those that render it nearest the original,
thus; Ye say, behold! what weariness? Whereas, ye may even blow it away;
wherein the Prophet even residenceth the speeches of these hypocritical Jews,
that, whereas they brought unto the Lord for sacrifices, the lightest, and
sleightest of their flock, such as they might even blow away with a blast of
their mouth; [Hyperbole] yet they would pretend, that they were even tired with
the weight of the Sheep, and other Cattle, that they brought for sacrifice.

Now, This sense standing, King. 10.16. When Jehu was going to the service the
Lord employed him in, in the destruction of the Priests of Baal, and spared
Jehonadab the son of Rechab, Come with me, says he, and [see] the zeal I have
for the Lord of Hosts: And this our Savior notes in the Pharisees, those grand
hypocrites amongst the Jews, Mat. 23.5. All their works they did, To be seen of
men, as he gives instance in one particular: It was the Lords ordinance, Number.
15.38. that the people of God, for the better remembrance of the Law of God,
should wear in the borders of their garments, fringes; and upon the fringe of
their borders, they put a Ribband of blew, etc. Now, these Pharisees, that they
might be noted to be more extraordinarily careful to preserve the memory of
the Law of God, and to deny their own wills, in matter of his worship, (though
they were, indeed, the most superstitious Traditioners that ever lived) they
made their Phylacteries broad, etc. The Action not evil, but, their
Affectation damnable; and the reason is that, Joh. 12.43. They loved the praise
of (men) more than the glory of God.

Let it be our admonition, Mat. 6. I say not, but it is lawful, and necessary,
to manifest devotion, that others may be drawn by our good example, Mat. 5.16.
But this, to affect the sight of men, and to call spectatours, as Jehu, to be
witnesses of our Devotions, that savours strongly of hypocrisy. Hear Christ's
reason; all is not lost that is done in secret: though men see not, God sees,
and has his book of remembrance written, for those that fear him, Mal. 3.16.
2 Thy piety will best be manifest, by Gods reward; In this life, his blessings
shall follow thee, so that men shall say, surely, this man fears God, though
condemned by us; for the Lord rewards him; or else, after this life.

And it reproves this vice, so rife in all states, whose own tongues must be
the Trumpets of their own Praises; but, says Solomon, Let another man's mouth
praise thee, and not thine own: Have thou been bountiful to the poor? Let
their Lips bless thee, and let thy works praise thee, Prove. 31. and, let it be
thy desire, to approve thy heart unto God, to be upright: Take heed of
vainglorious ostentations; they are the brand of hypocrisy.

A second property of an Hypocrite, is this; devoutest in pretense, slenderest
in performance; Here, they say, they are tired, with bringing so heavy a
sacrifice, when, [alas!] So slender, that they might blow it away: read Isa.
58. and the Pharisees, Mat. 23. Emptiest Vessels sound loudest; and the veriest
Hypocrite pretends most devotion.

See this, at this day, in Church of Rome;

Well, Beloved, Let this ever be noted, in a Child of God, his performances
most, his pretenses least; and, this the brand of an Hypocrite, to pretend
greatest, and practice the least devotion.

If we take our common reading; that varies from the original Text, though it
be consonant to the Analogy of faith: Two other notes of unsound people, in the
worship of God, are here propounded: 1. Wearisomness in the worship of God. 2.
Impatience, and murmuring at divine impositions.

Wearisomness in the worship of God, Amos 8.5. When will the new Moon be gone?
Reasons of this, are: 1. That their minds are settled on earthly things, and
they are their Treasure; and thence it comes, that every thing is irksome
that deteyneth from them. 2. Lack of love to the Majesty of God; for surely, to
such as love God, his Commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5.3. As it is said
of Jacob, that his seven years service seemed unto him a short time, because he
(loved) Rachel; So, etc. 3. That they feel no sweetness in the service of God;
as Peter, 1 Pet. 2.3. If they had ever tasted, how sweet the Lord is, they
would long after the sincere milk of the Word.

Now see, whether this note of an unsound heart show it self in our People, in
hearing, prayer, etc. See but the behavior of carnal men: At an idle
Stage Play, men can sit half days, and nights; at their Cards, and Dice, whole
nights; drudge after the world, all their life long, and never weary; but, when
we come to a Sermon, every minute beyond the hour, seems tedious unto them,
their devotion spent; and ever in Preaching, and Prayer, that is commended,
short and sweet: Now, this I dare say; A man thus [alwaies] calling for
shortness, (for that the service is wearisome) gives evidence, he never tasted
of the sweetness of the Word of God: A Child of God is of an indefatigable
desire, and unwearied endeavor, Isa. 58.13. They call the Sabbath a delight,
Psalm. 110.3. They came willingly at the days of assembling, Psalm. 1.2. Their
delight is in the Law of God, and therein they meditate, day and night; And,
David again, When shall I be satisfied with the pleasures of thine House? Psalm.
42.2. And, though it be true, that upon the best of us, sometimes, such
irkesomness creeps; yet this I know is true, it is bewailed of Gods Children,
and earnestly striven against by all means.

VER. 14. But, Cursed be the deceiver, which has in his flock, a male, and
voweth, and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing: For, I am a great King,
says the Lord of Hosts, and my name is dreadful among the heathen.


HEre follows the second part of the Chapter: A Curse denounced, wherein
these Particulars: 1. The Curse. 2. The Reasons. First, From description of
Hypocrites. Secondly, Of Gods Majesty. In the description of the Hypocrite; we
see, 1. His Title, A Deceiver, Machinator, a plotter, and deviser, how to
deceive, to wit, with shows of devotion: Deceivers they are: 1. Of God, in
intention, dealing cunningly with him in his worship, vowing many things in
extremities, performance none, or slender. 2. Of men. It shall not be amiss a
little to note how: First, one cunning they have, that they may seem holy, and
devout; they are commonly first, and sharpest in censuring, and condemning
others, Mat. 7. In the mean time, dissolute in their own lives; and the least
moats they can espy in another, their own beams in the mean time, dissembled;
our Savior carped at, for conversing with sinners, and oppressors; themselves
notorious for rapines, and extreme oppression: A cunning slight, and rife, at
this day, among many; That they Censoriously, judge of others, take liberty
over-enough, in their own lives: Whereas, true love covers, 1 Pet. 4.8. and is
compassionate, Gal. 6.2. A second cunning they have, in deceiving men withal,
is external conformity to the parts of the Worship of God; when as, in private
life, none more negligent, or careless, then they: If a man had seen the
devotion of Pharisees, in their Prayers, would he not presently have said,
behold, a devout man! yet, in private life who more abominable? measure thy
self, then, by private carriage. But, their worst deceit is, That by all this,
they beguile their own souls, as Jam 1.26. failing of all their intentions.

And voweth.] Their second property is, that they are forward to vow the best,
in their extremities; when Gods hand is upon them, nothing too dear for him;
but, when Gods hand is removed, as if they repented their forwardness, they
serve him with the corrupt: This ye may see, in Pharaoh, when Gods hand was
upon him, Moses and Aaron sent for, sin confessed, great mind to let Gods
people go; when Gods hand removed, then, to limit and distinguish; they might,
but, their children must stay; then, (they) might go, but their Cattle must
stay behind.

See we, whether this be not, in our people; when fear of death oppresses
them, then, how careful will they be? If God restore them to health; then all
but delusion, as in Achab; A little for ease; health restored, no token of
humiliation, or repentance: So, in spiritual extremities, whilst conscience
affrights; all the world for a conscience; yet presently, their old By as taken
unto; General vow made in Baptism broken.

Now, Beloved, Let us beware of this mark, and brand of Hypocrisy; and what we
vow, let us make conscience to perform; it is ill dallying with the Lord: Let
me add the Curse, as a reason to press it; Curse outward, Eccl. 5.4, 5. Inward,
in hardness of heart, as we see in common practice, their last end worse, than
their beginning.

And here I may take occasion to treat, shortly, of the Doctrine of Vows.

A Vow is a solemn, What a Vow is
and holy promise made unto God, deliberately, and with advisement, whereby we
bind our selves to do, or omit something, that we know is acceptable unto him.
I call it, first, A promise; next, a solemn, and religious promise, to put
difference betwixt promises made unto men; Thirdly, unto God, because, this a
part of Invocation, and Confession: The matter of Vows, things acceptable unto
God.

Whether they may be made, under the Gospel? I take it, yes: perhaps, not that
necessity now, that then was; but yet, lawfulness the same; because, 1. Helps
of devotion, when rightly understood. 2. A common Vow made in Baptism, renewed
in the Lords Supper, after the ordinance of God. 3. As testimonies of
thankfulness, etc. Yet, indeed, sundry Caveats there are herein to be observed;
let me touch the principal. First, Some concern the matter of Vows; In this
matter, are two things: 1. Lawfulness, 2. Possibility. Lawfulness; for, when we
vow things unlawful, we profane the name of God; nor can this be acceptable
unto God: Against this condition sinned those Jews, that had bound themselves
with Vow, and Oath; not to eat, till they had slain Paul; and those vile
wretches, amongst the people of Rome, that with solemn receiving of the
Sacrament, bind themselves to the murder of the Lords Anointed: Such those of
our people, our Gallants especially, that vow revenge; and that Vow once made,
no means of appeasement; thus, Vows that should be bonds of obedience, become
obligations to rebellion, and disobedience.

2. Possibility of things, in our power, that we have ability, by grace, or
other means, to perform; for, what a dallying were this with the Lord, and how
presumptuous, on our part, to vow what we have not power to perform. Thus sin
Papists, at this day, in vowing continency in single life; A thing out of
compass of man's power, except there be special grace given of God: And, to
Salvation; such repentance; this promised to all Gods Children, upon their
endeavors: The other special, and given to none, but by special privilege.
1 Cor. 7.36.

A second Caveat to be respected, is, the state of our Persons; namely, That
they be sui juris, Free men; Reason is, because otherwise, there is a
disjointing of Gods Ordinance, and a robbing of men of that honor, which God
has given them: Therefore, Number. 30. when a Child, or wife, has vowed any
thing, without privity, and consent of Superiors, the Lord gave them power to
abrogate it: And therefore they, in the Church of Rome, that allow unto
children authority to vow Monastical life, without free consent of their
Parents, abominable.

A third thing to be regarded, is, the manner, and grounds of vowing; See Eccl.
5.2. Be not rash with thy mouth, etc. Deliberation, in this case, much to be
regarded; as, first, of the matter, wherein Jephtah sinned, Judge. 11. Secondly,
Whether we have assurance of strength, and power, to perform what we vow, 1
Cor. 7.35. otherwise, we make them snares unto us, and unnecessary
entanglements. Thirdly, Whether God call us thereto, or no; for, then may we
assure our selves of assistance in performance; And this calling is gathered;
partly, by necessity; partly, by assurance of ability. Fourthly, the end; not
merit; but, as helps to us in obedience: So, if a man shall find a Vow may be a
bridle unto him, for some excess, or a spurr to devotion; lawful: not
otherwise. Fifthly, That it be done seldom, and sparingly; otherwise, Satan
gets advantage, and such wounds are grievous. Sixthly, That we be void of
presumption; and therefore, good in all Vows, to interpose that condition; if
God will, if God permit: Many, through presumption, have fallen, to their more
grievous wound, as Peter, etc.

Last thing, is, performance of Vows; every where urged, as Eccl. 5.4. and
Psalm. 116.18. Vovete, and reddite; vow, and pay unto the Lord; Vovete, is
hortatorium; yet, reddite, imperatorium: wherein, ancient Divines require three
things. 1. Haste to performance, Eccl. 5.3. Defer not to pay it; this, in the
common vow of Baptism, violated. 2. That it be full payment, without
diminution; See Eccl. 5.5. I did not foresee what would betide; as Ananias,
Act. 5. Pharaoh, and our people. 3. Discretion; this the sin of Jephtah, as
Hierom says, he was, in vovendo stultus; In reddendo, impius: Folly he showed,
in vowing; for, if it were generally understood, then, if a Dog, or an Ass had
met him, he should have performed it; again, as foolish in performance; For, 1.
The Law of God had provided redemption of some, even lawful Vows. 2. Being so
fondly vowed, rashness was to be repented, but the Vow not to be performed:
Votum duplex, absolutum conditionatum.

Lastly, About dispensation with Vows; the quaere is, whether dispensable, or
commutable? Answer is, when as lawfully made unto God, cannot be dispensed
withal, but by the Lord himself, for none can dispense with the Commandments
of God: Therefore, Papists here taxed.

And, let the Use of all this be thus much unto us; Eccl. 5.5. Vows are of two
sorts; public, and solemn; singular, and private, etc. I would be Author to
no man to be hasty in vowing; seriously weighing humane frailty; but, if he
have vowed, let him make conscience to perform.

For, I am a great King.] First, in largeness of command. 2. In power of
administering; as appears, that he has all Creatures at his command; therefore
styled, Lord of Hosts: His Kingdom is, of power, of grace; of power, over the
very wicked; seen, in restrayining, in overruling, in destroying his Enemies:
Of grace, in collecting, in protecting, in glorifying his Church.

The Use is, Heb. 12.28. According to greatness, reverence usually
proportioned; It is fearful to fall into the hands of the living God.

My name is dreadful among the heathen.] His name, that is, Himself:
Dreadful, that is terrible, and withal reverend; Terrible, to the Wicked;
reverend, to his dearest servants: There is, indeed, a double fear of God; one,
servile, and even astonishing: The other reverentiall, and is nothing else, but
that awe, and filial reverence, that is in Gods Children toward his Majesty;
And it arises from these grounds: 1. One is apprehension of the Majesty of
God. 2. Beholding of his Judgments. 3. Apprehension of his love.

Thus they differ: 1. In causes, and in manner of apprehending Gods Majesty;
wicked apprehend him only as a Judge, and an Avenger, Jam. 2.19. The godly, as a
Father, also, in Christ, Hos. 3. ult. 2. In effects, slavish fear drives
utterly from God. Genesis 4.31. 1 Samuel 28.7. Filial brings nearer unto him. 3.
Slavish fear, torments; Filial, comforts. 4. Slavish fear restrains, indeed,
because hell provided; filial, because sin offensive unto God.

Try how thou fear God; Thou can by no better mean know it,

CHAP. 2. VER. 1, 2, etc. And now, O ye Priests, this Commandment is for you:
If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto my
name, says the Lord of Hosts, I will even send a Curse upon you, and will
curse your Blessings; yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it
to heart, etc.


Sum of the Text, A persuasion of the Levites to do their duty, in reforming
the worship of God; by an Argument of the peril of the contrary neglect.

Parts. 1 A Preface, ver. 1 2 A Commination; wherein are three things.


1. The condition interposed, which if neglected, the judgments threatened shall
certainly be inflicted.

2. The Judgments threatened; as, first, Curse of their Blessings. Secondly,
Corrupting their seed. Thirdly, Casting dung in their faces.

3. The Reasons: First, from the Lords mercy toward them. Secondly, their
swerving from that Covenant, and the example of their Predecessors; the
foulness whereof is amplified.

The Preface has in it, an Apostrophe, and turning of the speech general, to
the Persons of the Priests.

Collection hence, this; It is lawful for a Minister, in Preaching, to
particularize, that is, to direct his reproofs, threatenings, etc. to particular
persons, and States; See Hos. 5.1, etc. Christ, to Scribes, and Pharisees.

Reasons, What is spoken to every one, seems spoken to no one: And hence is
that shifting of the stroke of the Word from themselves, through the subtilty
of Satan, Hypocrisy of heart, and love of our sins. Secondly, The Apostle
gives this Precept, 1 Timothy 5.20. That we should thus deal even with Elders;
whose credit (if any) should be most spared; if they sin openly, rebuke openly:
Reason, That the rest may fear.

Caveats here are: First, That the Fact be public, Mat. 18. In private sins,
another course to be holden, so long as any hope of Reformation appears. 2.
That it be evident; either, by the Fact, or, by Confession; or, by Witness, of
the fact; See 1 Cor. 5. of witnesses, 1 Timothy 5 19.

And this the Doctrine, the Practice whereof so distastefull to carnal men;
Paul, in a public Epistle, notes the incestuous person, 1 Cor. 5. And, why a
Minister may not so deal with men publicly offensive, I fee not; as, if there
be any in our own Congregation, known Brablers* as, of late, the Fact is
evident in one, whose bond to the good behavior might have taught him better
carriage; To whom, if I should now, as Malachy here, turn my speech, and tell
him, vengeance is the Lords, and, that he that smites with the sword, shall
perish with the sword, I see not but I follow a president, beyond exception:
And view, if you will; the small effects that come of general Teaching, in all
Congregations, where it is used; Little or no good done, while particular
abuses, in particular persons, are generally only reproved: But, Learn we hence
to submit our selves, without murmuring, to this kind of Teaching; and ever
think, that Preacher preaches best, that can best particularize; and in whose
mouth, Prophecy is the discoverer of our secret, and particular corruptions, 1
Cor. 14.25.

This Commandment is for you.] To wit, of reforming Religion, and the worship
of God.

So then, It is a duty specially belonging to Ministers, to see to the
Reformation of Religion, Tit. 1. Let us see how this is to be understood.
Papists understand it, Exclusively, so that they would not have Civil
Magistrates to have any thing to do, in matters of Religion, and the worship of
God: Now, that even in matters Ecclesiastical, the Civil Magistrate has
power of commanding, appears: 1. Signis, Deuteronomy. 17.18. A charge is given, that
the Book of the Law be delivered to the King, not only for private information
of his life; but, as Austin well says, That he might provide, that others also
observe it. 2. A minori, If Fathers, in Families, must deal in information of
Households, how much more the King? 3. 1 Timothy 2.2. Godliness, as well as
honesty, must be promoted by them. 4. Judge. 17. and 18. Neglect of Reformation
is imputed to lack of Magistrates, which what argues it, but a duty to promote
purity of the worship of God. 5. Kings in Judah, and Israel, blamed for
tollerating abuses, commended for care in reforming, Ergo, etc.

Briefly, That we may see, what the duty of Civil Magistrates is, in this
kind; See we what they may not meddle with. Secondly, what concerns them, in
duty, in this kind. 1. The execution of Ministerial Functions belongs not unto
them, because, they are not thereto called, Heb. 5.4. Therefore, Saul blamed
for this, 1 Samuel 13. In that, being a King, he would take upon him, to burn
Sacrifice; and Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26.16, is said, to transgress the Commandment
of the Lord herein; and Amaziah well tells him, it is not for him to burn
Incense; and, the Lord strikes him with Leprosy.

See we, now, what it is, that belongs unto them. 1 Making Laws, for
stablishing pure Religion, abolishing of false; See this, as, in
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3. so in Josiah, etc. commended. 3. To see to the
execution of those Laws; So, it is said of Josiah, he compelled those that were
found in Israel, and Judah, to serve the Lord, 2 Chr. 34.33. 4, To enjoine
every Church Officer, to see to his office, and place, 2 King. 23.4. 5. To
assign to every one his particular station, and calling, in the Church, 2 Chro.
17.7. 6. To correct, and punish omissions: So that, this Doctrine is not,
exclusively, to be understood, in respect of the Civil Magistrate; but serves
only to awaken the Priests, that were, in this point of duty, most negligent:
And, parts of the Priests duty, this way, are: 1. To teach. 2. To exercise
Discipline,

Therefore, how well they discharge Ministerial Offices, that are the foremost
in corrupting the sincere worship of God; consider we: Corruptions in Religion
are of two sorts: 1. In matter. 2. In manner. In matter, when means of worship
not prescribed, are brought in by men, as Mat. 159. How full of such
Corruptions is the Church of Rome? In manner, when abuses in the worship of
God, are tolerated: Secondly, See here, what we have to answer to that common
objection of the people; That we meddle where we need not, when we oppose our
felves to corruptions in Religion: As, to insist in one particular, Profane
abuse of the Sacrament; the common saying is, The unworthy Communicant shall
himself smart for his profaneness, True; yet the Minister also, For, to him is
this Commandment given, to inhibit, as much as in him lies, all profaning of
the Lords holy Ordinances.

Proceed we to the threatening: how the Lord, in threatening of Judgment,
interposeth condition of obedience, and repentance; which if performed, the
stream of Gods judgments is stayed; See Jer. 18.7, 8, 9, 10.

Ezekiel. 33.11. That he delights not in the death of sinners, but rather would,
they should convert and live, that every mouth may be stopped: And see, whether
ever the Lord was hasty (before warning) to execute judgment upon any people:
The old world had corrupted their ways before God; yet not suddenly swept
away, but Noah (a Preacher of righteousness) given to warn them; So, in Sodom,
Lots example, and admonitions; So Jerusalem; often would the Lord have
gathered them; with our selves, the Lord has thus dealt.

Then, that we may avert, and turn away the judgments of God from us: See our
duty, of two branches:

Beloved, The Lord has come near unto us, in sundry judgments: Pestilence has
long dwelt in our Land; Famine and scarcity have been often amongst us: greater
Judgments may be expected, if these be neglected; and yet, who cares to hear?
Or, hearing, who considers? Or, considering, who reforms? So that, just must
needs be our destruction, whenever the Lord shall bring it upon us.

See the Judgments: 1. Curse their blessings, that is, weaken their abundance.
2. Corrupting their seed, so taking away hope of recovery. 3. Cast dung upon
their faces, that is, extremity of vileness, and contempt: And, the cause of
all this, corruptions in Religion.

Corruptions in Religion cause of most judgments of God: Neh. 13.81. Did not
your fathers thus, and all this wrath is come upon us? Jer. 44. Their
Incense-burning to the Queen of Heaven, true cause of Gods judgments; Hag. 1.
The people wonder at their Famine; the Lord sets them down this, one true
cause, and reason of it, His house lay waste, ver. 9, 10, Exodus 32. The Calf
incenseth him.

See we, then, to what cause we may impute all those heavy Plagues, Josuah,
cap. 24.15. As for me, and my house, we will serve the Lord.

I will corrupt your seed.] So then, God is he, that is, the inflicter of all
judgments: Amos 3.6. No evil in the City, but the Lord has done it; So Isa.
45.7. Job 5.6. Affliction rises not out of the dust.

Manichees, then, are here refuted, who dreamed of a double, summum malum;
inflicting of pains a part of Justice, and therefore has in it some respect of
goodness. Again, amongst our people, Luck and Fortune carry away all: But,
though in respect of us, that know not second causes, some events may be termed
casual; yet in respect of God, all things are determined; not a sparrow falls
to the ground, without our father, Mat. 10.30. Some stick in second Causes,
impute famine to drought, etc. But, though it be true, that judgments are many
times executed by second causes; yet so, as that the first Cause orders all,
barrenness comes of drought, but the Lord makes drought; Hag. 1.11. I called
for a drought, etc. Therefore, Learn we to whom, in all judgments, to resort;
See Hos. 6.1. To the Lord, it is he who smites, and he only must heal.

VER. 4, 5. And ye shall know that I have sent this Commandment unto you, that
my covenant might be in Levi, says the Lord of Hosts. My covenant was with
him, of life and peace; and I gave them to him, for the fear, wherewith he
feared me, and was afraid before my Name.


FOllow now the Reasons* 1. From the special mercy of God bestowed upon them,
and their forefathers: Gods Covenant was with them, of life and peace.

Now, Gods Covenant is of four sorts. 1. General, made with all Creatures,
Genesis 9. 2. With the Church, in general. 3. With the Church of the Elect. 4.
With some particulars, of some special graces: of this last, must this place
be understood, God having entered a Covenant with them especially, to give them
life, and peace

So then, with Ministers especially, has the Lord made a Covenant of Peace,
binding himself, especially, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no
harm; has made special promise of assistance, and protection, unto them,
Mat. 18. and we see sundry examples hereof; as, if ye read the whole Scriptures
you shall not see any to whom more special deliverances vouchsafed, than unto
them; See in Jeremy, Elijah, Peter, etc. God was their portion.

And, this should be our encouragement, unto whom the Dispensation of the word
is committed, Jer. 1.18. It is true, that of all men, we are most subject to
the hatred of the world, as being those whom the Lord has called to deal with
the sins of men; but yet, if we shall look up to our God, that has made
Covenant with us; least cause have we, of all others, to fear the malice, or
power of Adversaries.

e Zech. 2.8.
Apple of his eye; but, more special care of Ministers has he, every where,
protested: And, would God, this could sink into the hearts of those wretchless
people amongst us, whose indignities and wrongs, no men taste more.

For the fear wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before my name.] Here have
we Levi's behavior, in the Covenant, declared by the cause, effects, and signs
of it. Fear of God, is an affection of the heart, whereby we reverence the
Majesty of God, What the fear of God is.
and fly from his offense, in all things.

Of it there are three kinds: 1. Merely servile, such in Devils, Jam. 2.19. 2.
Merely Filial, such in the Saints in heaven. 3. Mixed of both; which is that
only, whereof we partake in this life: The first of these arises only from
judgments, either felt, or feared; and only, in that regard, restrains: The
second, from Gods goodness, and feeling of his mercy, Hos. 3. ult. and, in
respect thereof, causes to depart from evil: The last, from both; partly,
from fear of judgment; partly, from sense of mercy: But, let us see the
properties, and effects of it. 1. It causes a reverence of the Majesty of God;
therefore, the Lord called, The fear of Jacob; and shows it self partly, in
speaking reverently of God, and his services; partly, in trembling at his
words; partly, in a seemly carriage in all things, as in the presence of God;
together with a constant care to depart from evil, and a stout courage in good
causes, and courses: Try by these things.

And, I gave them to him.] Here, we observe, That fear of God is his own gift;
See Jer. 32.40. And, Adam, we are destitute of all saving grace, Romans 3.18.
Natural men are thus described, No fear of God before their eyes; apparent, by
effects contrary, running into all excess of riot, without any bridle, or
restraint, till this gift of God be obtained.

If this be so, where is that Doctrine of free will, Rome?

And secondly, see the excellency of this gift; Jer. 32.40. set out in the
Scripture, by sundry Arguments: 1. It is made the note of a Child of God;
therefore, it is the usual description of men Religious, to be such as fear
the Lord. 2. Blessedness promised unto it, Blessed is the man that fears the
Lord. 3. The immunity that such men have, in common judgments.

Wherefore, bless God, if he have given it unto thee; and think him more
merciful to thee, in this, than if he had given thee all the wealth of the
world, severed from it: This, indeed, by earth-wormes, commonly counted
faint-heartedness; whereas it is, indeed, The highest point of wisdom, and
courage.

VER. 6. The Law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his
lips: He walked with me in peace, and equity, and did turn many away from
iniquity.


A second reason, why the Lord threatens to inflict those judgments, upon the
Levites, was, their swerving from those good precedents set before them, by
their Forefathers. And, it is handled in a plenary Comparison of unlikes; The
Protasis whereof contains an explication of Levi's behavior; The Apodosis
expresses their swerving from the pattern set them, ver. 8:

Now, before I proceed to particular handling, it is fit; First, to remove the
glosses of Papists. Hence they infer, That it is possible for some man, in the
state of this life, to walk so inoffensively, and perfectly before God, that he
may merit, and deserve Salvation; one argument for which they take hence:
indeed, they confess, that we cannot ordinarily live without venial sins; but,
without mortal sins, that is, such as deserve, in their own nature, death, we
may: Now, against the state of such perfection, the Scripture every where
speaks: The Apostle, Romans 7.23. expressing the state of himself, and others, in
state of grace, confesses, that he was led captive to the Law of sin; and,
least they should say, they were venial sins, he acknowledges them deadly,
when as he calls the corruption, whence they proceeded, to be a body of
death: And, in many things, we offend all; shall we say, venially? Nay, deadly,
Romans 6.23. For, The wages of every sin, is death.

Hear the Reasons: 1. Because, but, in part, sanctified, 1 Cor. 13.15. 2.
Knowledge, in part. 3. The perfectest fear trial, in extremity of justice,
which they would not do, were their works perfect, Psa. 43.2. 4. Taught to pray
for forgiveness. Wherefore, if we may live free from mortal, only with venial
sins, why may we not perfectly expiate?

What then is that perfection, that the Scripture speaks of? Answer, 1.
Perfection in Christ. 2. Perfection in Parts. 3. Uprightness, and sincerity of
heart, in all duties, when we are free from hypocrisy; And this is that, here,
commended in Levi.

In this verse, then, we have two things.

1. The behavior of Levi; in two things; In Doctrine; and in life. In
Doctrine, Truth, and it only: In life, peaceable, and equal carriage: In both,
sincerity, and uprightness before God: Where, 2. we have the effect of these
two, He turned many from iniquity.

See here the description of a true Pastor, Joh. 21.15. Voices, Mat. 3.3. Aaron
had Bells on the skirts of his Garment, and his sound must be heard, when he
goes into the Tabernacle.

Second property, That, as he taught, so he taught truth, and mere truth,
without wilful mixture of falsehood, or other corruptions; therefore Paul, as
he bids us preach, so to preach the Word, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. and, it must be
wholesome Doctrine; and, Pharisees are blamed, not, for that they taught nothing
but error, (for some truth they taught, Mat. 23.1, 2.) but, for that they
(mingled) errors, and humane devices; Mat. 16, 6. as Leaven that soured the
whole lump.

Third this, That as he taught well; so, he lived uprightly, and inoffensively;
a singular duty of a Minister; See 1 Timothy 3. As much care takes the Apostle, to
instruct touching life, as a liberty of teaching: and Mat. 5.16. Let light
shine by good works; See 1 Cor. 9. ult. and the mystery of Vrim, and Thummim,
that is, light, and perfection, that ought to be in the Priests.

Fourth, That all this was done, in sincerity, and uprightness of heart: this
that Paul challenges to himself, 2 Cor. 1.12, and counts it his chief comfort;
walking with God; that is, when a man is not carried away with the stream of
the times, but keeps on a constant endeavor of approving himself, and his
heart, to God.

England. 2. All such, as having ability, yet use not their gifts, to the good
of Gods people; See 1 Cor. 12.7. the gifts of the Spirit are given, to profit
withal; called dispensers, 1 Cor. 4.1. and, 1 Pet. 4.10. As we have received,
so we must minister the same gift, to edification.

Secondly, Those that teach, but teach unsoundly; whether gross errors, or
quirks of their own wit: The Apostle dealing against this kind of Teaching,
thus says, That their labor, and reward is all lost, 1 Cor. 3.15. They
profane the Temple of God; and the Lord shall destroy such.

Thirdly, Those that teaching truths, and nothing but truths, yet walk
inordinately, to the disgrace of truth, hinderance of the Gospel: How many
such are every where? causing Christ's ordinances, as the Sons of Eli, 1 Samuel
2.17. did the Lords sacrifices, by their ungracious lives, to be loathed.

Fourthly, That are outwardly painful, and honest; vet, without uprightness of
heart, in the sight of God; Phil, 1.15. Some such spoken of, that preached
Christ, indeed, but it was, out of envy, or, for filthy Lucre; such an one was,
Judas: And, would God, many such did not discover themselves daily; their sins
cannot be hid, 1 Timothy 5.24.

Mat. 9. ult. Pray God, that he would thrust forth Laborers into his harvest.
Beloved, How our Church groans under the burden of such idle, Idol, or
profane shepherds, we see, and can talk of; would God, we could heartily
bewail, and, as becomes us, pray heartily, for redress; no doubt, we should
see the work of the Lord go faster forward.

And did turn many away from iniquity.] In this clause, we have expressed the
effect of these Levites, thus demeaning themselves: They turned many from
iniquity.

Sense: How is this said of the Ministry, when conversion is made the peculiar
work of God? Answer, As to Instruments, because, by them, the Lord works
conversion, faith, repentance, etc. Therefore, we are said, to save others, 1 Timothy 4. ult. to wit, as Instruments; because, without us, God ordinarily, saves
none; and, by us, and the foolishness of Preaching, saves them that believe;
therefore, 1 Cor. 3.9. said to be (...), fellow-workers with God, and
Instruments effectual; Ministers, by whom ye have believed; so to remit sins,
as Instruments, and Ministers.

So then, here observe, That the Ministry of the Word, Rom, 1.16. See Isa.
8.18. Lo me, and the children which thou have given me, 2 Cor. 10.4. The
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty; through God; Heb. 4.12.
mighty in operation; 1 Cor. 14.25. Prophecy humbles, and makes fall down.

The reason whereof is, The promise of God, and his good pleasure; I will be
with you, that is, not only to protect you, and to assist and enable you; but,
to bless your Ministry. Object. Sometimes ineffectuall. Answer. A double effect
of the Minister, 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. Isa. 55.10. As the show, and the rain. 2.
Fruit may be, that is not seen, as in Elias his time, seven thousand, but
invisible, Romans 11.4. Act. 18.10. much people in that City. 3. Though blessing
promised, yet times and seasons kept in Gods power; as Act. 18.10. The day of
visitation is not come.



It is truly a discomfortable thing to be a Minister, to take pains, where no
fruit appears; it made Jeremy resolve to speak no more in the name of the Lord,
Jer. 20.9. and secondly, Paul shakes his raiment, Acts 18.6. but is reproved of
the Lord.

Luke 8.15. can say, He seldom has heard Sermon, but, he has been bettered
thereby: how powerful feel we it ripping up corruptions, in humbling for
sins, in furthering with comfort, etc? And, let such as have not felt their
power, suspect their State.

VER. 7. For the Priests lips should keep knowledge, and, they should seek the
Law at his mouth; for, he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts.


GLoss of Papists: Hence they deduce, That Priests cannot err; how absurdly;
See ver. 8. They had forsaken the way, and caused many to fall: Know we, then,
That this no promise, but a prescription of duty. The Lord does not promise,
that they shall be free from error; but prescribes what were their duties,
namely, to labor to be even a treasure-house of knowledge for the people of
God: so also, that place, 1. Tim. 3. understood of Office, not of Fact.

Hence, then, may we observe, Mat. 13.52. The good Scribe, etc. Those many
offices required of us, show it; as, to be able to resolve all doubts, to
convince errors, etc. Tit. 1.9.

This knowledge is of two sorts: 1 Theoreticall. 2 Experimental; both these
necessary in a Minister.

And it should teach us, Paul. 1 Timothy 4.13. to give attendance unto reading,
etc. Ignorance and Idleness, fit not (of all men else) a Minister. Secondly,
Pray God for such; it is his great blessing, when such are given, Jer. 3.15. to
feed us with knowledge, and with understanding.

The next is, the duty of the people, in respect of such a Minister; to seek
the Law at his mouth.

Hence then we collect, That it is Gods ordinance, These. 5.28. Despise not
Prophesying; Heb. 10.25. Forsake not our assembling together. For this cause,
many difficulties, and obscurities mingled in Scriptures; many things hard to
be understood, 2 Pet. 3.16.
perverted by the unlearned, and unstable; of which we may say, as the Eunuch
to Philip, Acts 8.31. How can I understand, without a guide, or an Interpreter?
And secondly, For this cause, it pleases God, by little and little, to give
his graces; a little knowledge, a little experience; Wherefore? But that he may
continually keep, as it were, an appetite, and edge, upon our desires?
Therefore also many decaies, as in buildings, Ephesians. 4. that what we seemed
best to know, we forget; comfort and consolation, not stable, etc. namely, by
this means, to evidence the necessity of using an Interpreter.

Therefore, Beloved, Pro. 28.9. He that turns his ear from hearing the Law,
his prayer shall be abominable; his study, reading, all is accursed unto him:
And therefore, mark when you will, such men, how it pleases God to give them
up, many times, to foul and gross errors, in judgment, and life: wherefore, I
say again, Despise not Prophesying.

He is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts.] 1. His Office. 2. The Author of it:
See we the message, Romans 10.15. 2. Cor. 5.20. From whom sent, from the Lord of
Hosts.

Now, this teaches us that are Ministers, sundry duties: Mat. 10.40. And, that
contempt the Lord will never suffer to go unpunished: When 2 Samuel 10.
David saw, how his Messengers, whom he sent to Hanun, to entreat of peace
betwixt them, were used, or rather abused by him, his wrath is enkindled, and
justly, against him: And, let all those that despise Ministers, lay it to
heart; Ye have heard of the sins of Sodom, and Gomorrah; and how the Lord made
them ensamples of his vengeance; believe it, for the mouth of truth has spoken
it; very Sodomy it self, is not a heavier sin, nor more severely punished in
hell, than this of despising a Minister, in the saithfull discharge of his
Ministry.

VER. 8. But ye are departed out of the way: ye have caused many to stumble at
the Law: ye have corrupted the Covenant of Levi, says the Lord of Hosts.


ORdinary Pastors (many) err, Lord, extraordinarily assisted by his Spirit;
such were Prophets, and Apostles, of whom Peter says, 2 Pet. 1. ult. That they
spoke not, of any private motion, but even as they were inspired by the Holy
Ghost: Ordinary, such as by ordinary calling are deputed to the Office of
Teaching; of these, whether alone, or collected, it is true, they may err.

First; That they have erred; See Mat. 23. Scribes and Pharisees sat in Moses
Chair, had ordinary calling, and succession, without interruption; yet had they
Leaven mingled with their Doctrine, Mat. 18.8. And, lest any should say. That
[Singularly] they might err, but not [Collected;] See Mar. 15.64. High Priest,
and all assembled, and yet conclude of Christ, He had blasphemed. Secondly, if
not, then because they spoke infallibly, by inspiration of the holy Ghost: But,
this not; for, then it will follow, that their decrees are (...), and so of
equal authority with the Scripture. Thirdly, if not, this, either in respect
of Multitude, or Wisdom, or Holiness, or Promise; but, first, Multitude frees
them not, as in Achabs 1. King. 22.
Prophets; and that warning, agree not with a Multitude, Exodus 23.2. Secondly,
Not in respect of their Wisdom, for, they are not always the wisest, that are
assembled in Counsels. Thirdly, Not in respect of holiness; for themselves
confessing, They may be as lewd as any. 4. Nor in respect of promise. If any
allege, Joh. 16.18. Answer. That promise, in that measure, made to the
Apostles; and that, as well separate, as collected.

Besides all this; expetience shows it: Concilium Laodicenum approves only
the books, that are now received; Trident concludes the Apocryphal; one must
needs err: Council of Neocasarea, against second marriages, and will have
Priests put them to penance, that admit them; yet S. Paul warrants them, Romans
7.3. 1 Cor. 7.39. Council of Nice ordained rebaptization for all, that had
followed Paylus Samosetanus.

Object. The high Priest of the New Testament cannot. Answer, True, if
understood of Christ: But, if of the Pope, ye shall see experience. Liberius
subscribed to Arrianisme John the 22 that the souls of the wicked should not,
at all, be punished, till the day of Judgment, and this he sends Preachers to
publish. John the 23. That the souls of men are mortal; and that there is no
Resurrection, not Life after this. Honorius a Monothelite, and this he did
dogmatizare, deliver by way, and as in the nature of a decree; What needs more?

Hear Reasons proving it: 1 Ignorance, 1 Cor. 13.12. 2. Imperfect
Sanctification. 3. No promise of Infallible, and incessant assistance; that
promise peculiar to Apostles, Joh. 16.13.

Let it teach us that wisdom that S. Paul prescribes, To try all things, 1
These. 5.21. 1 John 4.1. and even to fill our selves with knowledge of the Word
of God; And never so much admire any Minister, be his gifts never so reverend,
as not to bring him to the common trial, and touchstone: And, if ever this
Exhortation needful, now are the Times; wherein you shall see a manifest going
out of the way, and a reviving of old Errors. And, in such Times, lamentable
the case of men ignorant, or negligent, this way; And, let no man say, Their
Teachers shall answer. Though that be true, yet thou perishest also with them,
Mat. 15.14.

Ye have caused many to stumble at the Law.] So seldom falls a Minister alone,
but draws many with him into fellowship of errors, and corrupt manners; Tim.
2.17. their speech frets like a Canker, and increases to more ungodliness; See
Gal. 2.14. Peter's example compulsory, etc. Now, this causing many others to
fall, is, partly, through neglect of Instruction; partly, through connivance;
partly, through example: So that a Ministers Errors, whether in Judgment, or
Practice, enwrap many ethers in the same condemnation; See Jer. 10.21. The
Pastors were become brutish, therefore, all the Flocks of their Pastures are
scattered; as when a maine stone in a Building, or a tall Cedar, falls.

Reasons: 1. Evil examples, in general, are marvelous prevalent with corrupt
nature, even as Leaven, or as a gangrene, in the Body; but, especially those of
Teachers, partly, through admiration of their persons; partly, through
ignorance, or forgetfulness, rather, that those who know most, sometimes
practice the least: and partly, through a fond opinion, that their Leaders
shall excuse them.

Now, Tim. 4.16.

So also you, the people, are here admonished of sundry duties. 1. As the Lord
has laid this charge on every of you, to pray, that the Gospel may have free
passage, 2 These. 3.1. So, especially, to pray for this; that it would please
God, as, to give gifts of knowledge, so especially of Sanctification, unto your
Ministers, men, as your selves, compassed about with many infirmities, and whom
Satan especially labors to winnow, and sift to the very bottom: and what
should many Reasons need? We see from our woeful experience, what impediments
to the proceedings of the Gospel, the ungracious behaviors of lewd Ministers
are: Pray therefore for us. 2. The powerful effect of good life.

And, Rev. 1.6.
Priests, and Prophets to your family; learn you hence, of all the rest, to be
most wary in your carriage; Such Master, such Man; such Father, such Son,
commonly seen in experience: And mark, if ye will, how the least of your
Infants crept out of the cradle, like Apes, can imitate the Speeches, Actions,
Gestures, especially, of Parents; and, if nothing else, yet let this restrain.
Excellent is the benefit of it; woeful the issues of the contrary.

Thirdly, since this so; Mat, 23.3. where speaking of Scribes, and Pharisees, he
thus admonishes; do as they say, while they speak out of Moses Chair: And,
every of you labor for so much knowledge of the word of God, that you may be
able to judge, when they teach truth, when falsehood; when they do well, when
ill; See Joh. 10.27. The sheep of Christ hear his voice, know not a stranger.
Hence know, that, in imitation, Christ sets us our limits, 1 Cor. 11.1. and,
withal consider, that fellows in sinning, are fellows in punishment, Rev.
18.4. and, lastly, beware of too much admiring the persons of men; for, how
much this prevails to Heresy and impiety, woeful experience teaches.

Ye have corrupted the Covenant of Levi.] Here we have expressed the reason of
Gods Commination, or threatening; partly, because the Lord had entered a Covenant
with Levi; and partly, because they degenerated from the good example of their
Predecessors, and so declined from the right way. The Protasis of this
dissimilitude explaines the life of their Fore fathers, ver. 5, 6, 7. The
Apodosis, the aberration of the Posterity, ver. 8. Levi walked with God, in
truth, and equity; These turned out of the way; he turned many from iniquity;
these caused many to fall, or to sin against the Law; He, according to the
Covenant, feared God; These brake the Covenant of Levi,

From the body of the Text, we have two thing, he promises Solomon a blessing;
if he will walk before him, as David his father walked, in pureness of his
heart, and righteousness, 1 King. 9.4, 5, etc. Cap. 11.4, 6. This noted as his
blemish, that he was not, as David his Father; and, 1 King. 14.8. The Lord
reproves Jeroboam for this, that he had not been as his servant David: yea, in
many places, where worthy commendations of many Kings are recorded, yet this is
added as a blemish, they did not as David, and other their Fathers.

And, this may not seem strange, in as much as even amongst men, rightly
judging, this is a thing odious, to degenerate from our Lineage, and
Predecessors; but, in Religion much more. The Reason is, because the Lord has,
by so many Precepts, urged this duty upon us, To imitate and follow the steps
of our Forefathers, when they walked after Gods Commandment; Romans 4. Walk in
the steps of your father Abraham.

Or, 2. If we consider, how, by their example especially, the Lord effectually
teaches us, and gives them as guides unto us, in the ways of piety, and
obedience: How powerful examples are, chiefly, of Parents, we see in common
experience. And, though God be merciful, in teaching by his word; yet this may
not be esteemed a small blessing, that it pleases him to give us guides, to go
before us, Jam. 5.10. Heb. 11. and 12.1. As, in a journey, it is somewhat
comfortable, to have the way pointed out unto us; but more comfortable, to see
another more skillful, conducting us; and, if a man will then err, his error
must needs be wilful; even so, etc. Besides this, this degenerating is a
blemish, and dishonor to the name of Parents.

Let us now apply this,

Beloved in Christ; God has dealt graciously with us, in this Kingdom, in this
kind; chalking out the way to Heaven, in the example of our Forefathers; so
as, except we will shut our eyes, we cannot but behold the beaten track that
leads to his Kingdom; how heinous shall declinings, and degenerations be in us*

I will single out but a few of their worthy examples: 1. Their love of Gods
truth manifested, especially, in these three particulars: First, their fervent
desires to be hearers of it; as, whosoever shall read the histories of our
Church, he cannot but acknowledge; as, 1 Samuel 3.1. The word of God was precious
in those days, when there was no manifest vision; how frequent was it with
them, then, to ride many a skore miles to hear a Sermon, setting apart all
worldly employments! But, alas! How are our people degenerated, in this kind!
To whom when the Lord comes home, even in every of our particular
Congregations, yet audience not vouchsafed.

Again, How dear was the word of God unto them, when, for it, and to maintain
it, in purity, how many of them laid down their lives, and shed their blood!
Read the histories of our Martyrs, set out for this end; and, you shall see how
many, of all sorts, and conditions, the Lord then crowned with Martyrdom, and
with what constancy they embraced the extremest torments, for Christ's sake.

But behold, degenerate children! How do we flinch even at the least verbal
persecution, if it be but a scoff! and what they counted their glory, and that
justly, we now count our shame; to be professors of the Gospel. Besides, in
education of Children, and in straight charging of them, to maintain the truth,
which they sealed with their blood, how forward were they? O we slow-backs, in
this necessary duty!

Time would fail me to speak of their temperance, the just condemnation of our
gluttonous times; their peaceableness, condemning our jangling; their
hospitality, condemning our nigardly living to our selves: These things we can,
often, talk of; Lord! that we did make conscience, to walk, and to tread in their
steps; we wonder, as Solomon, Eccl. 7.10. Why it is, that former days were
better, than these; though we enquire not wisely of these things, when our
manners are so far worse than theirs.

More particularly; I doubt not but many of us can say, and that truly, that
God has given us our own immediate Parents, Patterns of many excellent graces,
Gravity, Piety, love of Religion, Bountifulness, etc. shall t not be our sin,
and shame, to degenerate, and disgrace our families? What greater shame can
there be, than for the Son to talk of his Fathers Religion, himself living as
an Atheist? Of his Fathers bounty, himself a niggard? Of his Fathers zeal,
himself a lukewarm Monster?

Now, surely, as these sins are odious in whomsoever; So most odious in those,
who have had so worthy Patterns, as examples, to go before them. To conclud
this point, as Esaias, in another case, Cap. 51.2. Consider Abraham your Father,
and Sarah that bare you; Consider every of us, and call to mind their
commendable parts; Surely, of all things, the Lord most hates degenerating
Children.

In the second place, we may hence well observe; That the piety of the Parent
shall not privilege the degenerating Child from the wrath of God; Ezekiel,
Cap. 18.20. The Lord purposely teacheh thus much: when the unthankful Jews
began to justify themselves, and condemn the Lord of injustice, for their
affliction, as if they had smarted for their Fathers sins, only; The Lord
protests, that the Son shall not dye for the Fathers sin; nor, on the
contrary, a degenerate Child shall not live, by his Fathers righteousness,
except he walk in his fathers steps: And, this that the Scripture affirms,
Hab. 2.4. The just shall live by his (own) faith.

Object. If any shall say, That the Lord has somewhere protested; That, for
David's sake, he would spare, as Solomon, Rehoboam, etc. 1 King. 11.12. Answer,
It is true, that it pleases the Lord, remembering the righteous dealing of
Forefathers, sometimes to bestow outward mercies upon degenerating Children:
But then, these are not to them, in the nature of blessings; such an one may
have wealth, but to his hurt, as Solomon speaks: Riches reserved to the hurt of
the owners thereof. 2. Not the Child, but the Parent in them, crowned.

And, this should teach us, not to trust,

Object. Promise made to parents and seed. Answ Romans 9.8. To the seed that are
such, by Imitation, conditionally, so that they Imitate, and tread in their
fathers Righteous steps; As well, as to the seed, who are such only, by natural
Descent.

VER. 9. Therefore, have I also made you contemptible, and base before all the
people, according as ye have not kept my ways, but have been partial in the
law.


FOllows now the punishment of this their sin; I have made you contemptible,
etc. Wherein two things. 1. The punishment. 2. The cause of it.

Where, verse. 3. cap. 2. And surely, if good Name, and Reverence, be a
Blessing, then is Contempt, a Punishment.

Object. If any shall say, that this befell Christ, Psalm. 22. A worm, and no
man. Answ. This a part of his humiliation, Phil. 2.

Object. The Lot of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 4.9. Answ. With the wicked only, for
otherwise, their feet are beautiful, Romans 10.15.2. Even they also have Sins to
be chastened; and this must be acknowledged, as a part of the Curse. Deuteronomy.
28.37.

This should teach us Humiliation,

Therefore.] The cause follows; whence we observe; That vicious life breeds
vileness of estimation; this casts the salt of the earth to the dunghill; Luke
14.34, 35. and, as its the Lord promise, to Honor those that honor Him; so,
they that despise him, shall be despised, 1 Samuel 2.30. How did the Lord honor
David, in time of his uprightness? How did that dog Shimei presume to rail at
him, when he had defiled himself? 2 Samuel 16. yea, and how did his own Son
fail, in duty toward him?

Cornelius unto Peter: And, to what cause, think you, do they impute it? Some,
to lack of Authority; Some, to our poverty; Some, to decay of Auricular
Confession: But, these not the maine Causes: Apostles were never Confessors,
yet highly esteemed; never abounded with wealth, yet reverenced; John Baptists
rochet was of haire-cloath, yet reverenced by Herod himself. But, this is that
which has exposed us to contempt, namely, the lewd life of many, in place of
ministers. The like of Magistrates; the like of Fathers; the like of the Aged;
Children presume against the Ancients; and no marvel, when old age is not
found in the way of righteousness. 1 Timothy 4.12. Let no man despise thy youth,
but be thou, then, unto them that believe, a pattern in good works.

who honor such as fear the Lord, Psalm. 15.4. While Adam stood in innocence,
the savage beasts did him Reverence; when he threw off obedience, they began to
Rebel; John Baptist feared of Herod, because he knew him to be a just man;
Mat. 6.2^.

If a punishment, to be vilely esteemed: then, a Blessing, to be honored, and
justly well esteemed, especially for Ministers: good name, a rich pearl, and
loving favor above silver, and gold, Prove. 22* 1. Eccles. 7.3. How prevalent
this is, for security; how many times did this restrain the fury of Jews
against our Savior? The people held him, as a Prophet, Mat. 21.46. Besides the
good, that such may do, rather then others: True honor is that that is given
by men, rightly judging of the graces of God.

Hence then collect, Tim. 4.12. Let no man despise thy youth, and 1 Timothy 3.7. A
testimony even from men without, is to be labored for: And, here, that little
regard of approving our selves to men, justly taxed; what men say, or think,
they care not; yet, says the Apostle, Phil. 4.8. If there be any virtue, if
any praise, follow things of good report.

Means. 1. To be an Honourer of God 1 Samuel 2.30. in all carriage, public, or
private. 2. To do the things that tend to good Report, rather then simply, to
hunt after praise. 3. Not principally to aim at praise; It is like your
shadow, the more you run after it, the faster it runs from you.

But have been Partial in the law.] A new reason of this judgment mentioned;
partiality in the Law. This is propounded, verse. 9. 2. Confuted by a reason, a
communi principio, and so from equality; This uttered in a Rhetorical
Dialogisme.

Partiality what it is.
See we the nature of this sin: Partiality is, when (without just cause) one is
preferred before another, in matter of justice; this is commonly called
Acception of persons; preferring one before another; See 1 Timothy 5.21. Now, not
every such preferring, is partiality; For, there is a preferring of one before
another, warrantable; therefore, its added, without just cause: causes of
preferring, of two sorts; just, unjust: Unjust, as when a rich man is regarded,
for his Riches; a poor man, for his poverty; See Deuteronomy. 1.17. Exodus 23.3. Levit.
19.15. Lastly, in matter of justice, as in punishment, or reward, in reproof,
or forbearing reproof: So, in kindness, we may without partiality, prefer. 1.
Our own before strangers, 1 Timothy 5.8. 2. Household of faith, before others, Gal.
6.10. but, in matter of justice, no such thing to be done.

This pressed upon Magistrates, Deuteronomy. 1.19, we have the example of God himself,
Romans 2.11. 1 Pet 1.17. They are Gods, Psalm. 82.6. nor may inferior officers
go unpressed herein.

To ministers urged, with a strait charge, 1 Timothy 5.21. However, it be
imputation to my self. To people, Jam. 2.1. sundry reasons. 1. God chooses. 2.
Rich in faith. 3. Heyrs of the kingdom. 4. A breach of Gods Law. 5. A cause of
murmuring, Act. 6.1.

VER. 10. Have we not all one Father? Has not one God created us? Why do we
deal treacherously every man against his Brothers by profaning the Covenant of
our Fathers?


HEre is set down the Confutation: Adam, our common father; Eve, our common
mother; God our common Creator; Christ our common Redeemer; See Ephesians. 4.6.

This should teach us unity in judgment, and affection, Ephesians. 4.3. It should
abate pride, teach to avoid partiality in any thing; and, would God, in all
things, we could consider this! it would be a bridle from many injuries, and
injustice,

VER. 11, 12. Judah has dealt treacherously, and an abomination is committed
in Israel, and Jerusalem: for, Judah has profaned the Holiness of the Lord,
which he loved; and has married the daughter of a strange God: The Lord will
cut off the man that does this: the Master, and the Scholar, out of the
Tabernacles of Jacob; and him that offers an offering unto the Lord of
Hosts, etc.


A Transition from the sins of the Priests, to those of the people; These are
two; both about Marriage. 1. Unequal yoaking themselves. 2. Disloyalty, verse.
14.15, 16, 17.

In the first, we are to consider, 1. The sin. 2. The hainousness of it. 3. The
punishment. 4. The amplifications, by frequency, and by Effects.

A heinous sin,

Reasons: 2 Cor. 6.14. No communion betwixt light and darkness; if none at all,
then not the nearest; Reasons: 1. An unequal yoke. 2. The contrary nature of
both. 2. The special commandment of God this way. Exodus 34. Deuteronomy. 7. with
Reasons. 1. Of corruption, that may ensue: and, lest any presume, in respect of
graces received. 1. No protection out of Gods ways; as appears by Solomon's
example; none like him, beloved of God, yet Neh. 13.26. strange women caused
him to sin; See also Genesis 6. Number. 25. 1 King. 11. Ezr. 9.10. Where we read of
the judgment of God upon such. 2. 1 Cor. 7.39. The injunction is, to marry,
only in the Lord. 3. 2 John ver. 10. Not so much as God-speed, to heretics,
men of contrary Religion; much less marriage. 4. Great inconveniency; as grief
to the godly parents, Genesis 26.35. and 27, 36. 5. Care of the contrary
commanded, in Abraham, Genesis 24. in Jsaak, Genesis 28.6. Duties hindered, yea such
as belong to the main end of marriage, namely, Education in the Information of
of the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 7. Corruption of manners, in Solomon, 1 King. 11. in
Achab, this given as a reason of all his wickedness, Iezabel his wife provoked
him, 1 King 21.25. and, of Iehoram, that he walked in the way of the house of
Achab; the reason given, he was son-in-law to the house of Achab, 2 King. 8.27.
8. Such an one forced to see, and hear, what cannot but grieve the Spirit of
God.

Ob. Joseph married the daughter of Potiphar; Moses of Iethro?

Answ. Examples are no rules, when they swerve from Gods Commandments. 2. Its
likely, they received a promise, and saw likelihood of conversion, Deuteronomy. 21.
After ceremonies observed, they might: as, strangers might not eat the
passover, Exodus 12. Yet, if any would submit himself, and become a member of
Israel; after such incorporation, warrantable.

Ob. Paul permits Cohabitation. 1 Cor. 7.13.

Answ. Case not the same; marriage once entered, cohabitation may be continued,
so long as hope; but not therefore to be entered, when we may choose.

Now, Brethren, Achab. 1 King. 21. and, its common to all the wicked, Prove. 4.
Disloyalty; and, what marvel, if they be unfaithful to Men^ that are
unfaithful to God? 5. Many times, cursed posterity, as Moab of the daughters
of Heth.

Ob. Now, no Infidels, or Idolaters.

Answ. Would God, that were so! but. 1. Every profane, unreformed man, and
woman, an Infidel; for, true faith purifyeth the heart, Act. 15.9. 2. Idolatry
is of two sorts; In worship; In manners. 3. Reasons the same.

Whether such marriages are ratified,

Some judge, Ezr. 9.10. We see example, and precept of dismission: Some
otherwise; that, though to enter them be sin; yet, being entered, they may be
continued, 1 Cor. 7.14. Reasons, they are sanctified unto us; and, perhaps, in
such case, God may use us, as means, to gain them.

Cautions. 1. Rash choice to be bewailed, continually. 2. Infection,
especially, to be taken heed of. 3. Children not permitted to their education.
4. Endeavor, by all good means, to reclayme them.

Verse. 12. The Lord will cut off the man that does this] That is, root out him,
and his posterity: Where we note. 1. The punishment it self. 2. Extent of it.
3. Certainty.

An heavy curse, King. 21. threatened to Achab, and David, Psalm. 69.25. prayed
for, upon the wicked, as a special plague. And surely, if this be a blessing,
to have posterity continued, as Psalm. 128. then, a curse, to have it cut off.

Now, Hos. 4.10. the adulterous brood prospers not. 3. Neglect of education, in
the fear of God; as, in Eli's sons. 4. Swearing, and oppression, Zech. 5.4, 5.
5. Persecution of Gods children, Psalm. 69.25. David's prayer was, withal, a
prophecy: And, let them lay it to heart, whom it may concern.

The Master and the Scholar, out of the Tabernacles of the Lord] Namely,
without respect of persons: So does the Lord never respect how great, or how
little, but, how righteous, or unrighteous; for,

But, especially, note we here, how the Lord joins together, in punishment,
those that have any way, been conjoined in transgression; Master, and Servant,
etc.

And, let this admonish especially servants, Sam. 10. and 11. in David; his
servants, they are the panders, and the bawds; And, a warrant they think, the
commands of their Masters: But, Beloved, know, that the Lord is an avenger of
all such things; we may apply this Bribery, to usury, etc.

Follows next the certainty; so that very devotion it self shall not hinder.

Whence we note; how, that devotion, Isa. 1.12, 15. Though ye make many
prayers, I will not hear, for your hands are full of blood; Isa. 66.3. The
Lord says to Hypocrites, their sacrifices were abominations; 1 Samuel 15.22.
Saul, in his kind, seemingly, and pretensively devout; yet has his kingdom
rent from him, for disobedience; and the Lord, in general, protests, he more
esteems mercy, then Sacrifice; See also Isai. 57. and Iam. 4.

Let all then, that call upon the name of the Lord, depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. and Iam. 4.8. Draw near to God, but first cleanse your hearts, and
purge your hands: Beloved, its strange to see, how many wonder, and begin to
find fault with the Lord, that he regards not there prayers; as Isa. 5.8.3.
They fasted, but God regarded not; the Reason is at hand; they do their own
wills: Again, see here the cause, as Iam. 4.1, 2, 3. why many devout in
external worship, yet are, for all that, subject to Gods just judgment; hear,
and profit not; pray and receive not: Spiritual judgments, especially, are
evident upon them; wonder ye at this? the cause is evident; your sins separate
betwixt God, and you, and hinder good things from you: As the Lord speaks, Mal.
3.10. amend your lives, then prove me with this; If I will not open the windows
of Heaven; therefore, Luke 8.15. An honest heart required.

Its strange to see how men, like atheists, begin to cry out, its vain to serve
God; No, not so; but, its in vain for a wicked man, continuing purpose to be
wicked, to pray, or hear; for, the condition of obedience, on their part, is
not performed; at most, no farther, then from the lip, Isa. 29.13.

VER. 13. And this have ye done again, concerning the altar of the Lord with
tears, with weeping, and with crying out, in so much that he regards not the
offering any more, or receives it with good will at your hand.


Follows the amplification; this have ye done again: as if he had said, not
enough to have once done it, ye repeat it.

Iterating of sins, Ezra 9. and 10. its hated by us, in our own very children,
and servants: Therefore this mark, Gods Children have not been noted, to have
fallen twice, in the same kind, except in matters of smaller weight; I mean,
after once brought to see their sin, by affliction, or other means: few, or
none examples of iteration, shall be found; of Abraham concealing the truth we
read, that it was done twice; but, of great, and gross sins, we read it
seldom: Indeed, of Lot, and Solomon, we read they fell oftener; but mark, their
acts were, as it were, continued acts; and in the interim, little or no
remorse, or chastisement; but, after once scourging, you shall not (I take it)
find, that they turned to their old sins.

Now then,

And, therefore, Let this be mine admonition to all those, that have been, in
any one sin, overtaken: Have thou sinned? and has the Lord had mercy on thee?
Remember who said, Joh. 5.14. sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto thee;
the last error worse then the first, conscience deeplyer wounded, Gods
favorable Countenance more estranged: And, for this cause, we must be
exhorted. 1. After such falls, seriously, and heartily to repent, not to
content our selves with superficicall cures, but to have the wound searched to
the bottom. As it fares in the body, so in the soul; a wound superficially
only cured, the rottenes still remaining within breaks out again, and the cause
is evident; so, in spiritual diseases, ordinary; this the cause we see many
fall again into the same sins. 2. But, specially, keep watch over that
affection, or that occasion, that was occasion to betray us; surely, as the
devil cease not, every where, to assault us; so especially, he there gives
the onset, where he has once prevailed, and there specially hopes for success;
If thou have fallen, once, by lust, look again to be assaulted there; and
therefore, there-against specially arm thy self. 3. Labor especially to shun
all occasions of that sin, and come not near any of those means, that have
entangled thee; if company, beware it: if idleness, beware it: the burnt child
dreads the fire, let it be true of thee. 4. Labor especially to forget the
pleasures of that sin. 5. Be not behind in any measure of humiliation,
public, or private.

Covering the altar of the Lord with tears, with weeping, and with crying out,
etc.] The thing we may here observe is, how even the wicked are sometimes
grieved at the testimonies of Gods displeasure, especially in rejecting their
services from his acceptance: One special instance we have, Genesis 4. How does
Cain go drooping, and hang the head? when he sees the Lord give testimony of
accepting his brothers, rejecting his own Sacrifice, verse. 5. and Isa. 5.8.3.
The Hypocrites are brought in reasoning the case with the Lord, why he should
not respect their fasting: And, Heb. 12.17. and Genesis 17. As lightly as Esau
esteemed of that favor of God, in his primogeniture; yet when he sees himself
deprived of the blessing; how weeps he, and howls to think of it?

This one Reason of it, there seems to me to be; namely, because there is not
the wickdest man that lives, but knows, and thinks this, that the top of
blessedness consists in Gods favor, and the testimonies thereof: Balaam, as
vile a wretch as he was, he could wish to dye the death of the righteous, when
he had seen the blessedness that God had provided to bestow upon his Church,
Number. 23.10. And, I am persuaded, howsoever we have many at this day, that like
Atheists mock at the counsel of the poor, because he makes God his hope, Psalm.
14.6. Yet, he wishes from his heart, he were as many of them be; so well
acquainted with Gods will, so sensibly favored of the Lord, and so highly
assured of his love: All the world for a good conscience, in extremity.

Now, hence it follows, that (every) grief for the loss of Gods favor, is no
token of a child of God; because, Esau did; he may be discontented at the
Lords testifying his displeasure, as Cain; and therefore, let no man thus
conclude; It grieves me to think, that the Lord favors me not, therefore, I am
a Child of God.

And yet, its true, there is a kind of grieving for the testimonies of Gods
dis-favour, that is a true note of a Child of God; and therefore, let us
examine it.

Signs of that grieving for the lack of Gods favor, that is a note of a
child of God, are. 1. A Child of God, that is indeed sorrowful for the loss
of Gods favor; he is never at quiet, till he have recovered the sensible
tokens of it; as, Psalm. 32. When David had offended the Lord by those his
fearful sins, see how he professes of himself, that he found no quiet in
himself, till he had recovered it; conferr Job 33. Sleep, and all things, are
unpleasant to him: with a wicked man, its not so ordinary; though, perhaps, it
may disquiet him some time, yet the storm is soon blown over; and, you shall
see, such is the like esteem of it, that, as they speak, it shall never break
their sleep; they will never eat, or drink less, etc. By this try thy self. 2.
Confession of sins, as the cause of it, Psalm. 32.5. And, they will be the
first, who will accuse themselves, and acknowledge, that its just with God, thus
to plague them; with a wicked man, not so. 3. A desire to remove all things,
that may offend, and continue the Lords displeasure; as Josh. 7. When it
pleases the Lord, to manifest his displeasure against Israel, for their sin,
and the Lord has made known the cause of it; Joshua presently goes about the
removal: Thus is it, with all Gods Children, and nothing so dear, but they
part with, to recover his love: Not so, with a wicked man: gladly, would he
have Gods favor; but does nothing to procure it; if they may have his favor,
together with the pleasures, and profits of their sins, they are contented; if
otherwise, rather then lose their pleasures, farewell Gods favor. 4. Instant
prayer, and that, without ceasing. as in David, etc. Not so with a wicked man;
hypocrites in heart increases the wrath, for they call not, when the Lord
binds them, Job 36.13. 5. Bitter complaint, under that sad condition, as, Psalm.
42. and 84. and Psalm. 74.9.10. Bewailing also, and bemoaning themselves to
every one, that they think may do them ease. 6. The means to recover it, by
diligence in Gods service, are never slacked, but rather increased by it: In
those times, above all, most diligent to seek God, Hos. 5.15. With a wicked
man, not so; but, presently, slacks he his devotion; as those wretches, Mal.
3.14. Cry presently, its in vain to serve God, and what profit is it? etc. 7. A
Child of God resolves, even in the midst of feeling Gods displeasure, still
to continue his service, what ever becomes of him; Job 13.15, 16. Though he
kill me, I will trust in him, and never forsake him, he shall be my salvation:
With an Hypocrite, and wicked man, its not so; if the Lord be not, presently,
merciful again, and at their beck; presently, they renounce him; as, 1 Samuel
28.6.7. When the Lord answered not Saul, by dreams, etc. presently, he flies
off to a witch: And, would God, this were not too evident amongst our people!
So long as any thing can be gained by Religion, and the current of the times
ru^^ that way, who but they? But, if the Lord justly be displeased, for
hypocrisy, so that, they feel him not so gracious, as in times past; or
perceive, that he answers not presently to their call, they then forsake, and
renounce him. 8. A wicked man's at the loss of Gods favor, it works envy, and
hatred against those, to whom the Lord shows most tokens of his love; as Genesis
4. compared with 1 Ioh. 3.12. so, in Saul, 1 Samuel 18.6, 7, 12, 28, 29. With a
child of God, its not so: That love of a child of God, is a permanent grace,
1 Ioh. 3.14. And, though they could wish to themselves, the happiness of other
of Gods children; yet envy they not thereat, but ever magnify the grace of God
to them shown.



And, for this end, gather as many testimonies of them, as possibly thou can.

What are the signs of it?

False signs, outward prosperity, with the common appendices thereof; but
against this, see Eccles. 91. because they come not into misfortune, as others;
therefore, they applaud themselves in their evil.

Notes of Gods respecting our services, are, 1. Extraordinary; such was that
same sending down of fire from heaven, 1 King. 18. and, 2 Chronicles 7.1. but thus,
the Lord deals not, at this day. Yet, its true, there are certain sensible
tokens of Gods accepting us, and our services, at this day; which Gods children
may take and esteem, as pledges of his love. 1. Success in all things that thou
put thine hand unto: but here, lest I be mistaken, understand by success,
not that which the world so esteems, a flourishing, and prosperous estate; but
this call thou success, when all things work to thy good, Romans 8.28. To thy
true good, furthering thee, in the salvation of thy soul; or when outward
prosperity makes the full of good works; and, fearful is the estate of those,
to whom these things work evil; when prosperity puffs up the heart; or, when
afflictions amend not, when hearing betters not, etc. Fear then, lest the Lord
be angry with thee. 2. When the Lord shall bless thee, in spiritual things, in
Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 1.3. That is, when thou shall feel this fruit of the service
of God; that, thereby the graces of God be obtained, and increased; that a
token; that God accepts thy service. 3. Thou shall perceive it, by that inward
testimony, and certificate, that Gods Spirit gives to thee, in thy conscience:
God deals not, now, with us, as he did with Cornelius; Act. 10.3. To send an
Angel from Heaven to tell us, that our prayers, and almsdeeds are accepted
with God: but this he does, he sends his Spirit into our hearts, that assures
us, by the word of God, that our courses please him; these if thou feel, bless
God for them; and, thus think, they are such, as even wicked men, sometimes,
would redeem with the loss of all that they enjoy.

Cain, and Esau; for, they grieved at this, which these wretches never do. As,
how many are there, that can say, and saying, deride all Religion, that they
could never perceive themselves to be any whit better for their prayers, etc.
What, nothing the better? And, find thou no feeling of Gods love therein?
Wretched man that thou art! what comfort, then, can thou have in thy wealth,
pleasure, honor? etc.

Yea, if thou had all the world, what could it comfort thee? But, how much
more miserable their condition, that are the worse for it? For example, when
God, gives wealth, they are the worse; when he sends afflictions, they are the
more heardened: when he gives preaching, and they are the more blinded, as Isa.
6.10. What a wretched case live such men in? except they should go down,

Insomuch, that he regards not the offering any more, or receives it with
good will, at your hand] Hence note we, that during state of impenitency, no
sacrifice, or service, is accepted with God, though performed with never so
great devotion: See Isa. 1.12. Sabbaths, and new mons commanded, yet, in these
people during impenitency, most odious, and abominable; See also Prove. 15.8.

Impenitency is of two sorts. 1. General 2. Particular: General impenitency
is, when a man lives in a continual course of sinning, without any conversion
at all unto God; as, before calling, and turning, by the Spirit of God:
Particular is that, which, after the first conversion, Gods children fall into;
as, they sometimes go astray, so, for a time, perhaps, they lie unhumbled in
their sins; as David, 2 Samuel 12. till Nathan comes to him. Will you hear
Reasons of it? One is, that extreme hatred the Lord holds all sins in,
especially, when they are thus lived in, Hab. 1.13. Its true, that the Lord
bears many sins, in his people, so long as they are bewailed, and striven
against sparing us, even as a father spares his own son that serves him. And,
though there be, in the dearest children of God, abundance of iniquity, and
corruption; yet whilst they are striven against, the Lord sees them not, that
is, he takes no notice of them, Number. 23.21. He sees none iniquity in Jacob,
nor transgression in Israel, But, when a man lives in his sins, (without
repentance,) these sins, even the least of them, are most detestable unto him.

A second reason of it is, because no obedience can be performed by such a man,
in singleness of heart; and, he does but dally with the Lord, and even mock
him, who comes before him with such services; Isai. 29.13. This people, says
the Lord, draws near me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me;
Singleness of heart is that the Lord accepts.

A third Reason; because such perform not the conditions of acceptance;
neither does Christ, (during that state) mediate for such: Its one main
condition the Lord requires in all that come near him; that they be holy, even
as he is holy, at least in affection, etc.

Levit. 26.21. and, as he speaks, Josh. 7. When Ioshuah complains unto God, for
his wrath upon Israel; what shall I say, when Israel turns his back upon their
adversaries? Its because of some detestable sin amongst us.

Isaiah chap. 1 18. Exhorts us; comfortably inviting us, then, though sins be
as skarlet, yet shall they be as white as wool; as on the other side, though
services never so glittering, and glorious; prayers never so many, and fervent,
all is to no purpose; If I regard wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not
hear me, Psalm. 66.18. Yea, and let Gods children make use of it, in this kind,
for the comfort, and assurance of acceptance of their services, before the Lord.

Isa. 58. But alas! vain men, all they do, is unclean unto them; God hears
not sinners, Ioh. 9.31. No drunkard, usurer etc. Impenitently such: and here,
by the way, I might take notice, how many deceive themselves, with an opinion
of repentance; some think the buyers speech, in Solomon, is repentance, It is
naught, It is naught; and, would I could leave it! fondly; for, what is it,
verbally, to dislike sin, and affectionately to practice it?

Some cry God mercy, as fondly; some mourning for sin, some confessing of sins,
some forbearing the outward practice, when their hearts run after their
covetousness; some leaving off some sins living in others; contra, Ezekiel 18, 28.
Consider sin, and turn from it.

VER. 14. Yet ye say, wherefore? Because the Lord has been witness between
thee, and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou have dealt treacherously;
yet is she thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant.


Yet ye say, Wherefore?] So willing is wickedness to defend it self; so hardly
brought to serious confessing, Adam, concealing mine iniquity in my bosom,
etc. So Adam, and Eve; so Cain, etc.

And, in this, how right show we our selves the Posterity of old Adam,
coloring, and shifting, and excusing our sins, and free confessing sin,
accusing and condemning thy self; See Psalm. 31.5.

Because the Lord has been a witness between thee, and the wife of thy youth,
etc.] Here follows the second sin, laid to their charg, a second violation of
the marriage bed, in polygamy, or multiplying of many wives, through liberty of
divorses: where. 1. The sin is propounded, in general. 2. Reproved. 3. Confuted
4. Amplyfied.

The general propounding of the sin, is verse. 14. amplyfied by a prolepsis;
that, howsoever they had so carried the matter, as they thought, that none
could justly detect them of lust, or cruelty, in this manner of putting away
the old, and, and marrying a new; yet the Lord was witness between them. The
reproof is verse. 14. she is thy companion; and therefore, ought not to be thus
sinned against. The confutation. 1. She is the wife of thy Covenant, that is,
she, with whom thou enterest covenant, and that before God, Pro. 2.17.
therefore ought not to be thus despised. 2. From the ordinance of God, and his
first Institution; He made one, and but one to be joined unto one: amplyfied;
though he had abundance of Spirit, could have made more, yet made but one. 3.
By the end; because he sought a godly seed; as if he had said, what ever is
born otherwise, is not the seed of God, but of the devil. 4. The amplyfication:
God hates dismission, yet they did it, under pretense, and color of Moses law.

The Lord is witness] So then,

In this testimony, or witneship of the Lord, are three things. 1. Knowledge,
and this is every where given unto God, Psalm. 139. and, 50.21. 2. Record,
registring our sins, as, Mal. 3.16. A book of remembrance written for those
that fear God; so, the Lord is said, (...), to have a book of record, and to
keep a register of all our sins, little, and great, Rev. 20.12. Jer. 44.21. did
not the Lord remember? 3. Evidence; giving evidence to the face of all sinners
of their trangressions.

Now, what should we learn hence? Surely, not to sin, in hope to be hid; for,
though man cannot testify, The Lord shall not see, neither does the God of
Jacob regard: but mark, how David reasons against this fancy; God made the
eye, the ear, etc. teaches man knowledge; and, Causa is not, to to genere,
dete^^^ effect^ suo. Yet this how evident a cause of many sins amongst us! Job
5. The adulterer waits for the twilight, as who say, darkness were a mantle to
cover us: hypocrites these are, who dig deep to hide their counsel from the
Lord, Isa. 29.15. and the vizar of hypocrisy, and dissimulation, shall hide
them from the eyes of the Lord. But, I wish, that we had this always in mind,
that the Lord is witness, one that takes notice of, records, and will give
evidence against us, for our colored and privy sins; no doubt, it would
restrain us from many of them.

Give leave to evidence this point. The first reason is taken from the
omnipresence of God, that is Totus ubique. Psalm. 139. He that is every where,
is in the dark, in the chamber, in the bed, in the heart, so is God. 2. Ab
effectis, he gives sight, hearing, knowledge, etc. therefore, no doubt, himself
is such. 3. He makes the heart, therefore no doubt, knows it. 4. Consider but
the nature of the word of God; how it rips up the secretest corruptions of a
man's heart, 1 Cor. 14.25. and Heb. 4.12, 13.5. Conscience testifies, and
accuses, Romans 2.15. 1. Joh. 3.20. God is greater than our hearts, and knows
all things.

Come we now to the sin it self: It was polygamy, and multiplying of wives; an
heinous sin; crossing. 1. Gods ordinance, in creation, as here, verse. 1. 2. The
end of marriage; commonly, a cursed generation, as in Ishmael. 3. Diminishing
comforts, by breeding heart-burnings Genesis 4. 4. Forbidden unto Kings, Deuteronomy.
17.17.

Polygamy what it is.
See we then a little what it is. It is, when a man, or woman, couples himself,
or her self, in marriage to more, than one; this is Polygamy; in this was
tainted Abraham, David, Solomon. The first author of it was Lamech, noted for
a wicked, and profane man.

Here then, we may see what to judge of that Poligamy of the Fathers, in ancient
time; namely, that it was a breach of the first institution of marriage, and a
thing contrary to the law of God.

Now, whether a sin in them, or, a thing done by dispensation, and privilege,
Divines differ. Some think, it was their privilege; and they give these
Reasons. 1. The holiness of those men, that used it; but, even these holy ones
are noted for their falls; as Abraham, David, Soloman. 2. Not reproved, by the
Prophets.

Answ. Though not particularly, yet in the general; and, here, in this place,
by name, and particularly reproved.

3. No special repentance recorded.

Answ. Perhaps, commoness made them swallow it up, without particular
repentance; yet thus David, Psalm. 19.12. Prays for pardon of secret, that is,
of unknown sins, unknown he means, to himself.

4. Sarah gave Abraham Hagar.

Answ. Through infirmity, and desire to partake in the blessing of the promised
seed.

And therefore hence may we see rather, as in a glass, a pattern of humane
frailty, when it pleases God to permit us to our selves. And, let this teach
us, to be the more wary, and watchful over our selves, as Paul speaks, 1 Cor.
10.11. of Gods judgments upon sinners; we may say of the very sins of the dear
Servants of God, they are written for our warning: And, howsoever wicked men
otherwise abuse them, and make them as patents, and warrants for like sins, yet
let Gods Children learn otherwise to profit by them; as. 1. Learn hence the
power of corruption; when as it prevails against men of greatest graces. 2.
Pray God to stablish, by his free Spirit. 3. Beware of occasions.

Again, take heed, especially, of those means, Cain. And, that plea of others
so doing, (Thus did our fathers, that were before us,) is nothing in the sight
of God. A second occasion of it, was, a preposterous, and overhasty desire to
have the promises of God accomplished; so, it is thought, the Fathers were drawn
to Polygamy. A promise they had, that the Messiah should beborn of them;
impatient in expectation of the blessing, they betook themselves to unlawful
means: Rebecca had received a promise of God, that Jacob the younger should be
the Lord of his brother, and inherit the fathers blessing; she willing to
accomplish this promise upon Jacob, she teaches him dissembling, and lying,
Genesis 27. But, to this let us oppose this conclusion. That the Lord, who will
have his will and purpose accomplished, will have it accomplished, by
warrantable means; and therefore, fear thou, even to do what God will have
done, by any means, that he has not sanctified. And, by faith, depend upon
God, yea, though he seem long to stay, permitting unto him the dispensing of
the times, and appointment of means, to bring his purpose to pass.

Now, the cause of this, in these Jews, was, besides the examples of the
Patriarchs, and long custom of the people, a color that they had from the
bill of divorce, permitted by Moses.

Of the nature of divorce
It shall not be amiss, therefore, a little to enquire, what we are to think,
touching the matter of divorce. 1. What it is. 2. Whether lawful. 3. The kinds.

Divorce, therefore, is, in general, the dissolution of the marriage contract.
Now, whether any divorce be lawful, any breaking of the knot of wedlock? some
think no; but, that the divorce spoken of, in Scripture, is nothing but
separating from cohabitation; and that there can no sufficient cause be, of
breaking the marriage-contract, rightly solemnized: indeed, some cases they
put, wherein outward solemnities may be frustrate; as, when marriage is entered
by parties, not permitted by the law of God; but, if entered betwixt parties
meet, no possible dissolution. But, here-against we may oppose that sentence
of our Savior Christ, Mat. 19.8.9. In case of fornication: Reasons of it,
these. 1. Because, this utterly breaks the marriage-bond, and is most directly
opposite, and contrary thereto; besides, they must be one flesh. 2. By that law
of the Lord, that would have the adulterer punished with death; wherein the
collection is easy, that, after that fact, they are to be reputed, as dead; and
the innocent party as free from that bond of marriage, as if the nocent were
dead.

Of divorce are two sorts. 1. One lawful. 2. The other unlawful: lawful
divorce is that, that is made for lawful causes: Now, hereabout is all the
controversy. What are lawful causes of divorce? Some have assigned many; as.
1. Infidelity, if a believer marry with an Infidel, that marriage is ipso jure
nullum.

Answ. In the Jews law, it was so, Exodus 10. The reason of it was, the will of
God, utterly excluding such from fellowship with his people, till they had
renounced their Idolatry, and were incorporated unto to the people of God; but,
under the new Testament, not so; 1 Cor. 7.14. The unbelieving wife sanctified
to the believer, and hope there is of gaining.

Secondly, grievous, and capital crimes; and thus they reason, if for adultery,
which is the less; then why not for Idolatry, murder? etc.

Answ. It follows not; for understanding whereof, know we, that grievousness of
sins, in this kind, must be considered, especially, in respect of marriage it
self. And, though it be true, that there are many sins, more grievous than
adultery; yet none, that so much is contrary to marriage, as adultery.

Thirdly sterility, or barrenness.

Answ. Not so; Abraham, and Zachary, keep their wives, though barren; it was
their cross, and affliction, but, no warrant for divorce.

Madness, or danger of life.

Answ. Neither does this break marriage. In such cases, holy means may be used,
for avoiding the danger; but, no attempt of divorce permitted; perhaps, that
which they call separation, a thoro, and mensa; but none such, as whereby
marriage should be utterly dissolved.

Lawful causes two only. 1. Adultery, Matthew. 19. and 5. 2. Malicious desertion.

Unlawful divorce when as for unlawful causes, the contract is dissolved, and a
new entered: as, the Jews for every cause: if but a blemish in the body, if any
dislike for crooked manners, etc. Our Savior deals against this, Matthew. 5 and
9. His reasons against it, are these. 1. The Lords ordinance. 2. The nighness
of conjunction. 3. The inferior cannot dispense with the inferiors authority.
4. Adultery incurred. 5. The Lord hates it, verse. 16.

Moses permitted it.

Answ. By assigning the cause, for safety of the wives.

2. By recalling to the original institution.

3. Corrupt the text; Moses commanded not, but permitted. Now beloved, this sin
of such divorces is not indeed, rife amongst us, as amongst the Jews; but
another, of like nature, every where rife: marriage of new not attempted,
because not permitted; but, assuming of strumpets into the room of wives, every
where seen. A horrible sin, and such as God every where, professes to plague,
and punish, And, let us all beware of it; surely, it is a sin, that devours to
destruction; and, we know who has said, Whoremongers, and adulterers God will
judge, Heb. 13.4.

Yet is she thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant] The Epithets given to
wives; called our companions: let us see then a little, what that society is,
whereinto they enter, that are married. 1. Mutual interest one to another
person, 1 Cor. 7.4. Ephesians. 5.31. One flesh. 2. Participation in that same herile
dominium, as, Genesis 16. Sarah over Hagar, by Abraham's consent. 3. In use, and
right over all things, that they have, etc. in testimony whereof, she is taken
out of the side, not of the feet, to teach, how near the conjunction is.

One caveat, by the way, though distastful to many; its such a fellowship, as
must still stand with subjection, and acknowledgment of that power, that the
Lord has put in the husband over the wife 1. From original Creation, 2. From
Principality in the woman's transgression, 1 Timothy 2.13, 14. 3. Gifts of wisdom,
and strength, not equal, 1 Pet. 3.7. The weaker vessel; not ordinarily so well
able to manage things as the husband; and, by conscience of infirmity, the Lord
would teach them subjection, 1 Cor. 11.10. She carries power on her head, that
is, a sign, and testimony of her subjection.

All one flesh.

Answ. Union may be without equality; Christ and the Church one; yet must the
Church be subject; body and soul one, yet soul commands; head and members one
body, yet head, a Principality.

Reproved here that over-Lordly carriage of husbands toward their wives, and
that usage of them, as drudges. The heathen Philosopher reproved this, in the
Barbarians, and from the name would make the sin odious unto us; that held
their wives in place of servants and drudges; yea more familiarity, many times,
with servants then with wives; a great ataxy, and disorder in the family.

VER. 15. And did not he make one? yet had he the residue of the Spirit: and
wherefore one? that he might seek a godly seed, etc.]


INtimating thus much. Ishmael: Howbeit, this is, withal, to be understood,
that it was not Gods will, that such should, all, and every of them, be
excluded from salvation: Ishmael was circumcised, though not admitted to
Priesthood, yet into the general covenant; and, an example we have in Iephtha,
the son of an harlot, recorded amongst the faithful, Heb. 11.32.

This an admonition unto such, be our admonition, how we break the bond of
wed-lock: the same use that the Prophet himself here makes hereof, in the
clause of this text, saying, therefore, take heed to your spirit, and let none
deal treacherously against the wife of his youth.

VER. 16. For the Lord, the God of Israel says, that he hates putting away:
for, one covers violence with his garment, says the Lord of Hosts;
therefore, take heed to your spirit, that ye deal not treacherously.


The corrupt reading here spoken, is thus, of the vulgar Latin: Cum odio
habueris, dimitte.
Here follows the amplyfication: reading corrupt; thus better read. The Lord
of Hosts says, he hates dismission, and putting away; yet, he covers this
iniquity with a cloak. For the other reading. 1. Crosses the purpose of the
Spirit of God; the Lord reproves them, for dismission; and therefore
improbable, he should here speak of approbation, or allowance. 2. Implies an
untruth. For, the Lord never thus said, by way of warrant; but only Moses
permitted, for hardness of heart. Though the Lord has protested, to hate this
sin, yet they commit it, and cover it with a cloak, that is, with pretense of,
know not what, liberty permitted them, by Moses.

Now, Sam. 15. Saul knew well enough, disobedience was odious unto God; yet,
having the cloak of a good intention, securely commits it: in 1 Pet. 2. The
libertines, in the first Church, they took to themselves liberty in sinning;
this oak they had, Christ had made them free; these wretches here, took Moses
permission for a warrant, and a cloak for their sinning.

Like colors, many of our people sinning: See we a few of them 1. Ye shall
see the examples of Saints pretended: But, let men enquire, how lawful; or,
whether by privilege; or, whether in the same manner, upon like grounds; For
these cases often vary actions. 2. Scripture abused; its lawful to do good, on
the Sabbath, etc. But, remember they must be necessary good duties; yet so, as
that it may not be thine own works; they must ever be works of mercy.

3. We must live, says the usurer.

Answ. And thou must live in obedience to the law of God; besides, the
strumpet, and the thief may pretend the same.

4. Humane law, and connivence of Magistrates.

Answ. Here the Lord tries thee, whether thou do, indeed, in sincerity, fear
God. 2. Connivence in Magistrates warrants not transgression in the people. 3.
Distinguish we must betwixt permissions, and commands.

5. Commands.

Answ. All such must have limitation, in the Lord; Ephesians. 6.5. See Hos. 5.

Therefore, take heed to your spirit, that ye deal not treacherously] And
admonition of three branches. 1. A duty. 2. A Reason. 3. A means to perform
the duty.

Admonition drawn out of the former words: Since this liberty of divorce is so
cross to Gods ordinance, so contrary to his intendment, manifested in creation,
so hateful to God, so injurious to the wife with whom a covenant is entered;
therefore, keep your selves in your spirits, and transgress not.

Out of the illative thus made, we may observe the reason, why it pleases the
Lord, to convince of sins, Ezekiel. 18. and Ier. 18.

Now, Brethren, the Lord has dealt mercifully with us, in this kingdom, this
way, by many means laboring to work conviction: and happy we, if it might
have this effect, to work in us admonition, and care to avoid sin. The usual
means whereby the Lord convinces of sin, are these. 1. His word. 2.
Afflictions. 3. His vengeance on others. 4. The controllement, and check of our
own conscience. And, in none of these, has the Lord been behind with us; as
Paul, sin is not imputed, where is no Law; and, Romans 5.20. The law entered, that
sin might abound. Beloved, in days of blindness, many sins were swallowed up,
that were most fearful, in the sight of God, Idolatry, blasphemy, breach of
Sabbath, etc. And those, that are every where, called works of darkness. Now,
in these days of light, the Lord has showed us what is good, Mic. 6.8. and as
well, what is evil, by the light of his word; shall it not be our shame, if
being convinced of sin, we continue therein?

Second means, afflictions; the smart whereof discovers also the hainousness
of our sins; in time of ease, sins sometimes are known, but, scarce thoroughly
considered; afflictions, Job 33.16. Open the ear, etc. And, how the Lord has
dealt with us, this way, if we have eyes, we cannot but see; following us with
many of his plagues, and heavy judgments; even Pharaoh could then, under
affliction, confess, I have sinned.

Third means of conviction, exemplary vengeance; of which, besides the records
of Scriptures, other stories are frequent; and the Lord thereby would show unto
us, how to esteem, and account of our sins: Usurers many brought to beggary;
drunkards clothed with rags; false swearers ruinated in their families;
adulterers brought to a morsel of bread: these are our convictions, would God
they were our warnings.

Fourth means, check of conscience: The heart smites it self, 1 Samuel 24.5.
and, 2 Samuel 24. As, the Disciples of Christ, did not our hearts burn within us,
Luke 24.23.
whilst he talked with us, and opened unto us, the Scripture? The like
question if I should propound unto us; I know, they would answer, they have
often felt it: Beloved, happy he, whom the Lord thus chastens, if he be thereby
admonished; and, woe to us, if being convicted of sin, we still continue
therein.

Beloved, let me exhort, therefore, every one of us, to whom the Lord has been
thus merciful, to reveal our sins, and to convince us of them: that the Lord
may attain his end in us, to work in our hearts a care to depart from evil: how
are we convinced in our judgments, by the Lords judgments, of many fearful, and
crying sins? Why resolve we not to leavthem?

Let me add reasons. 1. Continance of sin, after conviction, as it hardens the
heart; so makes it the sin much more heinous in the sight of God. If ye were
blind, ye should have noe sin, Joh. 9.41. and Jam. 4.17. To him that knows to
do well, and does it not, to him it is sin, with an emphasis. Every sin, after
conviction, is doubled, Ezr. 9.13. after all this, we have sinned 2. Reprobates
ascend thus far, to see sin, and acknowlelg it; Pharaoh could say, I and my
people are sinners; but (forsaking) of sin, is that only, that argues sound
grace; The fear of the Lord, is to depart from evil, to hate pride, arrrogancy,
and every evil way, Prove. 8.13.

Wherefore beloved, let us thus resolve, every of us, as it pleases God, more
and more to enlighten us, to see our sins, and rightly to know them; so, with
all speed and earnestness to leave them. I doubt not, but Prophecy, at this
day, has in many of us, the same effect, that it had in the Primitive Church,
by Gods ordinance, 1 Cor. 14. Would God! as it convinces, so it might work
detestation, and care to avoid sin.

And hence may we observe an order to be kept of us, in ministering admonitions
unto the people. First, to convince. Then, to admonsh, and exhort, that is:
First, to make sin known, before we admonish to leave it; and this that
enjoined, 2 Timothy 4.4. with doctrine, implying, that doctrine must be the ground
of all exhortations, and admonitions. And, the practice of Prophets, is. First
to labor to convince, then, exhort they to forsake, Jer. 3.13, 14. Know thine
iniquity, then, turn again. Reason of it, conscience ever works upon principles
of judgment; till those be planted, conscience never does her office, in
accusing, or condemning. Therefore it is, that an erroneous, or ignorant
conscience, is never moved with any reproof never so sharp, any threatening
never so severe; persecution, a grievous sin; yet while not known to be such,
or thought, erroniously, to please God, Ioh. 16. never moves conscience, 1 Timothy
1.15, 16. And, therefore mark, deal with an ignorant body that is not informed,
give him the best exhortations, use the forciblest persuasions, thou movest
them no more, then so many stones, etc.

Now, brethren, let us learn hence the method of admonition; it is a duty every
where enjoined unto us, and that by diverse reasons, Lev. 19.17. 1. From the
peril wherein they are, hardening, and destruction, Heb. 3.13. 2. From the
excellency of the work, Jam. 5. ult. 3. Nighness of conjunction. But would we
use it profitably? learn to adminster it discreetly, and orderly; that is,
first, convince; then admonish, reprove, exhort. Till thou be able to
convince an usurer, a swearer, etc. thou shall but beat the air, and prove
more ridiculous, than profitable unto him.

And here, beloved is to be bewailed a defect of many of us, of good
affections, I confess; would God, I could say also, of as good a judgment, and
knowledge! that are ready, in every transgression, to minister reproves sharp
enough. Now* that they reprove, and sharply also, I blame not; but this that I
would exhort unto, that we should labor to reprove, as out of certain
knowledge; and be able, first, to show the sin, before ever thou reprove it, as
a sin; And, brethren, how contemptible wholesome admonitions are grown, amongst
swinish sinners, who sees not? Let me exhort, therefore, to labor for knowledge
this way: Reasons. 1. Mark, if thou will, but the different carriage of
profane men, toward men, diverse diversely reproving: How scoffingly carry they
themselves, in all reproves of the ignorant? Now, let a man that has knowledge
deal with them, that is able to convince their judgments, how does he even
arraign them, and fill them, many times, with fear and trembling? And, how
fearful are they, to oppose any thing? Great is the fear of conscience once
convinced; and as audacious is a wicked heart, when it is not feretted out of
the starting holes. 2. Add unto this, that not every admonition has a blessing
promised, but such as is grounded on the word of God; as we say of preaching,
its the mean to convert; yet it is only, when the (pure) word of God is
preached. 3. Courage in the reprover is hereby much increased, when as he is
sure, his ground is good; as, on the other side, we cannot but faulter, and
halt in admonishing, that deal either ignorantly, or upon uncertainties.

We are all taught, that desire to be free from our sins, Romans 2.21. whilst
they adventure to teach others; even by this, that they know not their own
ways, nor can judge of their actions, whether they be good, or evil: as Paul
says of himself, Romans 7.9. Before the law came he was alive; and for
concupiscence, he never thought it a sin; and then, how could he bewail it,
till God opened his eyes, to see the law, and true meaning thereof?

This made David circumspect, Psalm. 19.12. Pray we, therefore, Beloved, for
Rev. 3.18.
eye salve, that we may see our sins, and therein our own miseries: How many
weaknesses are there, in Gods dear children, springing from this fountain of
ignorance? would thou, then, forsake sin? Learn, first, to know it; and
therein, ^earn to examine thy self by the law of God; self-love is blind, and
men's opinions uncertain, or partial, but Gods law, a law of liberty, most free
in reproving, Iam. 2.12.

Take heed to your Spirit.] Follows now the mean prescribed; and that is, the
keeping of our selves, in our spirit: (By Spirit) understand here the
affections, and desires of the heart: [Keeping] is the restraint, and
mortifying our vile affections, and that strait watch we ought to keep of our
hearts; Solomon, in other words, Prove. 4.23. thus enunciates it, Keep thy
heart, with all diligence; and mark his Reason, out of it are the issues of
life; from it, as from the fountain, proceed our actions: And, our Savior;
Mat. 15.19. gives this Reason, out of it come whatsoever enormities in the
life; and the fleshly affections thereof defile the man.

Besides that, the Lord ever measures both good, and evil, more by the
affection, then by the act; good things done weakly, are favorably accepted,
while the heart, and affection is upright before God; evil things, though
evil, yet are most odious, when the affections are inordinate.

So that, we here see, and let us learn to practice, the right method of
leaving our sins; Ezekiel. 33.31.
heart runs after covetousness: not accepted with God, that we forbear
practice of lust, whilst our hearts burn with fleshly desires: And, how many
see we externally reformed, after the sight of their sins, and smart of Gods
judgments, that yet turn back to their old sins, whiles the heart continues
chained with corruptions.

Means, to secure the heart, and to safe-gard it from the annoyance of vicious
practices. 1. That the mind, be occupied in holy Meditations; that mind is
the (...), Rules all. 2. Due consideration, that the hearts, and reins are
known unto God; hence Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 3.15. Sanctify the Lord God in your
hearts. 3. The guarding of the senses; by these Ier. 9.21.
windows Satan enters, many times, and by them conveyes his poison into our
hearts. 4. Something availeable hereto, is restraint of the outward man, from
practice of sin; the pleasures felt enthrall the heart, as, Hos. 4.11.
Whoredom, and wine, etc. 5. Pray to God, to sanctify it, by his Spirit: The
fountain must first be purged, before the streams can be wholesome.

VER. 17. Ye have wearied the Lord with your words: yet ye say, wherein have we
wearied him? when ye say, every one that does evil is good in the sight of the
Lord, and he delights in them; or, where is the God of judgment?


YE have wearied the Lord with your words] The sense: we are to understand,
there is no real wearisomness incident into the Lord; he is a pure act: as he
lives eternally, without decay of life; as he works wonders, without pain;
bears up all by his wondrous providence, without defatigation; punishes,
without passion; so is patient, without pain: But, this is attributed unto God,
(...), by a Metaphorical speech, which must thus be unfolded; that, as men,
when they have long borne an heavy and tedious burden, hasten to depose it,
that they may lighten their carriage, and gather refreshing: So, the Lord here
professes, that he had long borne their wickedness, but now would bear no
longer: So, every where, the Lord thus expresses his patience, and
long-suffering; professing, for our better understanding, a kind of
wearisomness, that he feels in bearing; Amos 2.13. I am pressed under you, as
a cart, that is laden with sheaves.

The words have in them, three things.

1. An accusation, by the Prophet. 2. An apology, by the people. 3. The proof
of the imputation, by instance.
In the accusation, are two things. 1. The fact. 2. The mean. By this
weariness, we are to understand, two things. 1. the Lords long patience, even
ad defatigationem usque, toward the wicked; and the abuse thereof, by the
people. 2. His readiness, to turn patience into wrath, and to execute vengeance
upon the transgressors. Of the first of these. This is that the Lord, every
where, challenges to himself, and in common experience, is seen to practice,
Exodus 34.6. and Romans 2, 4. (...); yea, even toward the vessels of wrath, Romans
9.22. So, after many long provocations, yet he gives to the old world, an
hundred and twenty years; so to the Amorites, though their sins were ever
crying, yet four hundred years given them, Genesis 15.13. And, this is that, that
every one of us have had plentiful experience of. What a long course of sinning
ran we along in, before our calling; and how bountiful found we the Lord
toward us? And which, even of the desperatest wretches amongst us, can say,
that the Lord has been hasty, to take notice of, or punish his rebellions? The
reason is, to lead us to repentance, if it were possible, Romans 2.4. or
otherwise, to leave the impenitent, excuseless.

Now beloved, this should teach us amendment of life, and lead us on to
repentance: Eccles. 8.11, 12, 13.

Secondly, this is propounded to us, as a pattern, to imitate, in our own
provocations, Col. 3.13. and 2 Timothy 24.25. that we should bear patiently, as
good children. And it condemns that hasty, and rash desire, in hastening unto
vengeance, in our personal injuries; see Paul, Tit. 3.3. we forward also, till
God called; and many times, the latter in calling, outstrips the former, in
obedience.

God will not always bear our provocations: its true, Jerusalem, Egypt; see
Psalm. 50.21, 22. One reason is, that he may show himself, though he be a bearer
of evil, yet to be not lover of it. 2. That we may know, it is not an idle name
of God, but, has in him actual, and active justice, thereforegives he us
continual experiments of his taking notice of man's sins and hatred of them;
Isa. 1.24.

And, what may we learn hence; but, to take heed, how we continue to provoke
the Lord to wrath, by our continued sins; surely, though the Lord keep long
silence, yet at length he reproves, by his judgmens: And as David says, Psalm.
50.21, 22. Consider this, ye that forget God; lest he tear you in pieces like a
lion, and there be none to deliver. The Lord puts upon him, the habit of these
violent creatures, the more to terrify. Sometimes, he seems to sleep; and
David says: The Lord awaked out of sleep; but in the day of his wrath, he is
furious, and none can stand before him. And, would God beloved, ye could all
lay this to heart, swearers, drunkards, etc. Surely, the restraint would be
much.

The mean follows; by their words] So that, words have their weight, Audacter
dicam: works sometimes, provoke not so much, as proud and contemptuous
speeches; See Mal. 3.13. And would God, these men, that speak so lightly of
their words, that are most blasphemous, would lay this to heart, saying, words
are but wind.

And, let it teach us all, to pray, with David, to the Lord, Matthew. 12.36, 2.
By them is our righteousness, or unrighteousness declared: a good man, good
things; an evil man brings forth evil things. Amongst all speeches, first,
stoutness in words, and desperate speeches. 2. Blasphemies, that impose upon
the Lord any thing unbeseeming his majesty. 3. Justifications of such speeches.

Yet yet say wherein?] Here is their apology.

Ob. If any shall say, that Gods children do thus, sometimes.

Answ. They are to be understood, as speaking of particular righteousness, in
some particular cause, wherewith they are burdened by men: The distinction is
usual; justitia personae, and justitia causae: So David labors to clear
himself of those particulars, that Doeg, and other adversaries imposed on him,
in respect of Saul's person, and his aspiring to the kingdom. 2. They thus
speak, as, in respect of men, not of God; and therefore, when they come to deal
with the Lord, they acknowledge their sins.

Ob. 2. Jobs example is alleged, as justifying himself before God.

Answ. Job must thus be understood, as speaking of his freedom from
hypocrisy; and that he was, in the Lords service, upright in the sight of God;
whereas his friends condemn him of hypocrisy, he challenges to himself
uprightness; See Job 8.20. and 9. per tot. and therefore, when he comes to
speak of himself, in respect of his infirmity, he acknowledges his sins; Job.
9.2, 3, 20.

And, let this teach us, to acquaint our selves with our own sins, and
corruptions: to which purpose. semidei, as half Gods; but, look up to God, and
thy righteousness will appear unclean, Job 9.2. 3. Consider, there may be many
corruptions which we see not; I know not mine own soul, Job 9.21.

When ye say, every one that does evil, is good in the sight of the Lord] Here
is the instance: Let us see their conclusion, which is disjunctive; either God
an approver of the wicked, or else no God of judgment, that is, regards not
things done on the earth; or else, indeed, there is no God at all: Hear their
medium, Mal. 3.14, 15. Because the Lord punishes not, but prospers the
wicked. 2. Afflicts, and delivers not his own children.

The like blasphemous thoughts are in wicked men, David confesses himself to
be much turmoiled, to doubt of Gods providence, love of the wicked, and seeming
hatred of his children; Psalm. 37. and 73. So Jeremy, chap. 12.1.

It shall not be amiss, therefore, a little, to show a mean, to fortify our
selves against this Godless, and blasphemous temptation; and, for the wicked,
these conclusions shall be proved. 1. That it may well enough accord with the
justice of God, to forbear, prosper, bless, in temporal things, even wicked
men; Eccles. 9.1, First of all, know we, that the will of God, and his
appointment, is the rule of justice; see this, Romans 9. in the case of Election,
and Reprobation; God wills not things, because they are just; but they are
just, because he wills them: This conclusion thoroughly seated in judgment,
stops the mouths of wicked men, and restrains from many blasphemies; so that,
though the Lord bear, yet, considering it is his will, who may find fault? The
second conclusion, that the Lord is an absolute Lord; having free power to
dispose of his blessings, and no man may ask a reason of his counsels, Romans 9
and 11. Seeing then, that these things are all his own; who should ask him a
reason of his dispensation? See also Matthew. 20.15. A third conclusion; that
what is lawful for men, cannot but be much more lawful for God. But, man
sometimes delays, and his delays are not censured of injustice. The Prince
uses not allwaies martial law, but in extremity, when he fears outrage; they
are kept in prison, till the day of trial, and conviction; and after
conviction, and condemnation, have a respite, to prepare for death: and, thus
the Lord deals with the wicked, respitting, and delivering them; and
therefore, weigh by the end, not by the beginnings. A fourth conclusion; that
the Lord, for good ends, reserves the wicked to punishment; and, in the mean
time, prospers them with temporalll things; as. 1. For exercise of his
children, so Ashur, Isa. 10.5. deferred, to execute Gods wrath upon Israel, and
Jerusalem; so the Gibennites reserved, to be Pricks in the eyes, and thorns in
the sides of his children; and thus the Lord, at this day, reserves. And
beloved, what would become of us, were it not so? 2. To declare his power; 1.
in preservation of his own children; how wonderfully shows this the power of
the Lord? that, notwithstanding all the attempts of the wicked, yet still his
Church is preserved; as, Exodus 1.12. The Israelites vexed, but the more vexed;
the more increased. 2. In conversion; Beloved, it may be, there are amongst the
very wicked themselves, some, in whose conversion, and salvation, the Lord
means to glorify his rich grace, Mat. 13.30. Not the tares, but the wheat
also: If the Lord had taken away Paul, in persecution, his grace had never so
much appeared; and, this that we see daily, men brought from power of darkness,
to the kingdom of Jesus Christ. 3. In their overthrow, and confusion; never
had Gods name been so mavelous over the world, if he had presently shown his
power, in the destruction of Pharaoh; but, thus permitting him to fortify
himself, and then to overthrow him, this showed his power; like at this day,
when they are flourishing like Cedars, then cuts he them down. A third end,
this serves much to illustrate his justice, when he thus bears, and invites,
by all means, to repentance, and yet men turn not: I gave her space to repent,
Rev. 2.21. Who cannot but acknowledge the justice of God, in their condemnation?

Yea, beloved, what if wicked men are punished? what if punished in these very
things, wherein they think themselves blessed? These two things I will briefly
evidence. First, that the wicked are never without punishment. Secondly, that
the very blessings, for which they applaud themseves, are their punishments.

For the first, know we; that punishments are not all of one sort; some are
internal; some external; some Eternal. Now, for internal punishments, we see
them evident upon them; as 1. Horror of conscience, in many of them; can there
be a more fearful judgment? This, perhaps, we see not, but they feel in their
inward restlesness, Isa. 57. ult. See Cain flying (if he could) from himself;
Pashur a terror to himself, Ier. 20.4. Achitophel, hanging himself; as the
Romans were wont to make the crucified carry their own cross; so God has made
the wicked to carry this cross, of an evil, an accusing conscience.

Ob. If it be said, they all feel it not:

Ans. First, that I much doubt of. Secondly, they have judgment much more
fearful, hardness of heart, the fearfullest judgment, that God in his wrath,
can inflict; see in Pharaoh. Thirdly, sins themselves are fearful punishments;
Romans 1.24, 26, 28. And, what drudges they are, what toil they take, to enjoy
the pleasures of their sins? How unquiet sleeps; what filthy belchings feels
the drunkard? Temporary; are in their persons, or in the things about them; as,
sometimes, graceless, and unfortunate children; besides these, there are paenae
posthumae, surviving plagues: The posterity smarts for the sins of the fathers,
Job 21.19. God lays up the iniquity of the father, for the child: And, their
very outward blessings, what curses are they unto them? The riches of the
wicked suffer them not to sleep, fill them with cares, and sorrows, many, and
many; their honors exposed to envy, their pleasures have bitterness, etc.
Eternal punishments are those, that are respited, till after this life.

Now, brethren, Differtur, non aufertur; wait but a while, and thou shall see
the Lord manifest his justice in their punishment, and overthrow. And, hence
likewise let wicked men learn to terrify and dismay their hearts, etc.

For the second, that it may well agree with the justice of God, thus to
afflict his own children.

First, there is none so just, but must be forced to confess, he has in him,
what deserves punishment; no not Infans unius dici; we bring corruption out of
the womb, and suck it from the breasts of our mother, Psalm. 51.5. Romans 5.12.
Its true, that Achans children perish with him, but yet not without their own
sin, being corrupt by nature; so of the dearest servants of God. And, who is
there, under any affliction, but must needs say, as that good thief on the
cross, I am justly in this condemnation, Luke 23.41. view them in their
original; or, in their end, they are good for Gods children. Their end. 1.
Exercise. 2. Chastisement: as exercises. 1. Firmant. 2. Probant. 3. Praeeunt.

1. Firmant. Afflictions are Gods schoole-houses, wherein he trains us up to
hardship: skill in sailing, is best learnt by tempest; in warfare, by fight; as
trees tossed with wind take deeper root, so, etc. and those tenderlings unused
to hardship, how does a little affright them?

2. Probant, Deuteronomy. 8. and, without these, men know neither the soundness, nor
measure of their graces: affliction tryes: how many please themselves in their
graces, whom affliction discovers to be but hypocrites. They show also, what
thy strength is.

3. Praeeunt, when as by example, they draw others, as Phil 1.14. and Abel's
blood still cries; to imitate his patience, and obedience, see Heb. 11.4.

Secondly, chastisment; so it profits; as being. 1. Either means to reduce us;
we going astray, these bring us home again, Psalm. 119.67. 2. As bonds and
restrainments; how strongly inclined we are unto all sins, we find in
experience; who blames a father, if he take from his child a knife, that would
hurt him? Or the Lord, if he withhold outward things, which he knows would not
profit us? 3. Besides that, they are excellent purgations, cleansing us from
corruptions. 4. Weigh, if thou will, that he afflicts in measure, with regard
to our strength, Isa. 28.7. 5. Sustaineth in afflictions. Thou have seen many
afflicted, thou never saw any of Gods children forsaken, 2 Cor. 4.9. 6.
Consider the reward, at last, of the afflicted, 2 Cor 4.17.

Hence then, learn we all to lay our hands upon our mouths; and, whatsoever
affliction betides us; that God is still good to Israel, an still and hater of
iniquity. And, in this point especially, fortify our selves; because Satan,
in this case, labors to persuade, that God is either unjust, or unmerciful,
etc.

CHAP. 3. VER. 1. Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the
way before me; and the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his Temple:
Even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in; behold, he shall come,
says the Lord of Hosts.


WE have here a twofold prophecy.

First, of John Baptist, the forerunner of Christ.

Secondly, of Christ himself.

John is described.

First, by his office, the messenger of the Lord.

Secondly, by his proper effect, to prepare the way for Christ.

Christ doubly described. 1. By his titles. 2. And office. 3. And adjunct.
Title, the Lord. Office, Angel of the Covenant. Adjunct. 1. Whom ye seek. 2.
His coming, by the speed, 3. Place, to his temple. 4. Ratification, says the
Lord of Hosts.

As touching the meaning of the words; some difficulty was caused by the
glosses of the Jews; some teaching, that the Lord should send an Angel, that
was such, by nature, as an harbinger for Christ. But, none can better interpret
this, then the Lord Christ himself, Matthew. 11.10. applying this to the person
of John Baptist: And 2. The word Angel generally signifies any messenger;
though sometimes given to the spirits Angelical, (...). Besides that, its no
new speech, that ministers are called Angels, Rev. 2.1.

Now, by this scripture, we may thus profit. Luke 3.5. And moreover, the devil
keeps possession, Luke 11.21.

Now, beloved, labor we to feel this; and surely,

Secondly, Its the office of a Minister, to prepare a way for Christ, that is,
to prepare a people for Christ's dominion; This was John's office; and, 2 Cor.
11. Paul of himself: therefore, we are called children of the bridechamber,
etc. This must be our admonition, and provocation to diligence, this way: and,
suffer your selves to be prepared; See Luke 1.16, 17.

The means are. 1. Humiliation, by the law, Gal. 3.10. 2. Bewailing of our
former lives. 3. Purpose of amendment. 4. Longing after Christ.

The Lord whom ye seek] This the description of the children of God, to long
after Christ; so Abraham; see Job. 8.56. Now, beloved, there is a threefold
coming of Christ mentioned, in the Scripture. 1. By incarnation. 2. By his
Spirit, into the heart. 3. In the clouds, to judgment; the first and second
here understood: And this business may be analogically applied to Gods
Children. Jews never so longed to see Christ in the flesh, as Gods children
do, to feel his presence in their heart.

Now, by this, try we our selves, whether we be children of God, or no; we
shall know it by this, that longing desire we feel, to be brought into
communion with Christ, by his Spirit; as also, by that desire we have, and
longing after his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.8. Rev. 22.20. Sundry Reasons for this.
1. Present afflictions; it being Gods ordinance, that we shall never, in this
earthly tabernacle, be free from them. 2. Subjection, and bondage under sins,
that the best feel themselves tied unto; Israelites long for deliverance, under
their burdens, Exodus 1. ult. How not we more, from this miserable bondage? 3.
The glorious, and comfortable presence of Christ, Phil. 1.23.

Shall suddenly come to his Temple, etc.] The description of Christ's coming,
by the place whither; to his Temple: namely, of Jerusalem, the place of Gods
worship; and thither especially, for this end, to purge it of those
corruptions, that were grown into the worship of God.

Now, this prophecy touching Christ's coming to the Temple, and purging the
worwip of God, has been accomplished. In the Evangelicall History y emay read
it: And, the means which he used to purge the same, were: 1. Doctrine. 2,
Discipline. For Doctrine, read Mat. 5. and 15. For Discipline, Ioh. 2.14, 15,
16.

Now, Brethren, since this is such an excellent work, the purging of the worship
of God, as that the Messiah, and Savior of the world, comes to perform it;
mark, what we learn: every one, in his place, to help forward this work so
excellent: And, in respect of the public, and supreme Magistrate, our duty
is, to be petitioners unto the Lord; so to incline his heart, that we may have
his worship pure from all defilements; not only of gross Idolatry, but even of
humane Inventions: See 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. etc.

Next, unto every of us, in our families, this must be our care, as it was
Joshua'hs, for us, and our house-holds, to see, that the worship of God be kept
pure, and sincere: Beloved, every family is, or should be, a temple for Christ,
to be worshipped in; Romans 16. We read of Churches in private men's houses; This
was Jacobs Commendable, and Holy Practice, Genesis 35.2, 3. going up to Bethel to
build an Altar unto the Lord his deliverer; commands his hous-hold, and all
that were with him, to put away the strange Gods that were amongst them, and to
cleanse themselves.

Sundry Reasons might be given for it. 1. That even for neglects of duties,
this way, Gods wrath, many times, hangs over our heads; Exodus 4.24, 25. in
Moses: And the defects this way, are reproveable; one too profane amongst the
vulgar, whose profession is, that they hire not servants for Gods service, but
for their own; And therefore, for matter of Religion, and the worwip of God,
let them do as they will; all which argues an earthly mind; and, by the
presence of such servants, what blessings can be expected? Surely, as the Lord,
many times, blesses a whole family, for the presence of one religious servant,
Genesis 30.27. and 39.5. So, for one graceless, profane servant, the whole family
tastes of the Lords wrath. A second neglect is, herein, perhaps more tolerable,
but yet as dangerous; and that is this, that you may observe, even in some of
Gods own Children; some care of civility they have, which restrains them from
gross breaches of the second table, drunkenness, whoredom, etc. Perhaps, look
also to external conformity; but, for matter of judgment in religion,
altogether careless: These things ought not so to be; but Instruction, and
Correction, must, this way, go together.

To every one of us, also, may this duty be pressed; for even we also are
Temples for the Lord to dwell in, 1 Cor. 6.19. And therefore, must we also be
careful, this way, to keep our selves from pollutions in the worship of God;
and if any have crept upon us, labor to purge them; See Deuteronomy. 4.12, 13.

And, for this cause, positive duties this way tending are. 1. Continual
attendance unto the word of God, as the only comfortable rule of the worship of
God* Mat. 15. 2. Beware of Philosophy, and vain deceit, Col. 2.8. 3. Relying
too-much upon the authority, and judgments of men, or of their writings:
Augustine prayed for his mother Monica: And, this one cause of Romish Idolatry;
whilst the word of God was laid aside, and writings of men advanced into their
room. Not, that I condemn judicious reading of them; but yet, bring all to the
touch, yea, even commands, and prescripts of Princes, Hos. 5.11. Ephraim
afflicted, and broken in judgment, because, he willingly followed the
Commandment.

The messenger (or, Angel) of the covenant] He speaks, here, of the covenant of
grace, made betwixt God and the seed of Abraham, touching life and salvation,
to be obtained by faith, in Christ's blould. Now, Christ is called the Angel of
this covenant, in two respects. 1. In respect of revelation. 2. In respect of
mediation, and procurement.

In respect of revelation; so Divines teach, that the Lord, before incarnation,
pleased, by Christ, to reveal his covenant unto man; so Christ that first
talked with Adam, that renewed covenant with Abraham, that led the Israelites,
etc. And of himself, Ioh. 1. He only reveals the Father unto us; he means, as
making this covenant of grace; for otherwise, God known to the wicked, from the
beginning, as creator, governor, preserver; but, as a Savior, and Redemer,
known only in Christ.

In respect of mediation, because that in him, and for his sake, this covenant
was made; see 1 Timothy 2.5. The mediator between God, and man; and in, and by
him, it has accomplishment, 2. Cor. 1.20.

Now, whereas Christ is the revealer of his covenant; me thinks, it will
follow, that those to whom Christ was not known, they never knew this covenant;
and therefore, could not be partakers of salvation; I mean, the Gentiles to
whom it pleased not God to reveal himself by Christ.

And therefore, that error, though compassionate, yet foul, of some, that
taught that even the Gentiles, before Christ, that knew not Christ, were saved.
I say not, but some Gentiles were saved; but, that any was saved, that knew not
God, in Christ, the scripture no where shows, Act. 4.12. No other name. Isa.
53.11. The knowledge of my righteous servant.

Hence, we are taught to pray to Christ the interpreter, to manifest it unto
thee; and with all, take heed, how we despise the word, and tenor of this
covenant, Heb. 2.3. the reasons are there given.

Again, whereas Christ alone is made the mediator of the covenant; mark, how
foully Papists delude themselves, and rob Christ of his honor, and set up
saints, and Angels, for mediators. They have coined a distinction, of
intercession, and redemption; severing those things, that God has combined, in
the person of Christ; the high Priest a type of both; and, Rev. 8.3. Christ,
the Angel, that stands to perfume our prayers. And, this the unspeakable
comfort of a child of God: it is true, that God has been gracious unto us, in
entering covenant; but, this our misery, that we keep not the condition; yet,
this again our comfort, that the promises of God have not their ratification in
us, but in Christ Jesus: Alas! what would become of us, if salvation depended
upon the merit of our own obedience? how full of unbelief? how weak in
obedience? How presumptuous in disobedience? Yet, this the comfort, that (in
Christ) the promises of God are yea, and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20.

Follows the ratification, says the Lord of Hostes] So, you shall see, that
the Lord ties his children to no other evidence, but his word, for the
accomplishment of all his Promises, and predictions: Thus says the Lord, and,
The mouth of the Lord has spoken; and this, indeed, is faith, torest in the
assurance of Gods promises, because he has promised. Other sciences have their
demonstrations, and we have liberty, to enquire a reason of them; and not bound
to rest in any man's, ipse dixit; But, for matter of faith, the Lords word must
be our only warrant.

Now, as the Lord propounds this, as the only thing, wherein he would have his
servants rest; Abraham, Romans 4.18. though no likelihood, to obtain feed, yet
having Gods promise, he believes; and, Heb. 11.19. When the Lord commands him
to take his son Isaac, in whom was the only apparent hope of the blessing
promised; yet, spares not him, being assured, that he who had promised, was
able also to perform. Beloved in Christ, many excellent promises are given unto
us in Christ; life eternal, and glory unspeakable promised to all believers;
yet, as Paul speaks, Col. 3.3. This life is hid with Christ in God; and, 1 John
3.2. It does not yet appear, what we shall be. And, look to the outward State
of Gods children in this life, nothing more miserable: Well, yet, we have the
Lords word, The Lord of Hosts has said it; and though we had no other
evidence, me thinks, this should suffice us. God has promised to dwell with a
contrite heart, and to revive him* that is of an humble spirit, Isa. 57.15.
Beloved, perhaps, at present, we see nothing less, than reviving; perhaps even
killing, Job. 13.15. Here now is the power of faith, then to expect life, when
we feel our selves in death; Godliness has also the promises of this life, 1 Timothy 4.8. Food in famine, Psalm. 37. Perhaps, we see no means, but now the Lord
will prove our faith: And, indeed, thou can never assure thy self, that thou
have any sound faith, till thou are come to this, to believe, even because the
Lord has said; though thou see no mean, before thine, eyes for
accomplishment of his promise. Labor therefore, for this; and, here consider.

First, the truth of God, and his fidelity, as by long experience of all times
thou may gather it. The Lord promised, to Abraham, to give Canaan to his
posterity; Abraham lived in it, and his seed enjoyed it; so the Messiah; and he
came.

Secondly, the power of God, in accomplishing his promise; these the two
pillars of Abraham's faith, Romans 4.20, 21.

Verse. 2. But, who may abide the day of his coming? and, who shall stand, when
he appears? for, he is like a refiners fire, and like fullers soap, etc.] A
description of the coming of Christ in the flesh, from the adjunct of terror,
illustrated by the effect; who may abide his coming?

For the sense, it may be enquired, how this may be ascribed unto Christ, in
respect of his coming in the flesh; For, first, his outward estate upon earth,
was most despicable; his external servants, fishermen; besides that, he came
to comfort his people; and, Mat. 12.20. It was said of him, that he should not
bruise a broken reed? Answ. Distinguish the Persons, and the Scriptures will
accord; Christ Jesus to his own Children, is comfortable, not terrible; but
yet, to the wicked most terrible; yea, in his very incarnation, and that
outward contemptible state, with what terror struck he the hearts of the
ungodly! See Mat. 2. When they hear but tidings of Christ's Birth, Jerusalem,
and all, is in an uproare; and, when he comes meekly to Jerusalem, riding on an
ass, how were they stricken with terror* and fear? Mat. 21. Herod quakes at
the news, Mat. 14. If any be demanded, how this comes to pass? Answ. Partly,
through the glimps of Divine Glory, that shined in that despicable State of
Christ; partly, through their earthly minds, while they savouring earthly
things, feared the disturbance of earthly peace; partly, through conscience of
rejecting him and his word: partly, through a terror, wherewith it pleases
the Lord to strike them.

Now, beloved, if Christ coming in the flesh were so terrible to the wicked,
what shall his glorious coming be? Rev. 6.16. The wicked are there described,
running to the hills to fall on them, and to the mountains to cover them: And,
this terror, methinks, should persuade men, 2 Cor. 5.10. To forsake their
sins, and to kiss the son, Psalm. 2. ult. To submit to him, that he may guide
them, by his word, and Spirit: The Prophet Isaiah propounds the question, who
among us, shall dwell with devouring fire? And answers to it, Isa. 33.14.15.

And, behold, he comes with clouds, Rev. 1. 2 These. 1.2. The Lord is gracious
unto us, in offering us means of reconciliation: Blessed are they, that
receive them; and woe worth the day, that ever they were born, that reject them
I and, let all such, as encourage themselves in their evils; because of
Christ's Incarnation, tremble at this: Alas I what avalls it a wicked, obstinate
sinner, that Christ came into the world, to reconcile us unto his Father? This
is comfortable to a mourner, but, its the scourge of a wicked man: when he
shall consider, how he has trampled under his feet the blood of Christ, and
crucified him by his sins, and rejected his grace, how can he but tremble?

For he is like a Refiners fire, and like Fullers sope] First, let us clear
this place of the glosses of Papists; they labor here to build the fire of
purgatory; and why, trow we? but only, because, here is mention made of fire,
and of purging fire: To which purpose, they apply that also, 1 Cor. 3.13.
Against this dream, oppose we. First, the contradictory, and the proof of it.
1. This that the Scripture every where teaches, that we have, in Christ,
perfect purgation from all our sins, both the guilt, and punishment of them, 1
Ioh. 1.7. 2. That remission of sins is here, either finally lost, or
everlastingly obtained, Ioh. 9.4. Walk while it is day. 3. Whereas they
confess, that we are in Christ, purged from all mortal sins; and all sins are
mortal; apparent, that there remains no such purging, after this life. 4.
Whereas they confess, that we are purged; a Reatu peccatorum, from the guilt of
sins; how can they imagine any part of punishment to remain unto the children
of God? for, does God punish the Innocent? 5. Rev. 14.13. Gods children are
blessed, and said, at death, to rest from their labors; and that their works
follow them close.

And, as for this place, its as absurdly, as any, applied unto this purpose;
For, 1. Its spoken of Christ's first coming in the flesh. 2. Its said, that
Christ is this purging fire. 3. Its done for this end, that we may bring
offerings unto God in righteousness, verse. 3. Now, will they say, that by these
offerings, their mass is meant? how absurdly? For, have they masses, in
purgatory? I think, indeed, there are Priests enough in hell; For, Mat. 5.19.
They that pervert Gods people, are least in the kingdom of God; but, of masses
in purgatory never dream, no not Catholics themselves,

See we then, what the sense of the words is, and in what respect Christ is
compared unto fire, and Fullers soap.

Answ. In respect of his effects, like unto fire; and that, both in regard of
the wicked, as also in respect of the children of God: In respect of the
wicked, because, by his word, afflictions, and his Spirit, he purges the
visible Church, works separation of the dross from the pure metal; so, Mat.
3.12. He is described, as one having his fan in his hand, and purging his
floor: So see we daily, by his word, he separates; by afflictions also, he
discovers hypocrisy.

And, what may this teach us? Surely, to labor to be upright in the sight of
God; for Christ is as purging fire, and will surely sever the dross from the
silver, and gold; and, howsoever a man may long masque under the vizar of
hypocrisy; yet, sooner, or later, the Lord discovers him, 1 Timothy 5. ult. Some
men's sins go before unto judgment.

See we the means, how it pleases the Lord, at this day, to work this
separation: These are. 1. His word, this that fire, Jer. 23.29. 2. Afflictions,
this also the purging, and trying fire. 3. His judgment, whereby he gives over
an hypocrite to some vile, and gross sins, whereby they discover themselves
unto the world.

Again, he is so compared, in respect of his own servants; because, he
scoureth, and purges them from their sins; no fire so purging, as Christ; the
fullers soap makes not so white, as the blood of Christ.

Here, first, take notice, how fast corruption cleaves to all the posterity of
Adam; David, Psalm. 51.7. knew well enough, and therefore prayed again, and
again, for washing, and wringing in this fullers soap, of the spirit of Christ.
And, what marvel? seeing bred in us by nature; confirmed also, and strengthened
by custom, Jer. 13.23. Heb. 12. 1. The sin hangs on fast, and presses down
sore; and this that, in woeful experience, all Gods children find, how strong
corruption is in them; and, besides all this, the devil holds Captive, 2 Timothy
2.26.

And, me thinks, it descryes that error of our people, that think it so easy a
matter to deliver themselves from the strength,

Now, alas! Beloved, these men consider not how fast corruption cleaves unto
them, while they thus speak: Is it so easy, to fly from corruption? Try, if
thou will, but in one sin, to which thou have been accustomed; and then, tell
me whether it be so easy a matter, to be delivered from thy corruptions. How
do all Gods children find evil present, when they would do good? And what
violent assaults of Satan are they encumbred withal? And how, when they have
much labored, yet evil returns.

Lastly, see here the efficacy, and power of Christ, in purging of our sins.
Fire it self; and the purest soap is not more powerful, then Christ's grace: How
powerful felt Gods children this, who from being, by nature, very vile, have
become zealous for the Lord of Hosts, 1 Cor. 6.11?

And, this should comfort the children of God,

First, the word of God Ier. 23.29. Ioh. 17.17. The word is that truth, by
which we are sanctified; and by it the Spirit, that alone purges, indeed, is
conveyed into the heart; that is the two-edged sword, Heb. 4.12. that searches
corruption, getting into the very marrow, and bones; and, they forsake their
own mercy, that leave it.

Secondly, add to this a second means, and that is, affliction, sanctified to
Gods children; how powerful a means the cross fanctified is to Gods children,
experience shows; which of Gods sons cannot say, that ever he was in
affliction, but he found sin abated thereby, and himself, in part, scoured from
corruptions: this that masters rebellion, subdues rebellion, makes careful,
and circumspect: And therefore, they forsake likewise their own mercy, and
comfort, who fly too cowardly from afflictions; and, if there were no other
argument, this alone should move us, to submit our selves to the cross; for
that, its a mean to purge us. Lastly, prayer unto God, for his Spirit, Psalm.
51.10, 12. for, without his biessing, neither word, nor afflictions, nor any
our own endeavors prevail, any whit, to this purpose; therefore, see we many
hearing continually, yet never a whit purged from corruptions; many followed
with crosses, yet never the better, but the worse; pray God, therefore, to wash
thee, and thou walt be washed.

VER. 5. 6. And, I will come near to you to judgment, and I will be a swift
witness against the sorcerers, and against the Adulterers, and against false
swearers, and against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow,
and the fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from his right, and fear
not me, says the Lord of Hosts: For, I am the Lord, I change not; therefore,
ye sons of Jacob are not consumed.


Coming of Christ, in the flesh, foretold, and described, by adjuncts. 1.
Speed. 2. Terror. 3. Ends; First, for his fervants, to purge them; Secondly,
for the wicked, to judge them: which latter we have, in this text, where there
are three things considerable. 1. The end, and effect of Christ's coming in
the flesh: in respect of the wicked; he comes to them, to judgment. 2. The
mean, manner, or degree of execution, by witnessing. 3. The subjects of this
execution, set down as in a synechdochicall induction of the particular species.

I will come near to you to judgment] For the sense: God is always near, Psalm.
139. but he is, then, especially, said to be nigh; when he declares his
nighness by effects, of power, justice, mercy; but nearest, while Christ lived
with us.

The end of Christ's incarnation, was, Ioh 9.39. and Luke 2.34. appointed for
the fall, and rising again of many in Israel; conferr Isai. 8.14, 15. Isai.
28.16.

Ob. If any shall object, that Christ testisieth of his Father; that he sent
him, not to judge the world, Ioh. 3.17.

Answ. There are two ends of Christ's sending; one principal, which is to save:
less principal, and as it were accidental, to judge the world; as Saint Paul
says of the Gospel, 2. Cor. 10.5, 6. Or, secondly, by the world, we are to
understand, the world of believers, as Austin; (est quidam quasi mundus
credentium) and verse. 18. ib. 1 Ioh. 2.2.

Ob. Christ refused to do the office of a judge, being requested to decide the
controversy, betwixt two brethen.

Answ. The place to be understood of a temporal judgment, after the custom of
this life; so Christ professes to Pilate, that his kingdom was not of this
world, Ioh. 18.36. But, ever performed he the office of a spiritual judge, as,
Ioh. 9.39.

Hence then it follows, that Christ came not into the world, only to be a
Savior of his Church, or to be a Savior to all; since the Lord here
protests, that Christ he came man to the world, unto judgment: This point I
have often proved. 1. Because of the eternal decree of God, which he would
never cross, in sending Christ into the world; nay, even in it had eye to the
fulfilling of that eternal counfell. 2. For that, means of salvation are not
granted to all, Mat. 11.23. 3. That Christ excludes some from his intercession,
Ioh. 17.9. 4. From absurdities; for Gods counsels must stand, and who can
resist his will? and, it is most absurd to say, that God would fain save, but
man's will hinders his intention, and desire; since he that made the will, knows
how to frame it to his own purposes.

And, therefore, beloved, vain is the confidence of those men, that expect
salvation from Christ, whilst they live in their sins: Its true, that Christ
is a Savior of his people, Mar. 1.21. but, a severe judge of all disobedient,
and impenitent sinners: Its worth the noting that Paul has. 1 Timothy 1.9. The
law, says he, is not given to the righteous, namely, as its the Ministry of
condemnation: or the handwriting of ordinances against us; but, its given to
the lawless, and disobedient; and to them it stands still in force.

And therefore, let this be the Exhortation, as Psalm. 2.12. Kiss the son, that
is, submit to his dominion, suffer him to your savior; else, surely, you shall
find him your severe judge.

See we, a little, how Christ executed this office of judgment, upon the earth,
in the days of his flesh, Joh. 9.39. namely, by blinding them that saw, that
is, by giving men up to blindness of mind, and hardness of heart: that
pleasing themselves in opinion of their own knowledge* despised that knowledge of
God which he labored to teach them. And thus we find Christ daily to execute
judgments amongst us in the Church of God: though we see him not now executing
outward vengeance upon the bodies of all ungodly men; yet spiritual judgments
we see on many, in the Church of God; many given up to blidness of mind, and
hardness of heart, and so prepared to condemnation.

Now, as means to avoid this judgment. 1. Take heed of opinion of thine own
knowledge, Ioh. 9.39. 1 Cor. 3.18. 2. While we have light, walk in it, Ioh.
13.35. 3. Shut not your eyes against it, but what the Lord would teach, learn
to acknowledge; See Ioh. 12.37, 39.

Next thing observable, is that part of judgment Christ here executed, in the
days of his flesh. Judgment has four acts. 1. Examination. 2. Conviction. 3.
Sentence-giving. 4. Execution. Now, of these, this only is here noted, that
here he executed the second office of a judge, which is, to convince of sin.
Therefore, it is said of the Father in Christ, that he would be a swift witness
against the soothsayers, etc. that howsoever he did not presently send them
down to hell; yet he would convince them of their sins. For, this is the office
of a witness, to convince, and give evidence of sins committed. Now, this
Christ did, by sundry means.

First, by his word, whilst out of it, he evidenced unto the conscience of
them, all their sins; so, by showing the meaning of the law, he convinced the
Pharisees of their corruptions, Matthew. 5. By showing the accomplishment of the
Prophets predictions, he convinced them of infidelity, etc.

Secondly, by his Spirit, Ioh. 16.8, 9. When he sent him down into his
children; and, by a general work of the true Spirit of God, in the hearts of
very cast awayes.

Thirdly, by his own holy and spotless life; as also, by the examples of his
childrens obedience, in whose hearts it pleased him to be effectual.

And thus, we shall see, at this day, the Lord Christ execute that part of
judgment committed to him, by his Father. Its true, that the Lord has long
patience, bears the very vessels of wrath prepared to destruction, respitting
their execution; as we see, in daily experience; But, let no man say, that
therefore, he does sit still, and not judge the wicked; except, we will say,
that the judge of assize performs no office of a judge, but only, when he
delivers them over to be executed.

And see we, beloved, a little, this truth daily evidenced unto us in the
Church, by the very preaching of his word, which is his testimony, 2 Cor. 10.6.
How many times, persuade I my self, does the desperatest contemner of God, and
all goodness, find that in himself verified, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. that he is
convinced of all men, and judged of the ministry of the word; as, when out of
the word of God, we show the haynousness of Adultery, Sabbath-breaking, etc!
How stand such offenders, like men arraigned at the bar; and say, secretly, in
their hearts, they are guilty! yea, the very trial of their countenance
testifies against them. Again, how does the Spirit of God, in the word, smite
them with fear, and horror, that they tremble, and quake at the noise of Gods
judgments denounced against them? Thirdly, the very examples of Gods children,
Heb. 11. Whiles they submit themselves to the word of God, convince them also
of their sins.

The Use will best appear,

First, in regard of Gods children, it is to humble them, by giving them sight,
and feeling of their sins, that renouncing themselves, they may supplicate to
their judge, see Act. 2.37.

Art thou, then, convinced in thy conscience, out of the word of God, of thy
sins? This do, supplicate to the judge; surely, not all, whom the Lord
convinces, he condemns; but, as a merciful judge, though he arraign all at
the bar of his conscience, by the Word, and Spirit; yet, whom he sees broken
in heart, purposing amendment, earnestly begging for pardon, to such he extends
pardon, and remission.

And therefore, beloved, if when thou art convinced, thou can thus do, happy
art thou: and Gods children, that find these things, in themselves, have no
cause to despair of pardon, and salvation. The end of conviction, in
castawaies, is their just damnation; for that, when the Lord convinced them in
judgment, of their sins, they still persisted in them.

And therefore, beloved, take we all heed, how we live in our sins after
conviction: when the Lord once brings unto the bar, arraigns us in our
consciences, by his word; shows us out sins, and the smart of them; if, after
all this, we shall continue in them, heavy, and just is our condemnation. And
this the state of many, at this day, as of swearing, drunkenness, etc. they
know the hainousness of them, yet practice them; and, is it not just with God,
to condemn? A thief arraigned, convicted, etc. but, by mercy of the judge
reprieved, upon hope of better behavior, if he shall still persist in theft,
all acknowledge his execution most just.

Well, next, let us see unto whom Christ is sent, as a judge: To soothsayers,
and adulterers, etc. Now, we are not so to understand the Prophet, as if he
meant, that Christ should be a judge of these particulars only; but, as Paul, 1 Timothy 1.9. He includes all sins, in general.

Wherefore then these mentioned only?

Answ. Because most rife in the practice of that people. Thence we learn, who
are Ministers, Baptist, how excellenly he fits his prescripts to the nature of
the people, Luk 3.10, 11. and, when he comes to Herod, he tells him of his
particular sin, Mat. 14.4. And Paul, before Felix, a bribing, and incestuous
person, preaches of justice, and temperance, Act. 24.25.

It warrants like practice of ministers, at this day, their own people; and,
therefore, pleases it God to set us over particular congregations, and to give
us charge of them, that we might redress their sins, And, howsoever that other
course be most plausible unto carnal men; I mean, general dealing in
instruction, admonition, reproof; etc. as, you shall hear such preachers, that
shoot at rovers in their Sermons, much applauded: yet this is the profitable
kind of teaching: And therefore, in the primitive Church, were there assistants
unto the Minister, in particular congregations, to enquire, and give
information of manners; and, if we had now such as the household of Cloe, 1
Cor. 1.11. No doubt, we might more profitably, a great deal, converse in our
Ministry: that by the way.

First particular mentioned, Sooth-saying.
Sooth-saying; the word rendered, by skillful, in original languag;
proestigiatores, as you would say, juglers, such as, by deceiving the sense,
bring strange things to pass; but; Synechdochically, under this name, are
comprised, all such as exercise any of those divellish arts, that cannot be
exercised without contract either secret, or open, with the Devil; which in one
word, we call Magic: My purpose is to speak something largely of it; and so
much the rather, because, I see there is some kind of this divellish art still
in practice, amongst our ignorant people: Of it there are sundry branches; but,
they may be all reduced to these two heads.

Magia Divinatrix. Operatrix.


The first is that, that is exercised about prediction of of contigent events,
not out of their causes, but by ways not sanctified of God; and this is of two
sorts, according as the persons, that use them; one seemingly joined with art;
the other vulgar; these of diverse sorts; briefly, of each.

First, Pythones, or Pythonissae; such as by acquaintance with familiar
spirits, take upon them to reveal secrets, and to foretell things to come; of
such read, Levit. 20.27. Deuteronomy. 18.11. Beloved, I say not, we have such in our
own congregation; but, this, I fear, is too common amongst us, upon every
occasion, consulting with such; if any thing lost, or out of the way,
presently, a messenger dispatched, to the cunning man, or the cunning woman:
any sickness dangerous, enquiries whether they shall recover; if a journey
undertaken, consult of success, etc. As the Lord says, Psalm. 50.18. Thou have
been partaker with the adulterer; so surely, such are partakers with
Soothsayers: And, it were to be wished, that as there are laws wholesome that
way provided, so those to whom execution thereof is committed, would put upon
them this resolation, and imitate his practice, 2 King. 23.24.

And, let us all be admonished to take heed how we join with them. 1. See what
is noted of Saul, before the Lord forsook him; he took them away out of the
land; when God had forsaken him, then goes he to consult with a witch, 1 Samuel
28.7. 2. The Lord, by strange judgments, has shown his dislike of it; See 2
King. 1. Ahaziah was sick; and, as it is the fashion of profane men, to be more
inquisitive, touching the issue, then to prepare for death; he sends to
Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron, to enquire, whether he should recover: mark, how
the Lord reasons against him. 1. What a sin is this, as if the devil, in Ekron,
could better resolve, then the God of Israel. 2. He tells him, he shall surely
dye, and accordingly, it came to pass. 3. Isa. 8.20. The Lord taxing this sin,
prescribes us the right means, how we should know, what the success of our
enterprises will be; To the law, and to the testimony. When journeyes are so
undertaken, we have a promise of blessing; when otherwise, assure we our selves
of a curse, though all the devils in hell shall foretell a blessing.

A second sort, are Astrologers, or start-gazers; who, as Austin well says,
though under another color, yet exercise their art of foretelling things to
come, by secret compact with the devil; of these the world was ever full; and,
at this day, almost no place empty of them.

These are of sundry sorts. 1. Genethliaci, that by calculating Nativities, and
searching out the constellations, and aspects of the stars, take upon them to
foretell, what should be the manners, state of life, death, etc. of men born
under them. 2. Such, as of particular events in businesses undertake to fortel
events of things, in their own nature, contingent.

These also not amongst us; yet, I fear, every where consulters with such, That
we arm our selves against them, let us see some reasons out of the word of
God. 1. stars made to another end, Genesis 1.14. namely, to measure out days and
nights, summer and winter. 2. That they make good creatures, malignant. 3. The
houses themselves feigned things. 4. They but universal causes, and their
influence mixed. 5. Gemini, or twins born in one hour, have diverse issues. 6.
Many other ways does the Lord descry their folly, Isai. 46. Ier. 10. showing
them to be but heathennish vanity. I might add unto these, those that by
dreams take upon them, to foretell things to come: now, it once pleased God,
by dreams to reveal particular events; not so now. So those, that by looking
on the hand, take upon them to foretell what shall be men's fortune; to these
also may be added that same, which they call Necromancy, that is, divination,
by consulting with the dead; that is, indeed, with the devil, in the habit,
and likeness of the dead: Of all which ye may read, Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. Vulgaris;
that which our common people, in superstitious ignorance, observe, of things
boding good, or ill; as, how many such observations have they of dismal days;
wherein they say, its dangerous to begin any work: That, when a man puts his
shoe on the wrong foot, that bodes ill; if the salt fall toward us on the
table, ill luck; that, if the staff fall out of the hand; a hare cross our way;
stumble at the threshold, when we first go out of the house; or, if the
garments be gnawn of the Rats; of which Augustine well notes the answer of
Cato, an old wizard among the Romans. A superstitious observer of such things
came to him, as a man full of heaviness; more grieving, says he, at the
suspicion of ill to come, then for loss present; and, he would needs know, what
hard chance that might bode. To whom the heathen answered merrily; that is no
strange thing, says he, that Rats should gnaw clothes; the wonder had been,
if thy clothes had eat Rats; so did the heathen deride that folly, and
superstition. And it should admonish us Christians, to detest, and abhor such
idle superstitious observations, whereby, as much as by any, the devil rules
in such.

If it be said, that the event, many times, answers to their fear, and
expectation. This comes, partly, through Gods judgment upon such; partly,
through Satan's desire to bewitch them with such things: God gives them over to
these delusions, that they may believe lies, because they have not received the
love, and obedience of the truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.

A second kind of Sooth-saying, or Magic, is operative, that is, consisting
in working things strange and beyond conceit; because, we see not the reason of
them; as we see in the sorcerers about Pharaoh, and Simon Magus; and the like,
perhaps, at this day; strange cures wrought by bringing enchanted napkins, etc.

Now, first, by natural causes known to Satan; as of the lamp burning, in the
Temple of Venus, without oil; a thing that has a cause in nature; as Pliny of
a stone called Asphaestus, once set on fire, never quenched. Secondly, by
deceiving of the sense, as Pharao'hs Wizards, by agility of their nature,
removing rods, bringing in Serpents Thirdly, perhaps also some marvels wrought,
true for their nature, but false in their end* Reasons. 1. Gods judgment upon
such, as believe such things, 2. That those that obtain such gifts, might not
be too much exalted. 3. To teach us, not rashly to receive doctrines thus
commended, but to bring them to the touch. 4. That we might not too much admire
this gift; but labor for those rather, that tend to edification, and salvation.

And, in this rank may I also reckon those so rife in every corner; charmers
and sorcerers: would God our own congregation were free! which is by procuring
of words, to procure speedy help, or hurt; and this is either plain; or covert,
some means pretendedly used: against which, and all the rest, See Deuteronomy. 18.10,
11. Reasons. 1. God cast out the heathen for these. 2. Prophets ordained.

Against all which, these rules must be observed. 1. That they are all
exercised, by a secret compact with Satan: Reason; they have no such force, by
nature, divine ordinance, or promise.

Ob. Prayers are good, and prevalent.

Answ. Made in faith according to Gods will: But 1. What warrant to pray for
cure, without means, or, by means supernatural? 2. What reason, why such a
prayer, rather then another? 3. See such people, known to be ignorant, vicious,
of whom the Lord professes, he knows none such.

Ob. Gift.

Answ. Extraordinary gift of healing, now ceased.

Ob. Devil does none good.

Answ. Yes, ease, with a desire to hurt.

VER. 6, 7. For, I am the Lord, I change not; therefore, ye sons of Jacob are
not consumed: Even form the days of your fathers, ye are gone away from mine
ordinances, and have not kept them: Return unto me, and I will return unto you,
says the Lord of Hosts: but ye said, wherein shall we return?


HEre, the true cause assigned, why they were not consumed; because the Lord is
unchangeable: And, that it might not seem strange, the Lord should, in mercy,
so long forbear them; he makes it probable, by promising a greater blessing;
the sum whereof is this; that though they had gone astray so long, and were
not amended; yet, if now at length they would return, the Lord promises, to
return to them.

Parts three. 1. An aggravation of the peoples sins. 2. An invitation to
repentance, 3. A promise of a blessing; with a confirmation of it; says the
Lord of Hosts.

From days of your Fathers.] That is, ever since your fathers gave you that
ungracious example, and became patterns of disobedience, ye have gone astray.

How prevalent with posterity the example of parents is, especially in evil: I
might instance this, Jeroboam; how many hundreds of years did idolatry continue
in his lineage? And succeeding Kings of his Stock, went a whoring after the
calves, in Dan, and Bethel: as the leprosy of Gehazi clave to him, and his
posterity; so the sins of Parents, oft-times, to their children: Hear some
reasons of it. The 1. Is, that proness in nature, to imitate examples, either
in good, or evil; especially, in children toward Parents; as we see, in
common appearance in the least of our infants, but newly crept out of their
cradle: speeches, gestures, etc. how apishly imitate they them? 2. But
specially, this comes to pass, by a judgment of God upon the children, for the
fathers transgression, threatened in the second commandment, where he says, he
will visit the sins of the fathers upon the children.

If a man demand, how?

Answ. By withholding his grace from them, and giving them over to imitate
their fathers sins; and this, how see we it verified in daily experience?
Popery, how long continues it in families popish!

This should admonish all those, of us, whom the Lord has made parents, to
take heed how we forsake the ways of our God, and walk after the stubbornness
of our own hearts.

Sundry reasons I might give for this. 1. Examples in evil are always
prevalent; like leaven, 1 Cor. 5.7. how soon it leavens the whole lump, we
see; so spreads the infection of an evil example. 2. Methinks, the very
misery of our children should move us; God has made us fathers of their
bodies, Heb. 12.9. And very birth is, in its own nature, a blessing; but yet if
we shall bane them by our evil example, better had it been for them, never to
be born; how discomfortable is it to parents, to see the shameful ends of
their children, as sometimes on the gibbet? Can we grieve at this? Methinks,
that other misery of them, their eternal damnation, should move us; murder of
bodies odious, much more of souls.

And therefore, beloved, let us all be exhorted, to take heed, how, by a
poysonful example we corrupt the souls of our children: be diligent to bring up
in the discipline, and information of the Lord; but be as careful to go before
them, in an holy example of practice. Would thou have children reverently
use the name of God? beware how thou prophanest it, by ungodly swearing.
Longest thou to wean them from wantonness, and love of pleasure; and would
thou have them, even in youth, to renounce the vanities of life? Redeem thou
the time: methinks, it is unreasonable, that parents should spend weeks and
months in pleasures, and yet expect restraint from pastime, at the hands of
their children: What is this, but to bind heavy burdens, and not to move them
with the least of our fingers?

Secondly, this should teach us to repent of our sins, lest we bequeath unto
them, with our goods, our sins also. Riches and possessions, they descend by
inheritance, sins also are sometimes hereditary.

Thirdy, this should be admonition unto children, to fortify themselves
against the means so powerful, used by Satan to pervert them: As much as for
thine own, grieve for thy fathers sins. I never knew an ungracious father, but
he has left behind him some pledge of Gods displeasure, amongst his children;
yea though they have seen their fathers sins, and fled from them. I speak now
of temporal plagues, by which it pleases God to visit the sins of fathers,
even in Godly children: And therefore this do, when God gives thee eyes to see
the sins of thy parents, and to fly from them, Ezekiel. 18. Humble thy self, even
for thy fathers sins; See Dan. 9. Neh. 13.18. But, specially, learn to fly from
them; and, for this cause, inform thy self by the word of God, touching thy
duty; and ever set thy self these bounds, to follow thy father, no farther then
he follows the Lords commandment; great is the benefit of such wisdom.

Prescription in error is no feasible plea, in the Court of the Lord. What if
thou could say, Popery, whordom, covetousness, etc. had continued, in thy
lineage, to a thousand descents? This may aggravate thy sin, but shall not
excuse it: And therefore observe, every where, how the Lord adds this, as the
aggravating circumstance, Psalm. 95.10, Forty years long was I grieved with
this generation, and, Act. 7.51. Always, ye have resisted the Holy Ghost; as
your fathers did, so do ye.

And therefore, ones amongst us; that because they are able to prescribe in
sinning, therefore procure themselves immunity, from the wrath of the Lord. How
often hear we those speeches from our people? Thus have I always used, and my
father before me. Now, brethren, put it in some other case, in sins against the
second table, and see how odious a defense this would be; if a man should plead
thus, in his whordom: thus my father has used before me; if in theft, etc. How
should we abhor him? And yet in sins, as vain as the excuse is, must go for
current, Psalm. 78.8. Be not as your fathers, a disobedient, and rebellious
generation; and, Psalm. 95.9. in tempting God, and hardness of heart, Ezekiel.
20.18. Walk not in the ordinances of your fathers, to defile your selves with
Idols, and, for th^s cause, see Zech. 1.5. Your fathers, where are they; and
remember what Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 4.3. Its enough, if any thing were enough,
that we have spent the former part of our life in vanity, ignorance, etc. To
the dishonor of our God.

Sins never so long continued shut not out from mercy, if repentance
unfeignedly be performed, Observe. 3.
Luke 19.42. If thou had known, in this thy day, etc. that is, if after all
this contempt of my word, all this innocent blood of my Prophets shed amongst
you; if, in this day, thou knew, and would embrace the things that
concern thy peace, happy were thou. Act. 17.30. The times of this ignorance God
regarded not, but now he admonishes every man to repent. The reason is,
nothing but the endless mercy of the Lord, that knows no limits of time, so be
it repentance can be performed. If a man turn, whenever he turn, he shall
live, Ezekiel. 18. etc.

Now, mark the forward use, profane men make of this doctrine; from pardon,
if, at any time, heartily performed.

Well, beloved, this is true; But, shall we continue in sin, that grace may
abound? God forbid! Romans 6.1. Know we, therefore, that that God who has
promised to give pardon, whenever repentance is performed, has not all-wayes
given repentance, when it is sought for; nay, has threatened to deny repentance
to them, that contemning it offered in the means, respit the day of their
conversion unto God: How howls Esau for the blessing? How fain would he come to
heaven? How bewailes he the loss of Gods favor with tears? Heb. 12.17. and yet
obtains it not; and* what says wisdom, Prove. 1, 24, 26. I called, you heard
not; you shall call, but shall not be heard, you shall seek me early, but not
find me: And therefore, mark, what Esaias says, Isa. 55.6. Seek the Lord,
while he may be found.

Is there any time, when the Lord will not be found?

Answ. Yes, no doubt; not, but that his mercy is everlasting, but, for that men
cannot seek it, when the time is over-slipt, Ezekiel. 24 13.

Hence then, let us learn, beloved, that perhaps have lived long in our sins,
now at the length to seek God, if he may be found of us: And mark, how lovingly
the Lord invites us, who have gone astray, etc. a long time; yet return unto
me, and I will turn unto you; as if he had said, yet at the length return,
there is hope of mercy, and forgiveness. Beloved, the Lord is the same to us,
as he was to Israel; and still says to us, as to them; though ye have long
gone astray, yet, if now at length, we could return, there were hope of mercy,
and forgiveness.

Let me thus apply it to every of us; and let us all think this spoken to our
selves: Thou that art ignorant, and lived thus, all thy life long; if now, at
length, thou could be admonished to repent, God regards not thy past sins,
upon performance of present repentance; so to all other sinners; and mark how
the Lord protests, he delights not in our death, why will ye dye, says the
Lord? See Hos. 13.9.

And, let not Satan prevail with thee, so far, as to think, as the saying is,
too late now; for, the promise of remission is made to repentance, without all
limitation of time, person, or number of offenses: and this be assured, out of
the word of God; that howsoever there is no sin so light, but deserves a
thousand hells; yet, none deadly, in the event, but impenitency; yea, the very
sin against the Holy Ghost were capable of pardon, if capable of repentance.

And, Observe. 4.
if these things move us not, what shall we say, but as the Lord, by his
Prophet; thy destruction is from thy self, salvation of me; this only be sure
of, that thou bring repentance: What that is, we shall see anon, if we shall
first observe, the state of man, during impenitency; which is the next thing,
to be considered in the text.

The State, and condition of impenitency: its nothing else, but a continual
straying from God, as Ier. 2.27. They have turned unto me the back; therefore,
1 Pet. 2. ult. We are said, to go astray like sheep; and the Scripture every
where calls it, a wandering from God.

And, beloved, let this be holden of all men, whose hearts are not turned, and
renewed by the Holy Ghost: Let their civil honesty be never so great; their
zeal and devotion never so fervent, till the heart be changed, all is but,
celer cursus extra viam.

What learn we hence? Surely, to take notice of our own misery, whose hearts
the Lord has not yet turned unto him; we are as men, in a wilderness; fain,
perhaps, we would find the way to heaven but cannot; nay, the more we strive,
the further, out of the way; and this is the misery of every impenitent sinner.
Then, hence learn all such, to pray, with Jeremy, Chap. 31.18, 19, Convert thou
us, O Lord, and we shall be converted, Lam. 5.21.

Secondly, refuse not the Lords corrections, but embrace them, as the Lords
love tokens; think they all cry unto thee, saying, as Elisha to the Assyrians,
2 King. 6.19. This is not the way: and look, how thou would rejoice, if in a
dangerous journey thou should have one but to tell thee, thou were wrong,
etc. 2. Because these are, indeed, but dumb guides; learn to depend on the
Ministry of the word: God has given us all, in our places, to be guides, and
directors unto you; as Paul, Act. 26.18. God sends us to open the eyes, that ye
may turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God; See
Act. 3. ult.

This should admonish every one of us, to be diligent in admonition; as, Iam.
5.19, 20. Look, what we would do, if we met with a travellour out of the way;
so, etc. especially, strive we to be guides unto them, by our example Heb.
12.13. Make strait steps to our feet, lest that which is halting be turned out
of the way.

The nature of repentance: And that is here briefly described, to be a
returning unto God; so every where, Hos. 14.1. Joel. 2.13, Act. 26.18.;
therefore, commonly, the working of it, is called conversion; and men
repenting, are called converts; as Nicholas the convert, or proselyte of
Antioch; Act. 6.5.

Let us all try our repentance, by this; that we may see,

Sundry notes there are of it.

First, as preparatives, there are these things. 1. Knowledge of our sins, and
of our errors, Ier. 3.12, 13. The Lord thus exhorts the people of Israel; thou
disobedient Israel, return, says the Lord, and I will not let my wrath fall
upon thee; how may this be performed? Know thin^ iniquity, that thou have
rebelled against the Lord thy God 2. A second preparative, is shame, Ier.
31.18. I was ashamed; Romans 6.21. Whereof ye are now ashamed. 3. A third, is,
indignation, 2 Cor. 7.11. I smote upon my thigh, Ier. 31.18. 4. Enquiry after
God; See Act. 2.37. What shall we do? And, Act. 16.30. What must I do? 5.
Deprecation, Hos. 4.2. Take unto you words, and say, receive us graciously. 6.
Thankfulness, ibid. 7. As a sign of all this, holy obedience in all things.

The last observation, is, the benefit of repentance; I will return unto you.

Sense: The Lord is said to be with us, when he favors us, giving us
testimonies, and pledges of his love; Isa. 54.7. To go from us, when he removes
the signs of his favor; and, to return unto us, when he restores us the
comfortable pledges of his loving kindness: So that, the meaning is this;
return to me by repentance, I will return unto you; that is, whereas I have
now, a long time, withholden the pledges of my love, and by judgments
inflicted, have testified my displeasure against you; return to me, I will
restore my blessings inward, and outward.

This then the benefit of repentance; it draws down from the Lord his blessings
in abundance; it turns away his wrath, brings us the pledges of his love, and
favor.

And, but his hand is stretched out still, Isai. 9.12. Wonder we at this?
Surely, the cause is this, our not returning unto the Lord by repentance; would
we recover the Lords favor? return we then unto him; let the wicked forsake
his own unrighteousness, Isai. 55.7. Prove the Lord with this, if he will not
open us the windows of Heaven, and pour down his blessings, in a bundance;
Isai. 1.26.

The like say I of all other pledges of Gods favor, whereof he has deprived
us; health a blessing* peace of conscience, comfort in Gods service; would we
recover these? We have here the mean. And, see the experiment of it, in sundry
examples of the Lords dealing with his people, Psalm. 32.5. I said, I will
confefs my sin, and thou forgavest the punishment of my sin.

But, ye said, wherein shall we return?] Their justification of themselves.
Whence we note; Oserv.
that men deeplyest engaged in the guilt of sin, are hardlyest brought to
acknowledge their sin: See Luke 16.15. You are they, that justify your selves,
but God knows the heart; and what is highly esteemed amongst men, is abominable
in the sight of God. Reasons hereof many; but, principally, that very custom of
sin, wherein they have long lived, brings blindness upon the Understanding,
insomuch, that the grossest sins seem as no sins, after custom in them; See
Eccles. 4.12. They know not, that they do evil. 2. This falls by Gods just
judgment, giving them up to blindness, as Romans 1.28. (...), a mind void of
all judgment; so that, they speak evil of good, and good of evil, Isa. 5.20.
And therefore, be we exhorted, to take heed of that, which brings this judgment
upon us.

VER. 8, 9. Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me: But, ye say, wherein
have we robbed thee? In Tithes, and offerings: ye are cursed with a curse, for
ye have robbed me, even this whole nation.


THe Lord insisteth in their accusation, by mentioning a new crime; namely,
sacriledg, or spoiling of God himself. Where we note. 1. The crime laid to the
peoples charge, sacriledg. 2, Their apology, or justification of themselves. 3.
The amplyfication of the sin; they did, as none would do; no not Idolaters
themselves. 4. The proof of it, by instance. 1. In tyths, and offerings. 2. By
the signs, and effects; Gods curse upon them: Where is also the generality of
it, in the subject. This whole nation.

Will a man rob God?] Care of maintaining Gods worship is ingraffed in men, by
nature. Will a man spoil his gods? Though Idolaters err in their apprehension,
yet, when they have once conceived a godhead, they are careful to maintain his
worship; and conscionably abstain from purloyning any thing that may thither
serve. This I might show in the very heathen themselves. How devout in dolatry?
How liberal in contribution, to maintain their divine worship? See what cost
the Egyptians were at, this way; what store of crafts-men maintained, by
Idolatry? How frets Laban, when he loses his gods? So Micah, Judge. 17. I might
be infinite this way: Reason is, the fear of natural conscience this way; which
howsoever it erreth in particulars, yet, for the general, holds the
conclusion, that God must be worshipped: And therefore sets up a stock, and a
stone, rather than it will be, without a god.

Then, Psalm. 14.1. 2. Call not upon the name of the Lord, ib. v. 4. 3. Light
esteem of the pledges of Gods favor, Heb. 12 15. as amongst us, of the word of
God; whereas, a child of God, buys the truth, and sells it not, Prove. 23.23.

Israelites, Exodus 32.3. Nothing so dear, but they part with, their very
Jewels, and earings, to make a Calfe; yea, children themselves made to pass
through the fire; and, Act. 19. How many craftsmen maintained, by that Idol
Diana? Baals Priests, how cut they themselves with knives, and lancers, 1 King.
18.28. Compare us with Papists; see we it not verified? how liberal are they in
maintaining the Idolatry, among them practiced? What pains take they in
Pilgrimages? And none appears empty-handed before the Idol.

Well, beloved, Matthew. 12.41.

Now, before I come to propound the doctrine, it shall not be amiss, a little
to handle the question, that here offers it seif to be discussed; lest we
think, this sin concerns us not.

Question of Tithes handled.
The question, then, is, whether tenths be, by divine right, belonging to the
ministry of the Gospel, for their maintenance?

Answ. herein, Cor. 7.6. I, not the Lord; the Lord, not I: I have no
commandment, but give advice.

Now, this is the judgment of some ancient, and modern Divines: That, by Divine
law, the tenths of all fruits, both predial, and personal, are due unto
ministers of the Gospel, by those very laws, that were given concerning the
Levites, Origin, in Number. Hom. 11. This law of Tithes, he thinks should be
observed, according to the letter. Hierome, upon this place, accords with him.
Austin makes Tithes to ministers, and tribute to Caesar, of equal right.
Divines, of late years, accord with them: Junius; Tithes, by all laws, of God,
nature, nations, have been hallowed unto God. Gaulter. in Matthew. 23. and Zepper
de leg. lib. 4.10. are peremptory, this way; and demand, with what reasons it
may be proved, that the law was merely ceremonial

Hear their reasons; because paid before the law, when ceremonies were not in
force; as by Abraham, to Melchizedech; this argument concludes not, for, even
some ceremonies were in force, before the law of ceremonies given in writing;
as sacrifices, etc.

Better reasons are these.

First, that we are not able to show, what was in this law ceremonial;
therefore, not so to be esteemed.

Secondly, Origin thus. As Gods blessings, under the new Testament, exceed
those vouchsafed unto the Jews; so should our maintenance: This proves thus
much only, that as liberal, if not more, is due to the ministers of the Gospel.

Thirdly, greatest reason that of Iunius; that by all laws due; very light of
nature taught Gentiles to hallow the tenth unto God; whence, may thus be
concluded. That what, by instinct of nature, is due, that is perpetual; for,
this is one rule, to discern judicial laws of common equity, from those of
equity particular; namely, if they be universally received by all nations; and
accord with the word of God: but thus, it is apparent, that in all ages of
heathen, they were due.

Fourthly, Ab absurdo, it seems not likely, that the Lord providing so
liberally for maintenance of Levites; would leave all uncertain to the devotion
of the people, under the new Testament; but other certainty, is not determined;
Ergo.

These reasons are something urgent: And, I must needs profess, to see no
certainty of answer to them.

A second opinion is, of them, that hold them to be due, by consequent, from
the law of God; though no direct law given concerning them. As, 1. From the
command of the Magistrate, to whom they imagine the Lord to have left
determining of particulars, only with this general; so it be competent. 2. By
virtue of confecration that way, either by vow, or other wholesome ordinance:
And thus they think them due unto us; so that he shall be guilty of sacriledg,
that withholds, or alienates them; Gal. 3.15. A (man's) testament no man
abrogates; Prove. 20.25. Its a destruction, to devour Holy things, and after
the vow, to enquire.

A third sort think them utterly unlawful, to be either paid, or exacted; in
as much, as it was a part of ceremonial law; and, for this cause, amongst
others, abandon society with our Church, because, as they say, we judaize in
maintaining our Ministers, by tenths: These need rather pity, in respect of
their zeal; then confutation of their judgment: It being a principle holden,
amongst all Divines; that judicial laws, especially, when there appears not
some evident cause why they should concern only the State of the Iowes, may
justily be revived in Christian Commonwealths; nay, that Commonwealths are
best governed, that come nearest that plat-forme.

What my judgment is, I will forbear to propose; professing only an inclination
this way; that they are due, by divine right, for some reasons before specified.

To leave these [Uncertainties:] See what the Scripture (certainly) teaches,
touching maintenance of the Ministry.

First of all, Cor. 9. 1. From common equity, verse. 7. 2. From voice of the
Law; the ox not muzled, verse. 9. 3. Spiritual things are ministered,
therefore, temporal things may be reaped. 4. A pari, they that serve at the
Altar, live by the Altar. 5. A sanctione Christi, God has ordained, etc. verse.
14.

2. That this must be a liberal maintenance, 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. double honor;
Gal. 6.6. Made partaker of all his goods; 1 Timothy 3.2. How, else, given to
hospitality? due from all that partake in benefit of instruction: Again, this
the word teaches morally; that magistrates are to be obeyed, in things
lawful, for conscience sake, Romans 13.5.

3. That things consecrated unto Gods service, may not be alienated to other
uses, out of case of necessity, Prove. 20.25. Gal. 3.15.

Out of all which, I think this conclusion arises; that Tithes (of England)
are due by Gods Law, to the maintenance of the Ministry; if not directly, yet,
by consequent; if not, in specie, yet in the aequivalent: Whence, this
conclusion will soundly follow; that, to detain any thing belonging to
maintenance of the Ministry, is Sacriledg; let it be colored with never so
goodly pretenses.

Now, Levit. 27, 30, 31. and may not, for ever, be alienated. 2. This holden by
all Divines; that so to alienate, as that there be not a liberal maintenance
for the Minister, for all works of his calling, is generally holden an accursed
practice: And, what maintenance is this, Micah's allowance? Judge. 17. A, Livery
diet, and ten shekells of silver; surely, the platform I think was first taken
from that Idolater: But, beloved, let such men consider, how many souls perish,
for lack of Ministers: I know what they say, blame the law: Be not deceived,
God is not mocked. Gal. 6.7. There is a law of equity should guide every
christian, and they should be laws unto themselves.

Ob. Ministers covetous.

Answ. So, indeed, they say, who are deeplyest engaged this way; but, it will
be hard to prove, that desire of a competency, comes under the censure of
covetousness.

Secondly, guilty of this sin also, are all those that detain any thing due,
from the maintenance of the worship of God: I know it will be said, I am now in
my own harvest. But, since it pleases God, to give so just occasion; judge, I
pray you, in charity; that I preach of conscience, not of commodity.

And, this let me say, from my own, and other men's experience; men most
liberal to other profane uses, think any thing too much, that is given to the
Ministry.

What should be the cause of it? Surely. 1. That root of all evil,
covetousness. 2. Lack of feeling sweetness, and comfort, by the Ministry;
surely, if Spiritual things were reaped, temporal things would flow, of own
accord. But, to what cause should we impute the scanthandedness of men
professing of Religion, and the fear of God; that they, notwithstanding, should
so niggardly contribute; and paying never so little, look for a cap, and
courtesy from the Minister?

Let me add some Reasons, for exhortation. 1. Its an honoring of God, Prove.
3.9. 2. It argues, that we have tasted sweetness in the word, and are, indeed,
partakers of spiritual things. 3. Consider but the example of very Idolaters,
this way; as of papists, at this day: and, let it shame us Christians. 4.
Detaining brings Gods curse, Prove. 20.25.5. Mark, what the Lord here speaks, it
brings down scarcity, and famine upon the land.

Ye are cursed with a curse] The punishment; the generallity of it; obstinacy
of the Jews, notwithstanding thus afflicted.

Common sins draw down common judgments: Go out, lest thou partake of her
plagues.

What does this teach us? but as Solomon says, Prove. 1.10. If sinners entice
us, not to consent unto them.

Quest. What is then to be done? Must we leave the world?

Answ. There may be a just dwelling among sinners, and wicked men. 1. If there
be mourning for their sins, Ezekiel. 9.4. 2 Pet. 2.8. 2. If we partake not with
them, any way, by consent, countenance-giving, fellowship in evil, Ephesians. 5.11.
3. If there be a reproof of their evil, within bounds of our calling. 4. An
hindering, within bounds of our calling, Neh. 13. Josh. 24.

Yet ye have robbed me] Note here the amplyfication of the sin; yet ye spoil
me. This is ever an aggravating circumstance in sin, Neh. 13.18. Yet, ye
increase the wrath: Ezr. 9.13. After all this, Jer. 5.3. Thou have smitten
them, but they have not sorrowed.

And this the common sin of these times. Ier. 8.6. etc.

VER. 10. Bring ye all the Tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat
in mine house; and prove me now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will
not open you the windows of Heaven, and pour you out ablessing, that there
shall not be room enough to receive it, etc.


IN the former verse, was a reproof of sacriledg. We have here a duty
prescribed, as a remedy, for removal of that curse of God now upon them.
Wherein consider we. 1. The duty, Bring all the Tithes into my storehouse. 2.
Reasons persuading the duty. 1. Abundance promised. 2. Means of their penury
removed. 3. That all nations shall call you blessed.

For the duty, see we, 1. What it is. 2. Form of it.

Bring ye all my Tythes] For this was the ordinance of God, partly, to free the
Levites from distractions; and partly, to prove the fidelity, and willingness
of the people, this way, that they should bring the Tithes to the place
appointed; a storehouse provided for that purpose, Deuteronomy. 14.28, 29.

Whereas the Lord propounds this mean to remove his wrath; we may observe, what
course to take, Oserv.
when Gods hand is upon us; namely, to give our selves to practice of those
duties, for omission whereof, Gods wrath is come out against us: and this
propounded, Isa. 1.16. So, in Moses, Exodus 4. Isa. 9.12, 13.

Reason is, because that cause remaining, the effect must needs stay upon us:
The Lords wrath is compared to a fire, Isa. 10.17. Wicked men, they are as the
fuel; impenitency as the bellows, that blow it, till it have utterly consumed.

This then let us do, Jeremy, Lam. 3.48. Search and try his ways, and turn
unto the Lord. Beloved, we have seen, and do see the infallible evidences of
Gods wrath upon us; and just cause have we to fear, lest greater plagues, than
these, hang over our heads. Surely, as many evidences of it we see still before
our eyes, as any nation; how the Lord has gathered his Saints from evil to
come, Isa. 57.1. How stubbornly, and securely, we walk still toward our God,
who sees not? Beloved, these are the forerunners of some heavy judgment.
Would we prevent it? Remove the cause of it, that is, every man his own sins:
What duties we have been slack in, let us learn, now, zealously to practice.
And, to see the behavior of our people, in all these judgments, it is strange.
Some little wonderment we can make, how it should come to pass, that the Lord
should be thus incensed against us; never free from one judgment, or another;
One while sword; another while, pestilence; another while, famine; and one
blames this cause, another that: Poor, they cry out, it comes from wealthy, and
their hearts are hard: Rich blame the poor, and its a plague for them; few or
none, enters into his heart, to say, what have I done, that all this wrath is
come upon me? Ier. 8.6. Whereas, if we would not flatter our selves, how many
causes of these, and far greater judgments, should we find in our selves?
Oaths, drunkenness, abusing Gods graces to wantonness, contempt of the word,
etc. And, I wish there were such hearts in us, thus to do; how should we find
the Lord true in the proof, to remove his judgments, and wrath from us! and,
till this be done, never look we for peace, Levit. 26.21, etc. 2 King. 19.22.

Again,

Bring] Even withour craving: Al] nothing detained: When the tabernacle was to
be erected, mark, what charge the Lord gives touching it; and what manner of
offerers thereto he required, Exodus 25.2. of every man, whose heart gives it
freely; and, 35.5, 21, 22. their practice followed, in both kinds, Exodus 36.5,
6. So plentiful, that they were fain to restrain bringing; See also 2 Chr.
31.5, 6. Herein, especially, that has place; The Lord loves a cheerful, and
liberal giver; 2 Cor. 9.7.

But, ah brethren, what times are we fallen into, under the Gospel! As an
eminent Divine has well observed, our blessings are more, in the means of
salvation, revelation, clearness, burden less; etc. And yet, how unwillingly
come, even a little to the painfullest Minister? And those, that upon a kind
of conscience, pay other duties, think all lost, that goes to the maintenance
of the Ministry; and that with such repining, as if that were money, of all
other, worst bestowed: And secondly, scant-handedness, this way, how is it seen
in the best? that we need not wonder at it, in those, that never tasted the
sweetness of the word of God: at the building of the tabernacle, they were fain
to proclaim a sufficet; and 2 Chro. 31.5, 6. They brought it in by heaps, when
Hezekia'hs commandment went forth: But, I conclude this point, with the saying
of the Apostle, Gal. 6.8. He that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap
corruption; he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life
everlasting.

Follows now the reason, Gods promise; which is not barely propounded, but in a
Rhetorical permission: Prove me now with this; as if he had said, many means
you have assayed, to remove my judgments, and to supply your penury, and all to
no purpose; and, it may be, you think, guessing by second apparent causes, that
this is impossible, at least unlikely; well, prove me with this; etc. make
trial of this one means, for recovery of my favor.

Two things. 1. What the Lord permits to his people; prove me. 2. Wherein, or
how they should take experiment of him.

Prove me] Make but a trial, and if the event answer not, then say, I have
forgotten my truth: David, Psalm. 34.8. Where, having set out the notable, and
to wicked men incredible privileges of the Children of God at length, he thus
speaks; taste and see how gracious the Lord is, and you shall find it true,
that blessed is the man, that trusts in him.

And, beloved, if those wretches, that make a mock at the counsel of the poor,
because God is his hope; and cannot be persuaded of the sweetness, that is in
religion, would but make trial a little* if they would but make proof, how
comfortable the service of God is, how happy were they! David, Psalm. 4.7.
Speaking of the joy the wicked had in earthly things, professed; that he found
far more comfort and joy, in the service of God, then they had, or could have,
in the increase of their corn, wine, and oil: And, if those sluggardish fools
amongst us, that have a price put into their hands to get wisdom, but have no
heart, would consider this! They think it is too late to learn; their wits, and
memories, are grown dull: Oh yet, do but prove the Lord; wait at the posts of
his doors, hear, read, confer, pray God, prove him a little; he has promised,
that they that seek wisdom shall find, Prove. 2.4. Prove him, and see, whether
thou find him not full as good as his promise.

There is an unlawful, and damnable proving, and trying of the Lord; we call it
commonly, tempting God. It is, when men presumptuously make needless
experiments of the truth of God, especially in his threatenings. The Lord has
given charge unto the people of Israel, that they should, on the evening of the
Sabbath, provide for that might suffice, on the Sabbath; and told them, that on
the Sabbath, they should find none; notwithstanding, there went out some,
Exodus 16.27. To gather on the Sabbath day: they would try, whether the Lord
would be as good, as his word. So likewise, a charge he gave, that if the manna
they gathered for every days provision, they should keep none, till the
morning; yet, were there some, that would needs reserve, for experiment, to see
what would come of it; it was full of worms, and stank. He had likewise given
strict charge unto the people, that they should take heed of doing any thing,
presumptuously, against the Lord; and told them, they should dye; there goes
out one, notwithstanding, Number. 15. To gather sticks: he would try what the Lord
would do to him; and the Lord caused him to be stoned.

And, of this kind of presumptuous proving the Lord, the world is full. The
Lord has threatened to him that increases his riches by usury, and unjust
gain, that he shall lay it up for another: yet, mark, notwithstanding this be
exemplyfied still, in the course of Gods providence, they will prove the Lord;
and they will see, whether goods so gotten may not be permanent. So likewise,
that the companion of Drunkards shall be clothed with rags, how often see we
it exemplyfied? and yet, how many are there, that presumptuously will herein
prove the Lord! The Lord has taught us, that theordinary means to come by
faith, is, by the word of God; and that prayers are all cursed, and abominable,
when that is despised, Prove. 28.9. Yet mark, how many, presumptuously, make
trial of the Lord; and they, forsooth, will see, whether, by other means, they
cannot be saved. He has threatened, that he that deferrs repentance, when it is
offered, shall never come to repentance, Ezekiel. 24.13. Yet, how many be there,
that herewith prove the Lord! they will put it to the trial, and see whether
repentance may not come, on the deathbed. Beloved, this is a fearful provoking
sin; and they, that thus prove him, shall find him, in the proof, a terrible
God to them.

What then is this proof of the Lord, herepermitted unto the people of God? It
is, when a man, in faith of Gods promise, uses those means prescribed for his
comfort, expecting, by hope, the performance of what is promised.

And it has in it, three things. 1. A promise of God, to rest on. 2. Walking
in the ways, that God has prescribed. 3. Expectation of performance, in use
of the means. Or, briefly thus; when a man using the means prescribed, waits
for the performance of what is promised: as, in this place, here is. 1. Promise
of plenty. 2. The means, repentance. 3. Faith, in use of the means prescribed.

Now, when a man fails in any of these, he proves God, indeed; but, that
proving is tempting: As for example, when a man throws himself into an
unnecessary danger, he has no promise of protection; as the devil tempted
Christ to do, Matthew. 4.6. He may make experiment of Gods truth, so doing; but
indeed, is a tempter of God. So likewise, when a man having holy means
prescribed, neglects to use them; as, having meat, looks to be fed, as Elias
was, by Angels, that he may prove God; this also is tempting of God.

See we the means, with this, now prescribed; the observation will be.

A man, that would have a comfortable experience of Gods truth in his promises,
Act. 27.31. The Apostle had received a promise from God, for preservation of
him, and his company, in the shipwreck; they seeing the ship like to break,
begin by means (not prescribed) to provide for themselves; but the Apostle tells
them, that unless they tarry in the ship, they cannot be safe.

And, let it teach us, to walk in Gods highway, if we look for comfortable
deliverance,

Reproved those that neglect the means vouchsafed; as, how many both in
temporal, and spiritual things, there be, that fain would be saved; but means
of their own they seek; at least, neglect use of means, by God prescribed, and
vouchfafed unto them.

Secondly, such, as in dangers, and extremities, betake themselves to means of
their own, that have no warrant from God. As, how many in these days of
scarcity, to pilfering, and stealing, profanation of the Lords Sabbath etc.
Though the Lord? has often protested, that obedience is the best means of
preservation, Deuteronomy. 28.

If I will not open the windows of Heaven] See Genesis 7.11. 2 King. 7.2.
Meaning, that the Lord would give them plentiful means, and a plentiful
blessing with them.

Where, note the power of repentance, how prevalent it is with God, to draw
down his blessings upon us: it turns the greatest penury into abundance. See
this, first, in feigned repentance, by Ahab: it respits Gods vengeance, though
but counterfeit, 1 King. 21. ult. In Nineveh, Who knows, says the King,
whether the Lord will repent of the evil, and return, and leave a blessing
behind him? See Jon. 3.10. See Psalm. 106. in the example of the Israelites.

Beloved, let us prove God with this. It has pleased God, a long time, to
follow us with his judgments, Amos 4. And what marvel? Isa. 9.12, 13. If the
Lords wrath be not ceased, but his hand stretched out still; since the people
turns not to him that smites them, nor seek the Lord of Hosts.

Now, beloved, that we could be persuaded, by repentance, to seek the Lord, and
would prove him, a whiles, with this, as we have provoked him by our sins; so,
we would prove him, a little, with repentance; how easily could the Lord turn
our penury, into abundance? It was a profane speech of the Prince, 2 King.
7.2. Though the Lord should open the windows of Heaven, this thing could not
come to pass. And, as profane is the thought of our people; because, perhaps,
we see no means: men's hearts (we say) are hardend, etc. But, in whose hand are
the hearts of men? How moved he the hearts of the people, that led Israel
captive, to pity them? Psalm. 106.46. See Gods favor to Israel, in the eyes of
the Egyptians, that before had oppressed them; neither is his hand shortened.
Prove the Lord with this.

Observe again, secondly, how plenty, and scarcity, are all the works of God;
He turns the rock into a spring; he makes a fruitful land barren; he makes
the earth iron, and the Heavens brass. Again, he opens the windows of Heaven;
he brought grass-hoppers upon Egypt; he calls for a wind, and sweeps all away.
He sends the Canker-worm, and grass-hopper, to devour, as his instruments, to
be avenged of our sins; it is he that rebukes them, etc. Amos 3.6. No evil, to
wit, of punishment, but the Lord does it.

Now, Elias prays for drought, it is given; prays for rain, it is given also,
Iam. 5.17, 18. So, in these inundations of late, the winds observed, but God
not seen in them; though, as David says, he brings the winds out of his
treasures.

Well, beloved, let us learn to hear the rod, and him that smites, Mic. 6.8.
Surely, of all these means we may say, as Elias of the still voice; the (Lord)
is in them, 1 King. 19.12.

And, what else, should be the reason, that the same causes have not always
the same effects, but that the first cause tempers, and overrules them? Nature
ever works constantly, and to the utmost of her power. Natural faculties are
applied, and brought to action, by the power of God. And therefore take we the
Prophets advice, Hos. 6.1. as the Lord has smitten us, so to him let us
return, it is he alone, that can heal us.

VER. 11. And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, etc.


NOte we here, Egyptians, by grasshoppers, froggs, lice, flies, hail, etc.

And, let us learn hence, to take heed, how we provoke the eyes of the Lords
glory;

VER. 13, 14, 15. Your words have been stout against me, says the Lord: yet
ye say, what have we spoken so much against thee? Ye have said, it is vain to
serve God, etc,


THe crime laid to their charge, stout words against God: In them consider the
blasphemies themselves. 1. Vain to serve God. 2. Proud blessed. Arguments,
whereby they prove it. 1, From their own experience, what profit have we had?
The interrogation denies; that is, none at all. 2. From the present prosperity
of the wicked; they are exalted, and delivered.

Mark here, how one sin draws in another, Judas harbored covetousness; what
villainy brought that him unto? even to betray innocent blood.

The reason whereof is this; Gods judgment upon them; giving them up to
hardness of heart, Romans 1.28. Which also we see verifyed, in common experience.

Let it admonish us, to take heed how we harbor any one sin in our hearts,
Hazael, 2 King. 8.12, 13. When Elisha tells him, with what cruelty he should
use the people of God; what, is thy servant a dog, that I should do this
thing? so, many of us: But, consider we. 1. How strongly we are inclined to
every sin, by nature; not blasphemy, not murder, not Atheism excepted: that
any of us are not as vile, as the vilest Atheist, it proceeds from Gods grace
restraining us. 2. That we have no other bridle, but the grace of God, Genesis
20.6. I kept thee: and, longer then this Divine bridle curbs us, no hope of
stay; man, says Job, is, in his nature, born as the wild asses colt in the
wilderness; he drinks iniquity like water; when that bridle is gone, whither
run we not? even to those sins, that nature teaches, to be abominable. 3.
Consider, into whose power we come, when the Lord gives us over, even to the
power of Satan, Ephesians. 2.2, 3. that works in the children of disobedience; he
must needs go, we say in the proverb, whom the devil drives. 4. How sins
themselves fret like cankers, 2 Timothy 2.17. and increase still to more
ungodlinese; evil men, and deceivers, grow worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3.13.

Pray we, therefore, to God continually, to put his fear into our hearts, that
we may never depart away from him, Ier. 32.40. And, if any of us have fallen,
make haste to rise, not by colored, but by hearty repentance. Adultery drew
David to murder; if David, what stay have we of our selves?

Let us next consider the words themselves; its vain to serve God] See the like
profane speech of Atheists, Job. 21.15. Nor may we much marvail at this, in
profane men; for, its that, that has assaulted the dear servants of God; David
confesses so much of himself, Psalm. 73.13, 14.

What are the means, whereby the devil insinuates this thought into our
hearts? 1. It is the present afflicted State of Gods children, betwixt whom,
and wicked men, we can see no difference, in external things; nay rather, we
see affliction the portion of Gods children; outward prosperity granted to the
ungodly. 2. Another cause is, that we walk by sense, and not (as we ought) by
faith, 2 Cor. 5.7. And because, we sensibly feel not Gods love, therefore
think, he is not gracious unto us, nor regards us; and, how many times, upon
this ground, look we back to Egypt? 3. Too much admiring the things of this
life: The garishness of honor, and wealth, and pleasures, it so dazels our
eyes that we think them the only happy men, that enjoy them; our selves
miserable for nothing else, but for that we want them.

Let us then see a little, what profit there is in religion,

See we, then, the benefit of the service of God: this is of two sorts: 1. The
one seen and felt, in this life. 2. The other, in another life, 1 Timothy 4.8. The
benefits of this life are, either outward, or inward: Outward so free, and
warrantable use of all the creatures of God, 1 Cor. 3.21. And, what a benefit
is this? We use to say of our own; though but little, yet, its mine own, and I
may comfortably enjoy it; not so the case of wicked men. 2. A second benefit,
is, protection in common calamities, See Psalm. 37. and 91. And, howsoever it
please God to chastise particular disobedience, to take them away, sometimes,
with others; yet then fails he not of his promise, but turns into better. 3. A
third benefit is peace, Gal. 6.16. And that. 1. With God, Romans 5.1. Thus they
may assure themselves, in all hatred of men; yet, God loves them, and is
favorable unto them. 2. Peace with themselves, in their own conscience; that,
whereas the wicked and ungodly, are always, as the raging sea, Isai. 57, ult.
and no peace unto them; Gods children have peace in their conscience. 3. Peace
with all creatures, in Heaven, and Earth; the very Angels wait on them, Heb. 1.
ult. Devils themselves cannot hurt them. 4. Add unto these that which, indeed,
is the true riches, Iam. 2.5. and Luke 12. Plenty of knowledge; contentment in
all States, 1 Timothy 6, 8.

Now, beloved, if a man should consider these unspeakable joys, that God has
provided for his children; who can say, that it is in vain to serve the Lord*
Is it nothing, that a man has right to all creatures? Nothing, to be preserved
in common calamities? Nothing* to have Gods favor, peace of conscience, which
wicked themselves would, sometimes, redeem with all the world? Nothing, that
God has called us to a lively hope, to an inheritance immortal? 1 Pet. 14. Let
them so speak, that have no taste of these things; Gods children are otherwise
minded.

Now see among our selves, against these temptations; as 1. afflictions.

Answ. Mark first, their benefit present; how do they, being sanctified purge,
and subdue corruption! 2. They give us plentiful experience of Gods favor,
Romans 5. 2 Cor. 12. 3. That incomparable crown of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. See Moses,
Heb. 11.25.

Ob. This we always see not.

Answ. Walk by faith, not by feeling. God sometimes seems to hide himself from
us, (see Job 13.) and that for our good; for, hereby he magnifies faith, and
returns to us with new favors.

2. Glory of riches.

Answ. See but their vanity; how little avail they, in the day of Gods wrath!
Prove. 11.2. and, withal, consider, how to the wicked, they become occasions of
many foul sins, and so of heavier condemnation; bringing with them also, in the
mean time, much disquietness; riches being often reserved for the hurt of the
owners.

3. We have deserved better.

Answ. Consider what we have deserved, indeed, and we shall see; it is not the
least mercy, but the heaviest wrath* And, even in the best service, there is
some imperfection, etc. And thus may we armor selves, against this temptation.

What profit] Mark here the nature of a carnal man; Job. 21.15. Ier. 44.17, 18.
1 Timothy 6.5. The reason whereof, is, nothing, but earthly mindedness, Phil.
3.19. Their belly is their God, they mind earthly things.

Let me apply it to the times: Ioh. 7.48. Now, brethren, though that be not
generally true; for, it pleases God to show his power; and, though not many
rich, and mighty, 1 Cor. 1.26. Yet some; and, see how rich these others are in
faith, Iam. 2.5.

And here, let us a little see, why it pleases the Lord to keep his children
so low, in this life. Reasons are. 1. To mortify, and abate their sins: Thou
blessest thy self, in the multitude of thy riches; Oh, how blessed were it for
thee, if thou had less wealth, and more grace! And, what happiness should the
Lord do thee, if he would deprive thee of that abundance, that steals away
thine heart from God! 2. To justify their sincerity, that it may be seen, they
serve not God, for commodity, Job 1.9. 3. To teach them, and us all, that the
hope of a Christian, is not in this life, 1 Cor. 15.19. 4. To magnify the
power of his grace* in their weakness, and infirmity.

Secondly, how many are there, that even for this, refuse to embrace religion,
because, they see, religion allows them not their benefits. They could be
content to be religious, as the young man, in the Gospel; but, they love not
the conditions, such strictness; that a penny must not be gotten, but with good
conscience. Now mark, my brethren, Mar. 10.30. that Christ has promised all
that may be expedient; and would thou have wealth that should hinder thy
salvation? 2. Consider, that if thou lose all, yet God gives contentment; and
that is a benefit, which no worldling can attain. If thou see but the carking
and toil, that such earthworms are put unto, methinks, thou should never
envy them their plenty, with such conditions. 3. Observe what a company of
noisome lusts they pierce themselves through withal. 4. With the Lord are
durable riches, Prove. 8.18.

Lastly, such also as for the exchange of things in these days of the Gospel,
run back, in their affections, to Popery. As the Israelites, when they came to
the wilderness, and were but a little pinched with hunger, cry out; it had been
better for them, to have sitten by the fleshpots, and garlic, and onyons of
Egypt. And, how many such, that wish for Popery, for no other end, then that
they might again enjoy the old plenty, and happiness of all things.

And now, we call the proud happy] That is, they thought those that walked in
the stubbornness of their hearts, against God, more happy, than they. Reason,
because they were delivered, and freed from afflictions. Shall I need to say,
This is the state and opinion of our people. How do they applaud the state of
ungodly men, in respect of their outward prosperity? And, how happy think they
such, as abound with things of this life, though wholly destitute of the graces
of Gods Spirit? yet look but upon such a professor, you shall see him less
friended, less honored, and living at less hearts ease, Now, that we fall not
into this blasphemy; let us see, a little, the reason, why it pleases God,
thus to deal with ungodly men? And, ye shall find, he does it, for this end.

First, to fat them against the day of slaughter, as we are wont to put our
cattle destined to the slaughter, into the fattest, and fairest pastures, Prove.
1.32. Ease slays the foolish; see also, Psalm. 37. and 73.

Secondly, to teach his own children, not too much to admire the things of this
life, which they see the very wicked themselves may be, and are partakers of:
Who would dote upon those things, which when a man has, make him, never a
whit, the more happy; yea, perhaps, further, through abuse, his condemnation?

Thirdly, to aggravate their judgment, when as by so many blessings of God,
they have been allured to obedience; and have had so plentiful means of doing
good, and yet have done none.

Fourthly, therefore does the Lord put such power into their hands, that he
may, by them, exercise, and chasten the disobedience of his children, Isa.
10.5. They are Gods hangmen, and executioners.

Now, for the second part, that, in all these things, they are not happy, what
need I stand long to prove? Presupposing supposing them to be such, as are here
described.

First of all, it is an argument, that the Lord has utterly rejected them from
his love; for a man to prosper, and to be delivered, continuing his sin, Hosh.
4.14. Among many curses, this is one of the most grievous, when the Lord gives
a sinner prosperity in his sin; this hardens the heart, and makes them please
themselves in their wickedness: Therefore, see the contrary promised unto Gods
children, Psalm. 89.31, 22. Therefore, says David, blessed is the man, whom
thou chastenest always, and teach in thy way, Psalm. 94.12. and 1 Cor.
11.32. We are chastened of the Lord, that we might not be condemned with the
world; and, a thousand times better is this state, then his, whose sins the
Lord-winks at, without chastisement: And therefore, envy them not in this,
whilst their hearts are fleshed in their sins, 2. Consider what Job has; the
rejoicing of the hypocrite is but short, and Job 21. 3. The fears, wherewith
they are perplexed, Dan. 5. 4. Have no assurance of pardon of sins; wherein,
notwithstanding, blessedness, indeed, consists, Psalm. 32.1. 5. Have their
portion in this life, and only here, Mat. 6.5.

Yea, they that tempt God are even delivered] Let us, a little, see, what it
is: It is, generally, to make needless experiment of the truth, power, mercy,
justice of God.

Some try his clemency; some, his patience, Psalm. 78. Some, his justice, by
presumptuous sins; some, his power, in needless dangers; some, his wisdom,
whether God will assist, on the sudden: Each of these a step to, or a degree of
this sin. And, in some, in this place, its nothing else; but, when a man
presumptuously sins, as it were daring the Lord to take vengeance; See Number. 15.
The law of God, and execution of it.

Even they are delivered] Men of extremest impiety are, Psalm. 37. and 73. Ier.
12.1. etc.

But,

VER. 16. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another; and the
Lord hearkened, and heard it: and a book of remembrance was written before him,
for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name.


IN the words before, is set down the blasphemy of the wicked. In the words now
read, is expressed the behavior of those, that fear God: they spoke. 2. The
blessedness of them that fear him; they are. 1. Gods peculiar. 2. Fatherly
clemency promised them; and, the use, and even of it; containing a confutation
of the blasphemy of the wicked; men shall return, and put difference; etc.

In the barrenest times of the Church of God, the Lord has some that fear him,
Genesis 6.12. When all flesh had corrupted their ways; there was found a Noah
upright before God, and a Preacher of righteousness: In the days of Elijah, 1
King. 19.18. Seven thousand reserved; Isai. 6.13. A tenth; in the days of our
Savior, when all was overgrown with superstition, were found Zachary, and
Elizabeth, Luke 1.5, 6. Rev. 3.4. A few names, that had not defiled their
garments. In the very heat of Antichrists reign, two witnesses Rev. 11.3. A few
that stood up for maintenance of Gods truth, in times of Arius, when the whole
world groaned, to see it self become an Arian. Athanasius raised up to maintain
Gods truth. Reason, that his Covenant, and promise may stand. His promise, and
Covenant made with the Church, is perpetuity; and howsoever, it be not tied to
any certain place, nor, in all times, has like number; yet some in all times,
in some places, stirred up, to maintain his truth. Romans 3. Though some
unfaithful, and deal untruly in the Covenant, yet God faithful, verse. 7. Mal.
3.6. I am the Lord, and change not, and ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. A
second reason is, because his worship must be everlasting, and without
interruption upon earth; he will have always some to worship him, in spirit,
and in truth: A third reason, for a testimony unto the wicked, that they might
not, at any time, plead ignorance of the truth, which they have oppugned, and
blasphemed; as, the Gospel must be preached, if not for conversion, yet for a
testimony unto them. Mat 24.14.

This, Psalm. 2.6. The drift of the Psalm is, to persuade all men, to submit
themselves to the dominion of Christ; and sundry reasons are set down: as. 1.
They, indeed, consult, and bind themselves, but, it is but a vain thing; yet,
says the Lord, have I set my King upon my holy hill of Zion. And, what though
tyrants, in all times, have set themselves to extirpate the very name of
Christ; yet, out of the very ashes of those slain for his testimony, have
sprung up others, to defend the Lords cause; 2 Timothy 2.9. I suffer trouble, even
unto bonds; yet the word of the Lord is not bound; that still has its free
passage, and that the swifter, by means of persecutions, Phil. 1.10. And, let
it admonish all those amongst us, if any such, that oppose themselves against
Gods truth, to lay down all their intendements; many attempts there have been,
to put out from amongst us, the very light of Gods truth, etc. Yet still, the
Lord stablisheth it; yea, beloved, as our Savior speaks, Luke 19.40. When the
Pharisees would have had our Savior rebuke his Disciples, for acknowledging
him the Messiah; If these should be silent, the stones would cry; that is,
rather, then God will have his truth unconfessed, undefended, he will make the
very stones of the streets to publish it: Wherefore, kiss the son, lest he be
angry; that is, submit to his dominion lest ye pe^ish from the way.



3. That they think upon his name.

The first of these properties, see in all the Saints of God, Job 32.19. When
Elihu had heard the fond reasonings, and censures of Jobs friends; as if
afflictions could not, with Gods justice, be inflicted on Gods servants; the
Spirit was in him, even as new wine in vessels, without vent, and he could not
keep silence. Jeremy, cap. 20.9. when he saw, that the word of God became a
reproach unto him, that the people fell a scoffing at his most serious
reprehensions, and severe denunciations of judgment against the sins of the
people, he professes of himself, that (in his weakness) he had resolved, and
almost vowed to speak no more, in the name of the Lord; but thy word (says he)
was in me as fire, and he was weary of bearing, when he heard the railing, and
blasphemy of the multitude, Psalm. 39.3. David, he also had a purpose to keep
silence before the wicked, but that samefiery Spirit of God, would not let him
be at rest, he must speak, or burst assunder, etc. See also, Act. 17. I might
be infinite this way. If any man demand the reason of it, it is nothing but
this, the ardent, and fiery love that is in them, to the glory of God; having
tasted of his love in Christ, they cannot endure to see Gods name dishonored;
life it self not so precious unto them, as Gods glory. Besides, this is the
very work of the Spirit of God, as our Savior, Matthew. 3.11. he is compared
unto fire; as in other respects, so for this also, that he is of a strong and
operative nature, in the hearts of the children of God; as Genesis 6.3. He is
said, in Noah, to have striven with men.

By this, let us try our selves, whether our hearts be possessed with the fear
of Gods name, indeed, or no: Beloved, we cannot have a surer testimony of the
soundness of Gods graces in us, then this; the fearless maintaining, and
defending of the Lords cause, against the adversaries, and blasphemers of Gods
truth. Look then, and see how thou find thy heart affected, when thou
hear the blasphemies of the multitude.

Beloved, these, and as great blasphemies, we are, some of us, forced to hear
from profane men, in the Church of God: Its vain, to serve God, and, what get
they, by theirzeale, but hatred, and obloquy, and trouble amongst men? Now,
when thou hear any of Gods truth's blasphemed, and evil spoken of; how
feel thou thy self affected? Goes it not to thy heart, nearer, than any
thine own outward reproach? else, suspect thy self.

And, alas, beloved, to see the state of most men, this way, argues a nullity
of Gods fear in their hearts. If it be but a friends name called in question,
how do we startle? If our own credit never so little impeached, and questioned,
that kindles us, and sets all on fire; but, if Gods name be blasphemed, his
word traduced, his ordinances violated, etc. How keep we silence, as if this,
of all other things, did least concern us. Beloved, this is the effect of Gods
fear in the hearts of his children, to be much affected at the dishonor of his
name.

When Iehu approached near unto Iesabel, and espied her, in her window,
trimming her self, after the fashion of harlots; he cries out to them with her.
Who is on my side, who? and the Eunuchs threw her down. Beloved, the Lord
seems, 2 King. 9.32.
sometimes, thus to say to us, in the extremities of the peoples blasphemies;
and he seems to cry unto us, Who is on my side? If then thou be silent; that
which our Savior has, Matthew. 12.30. will be here applied; who is not him, is
sure against him; and so shall be accepted, in the day of acounts.

A second property, that they labor to edify, and exhort each other, that
they may preserve them from infection by those, who labor to overthrow their
faith; as here, these Atheists they begin to publish it, it is vain to serve
God; Now, lest the people of God should hereby be poisoned; they that fear God,
begin to confirm their brethren, every one his neighbor; as if he had said,
look not to these blasphemous wretches; for, surely, the Lord hearkens, and
hears, etc. And this, as it is the practice of Gods Saints, every where, so
has it the precept, and commandment of God, Jude 23. Edify one another in
your most holy faith. Heb. 10.24. Provoke to love, and to good works; See Psalm.
34.8. And, indeed, it is one end, why God endues us with his graces, namely, to
strengthen our brethren, Luke 22.32. See, 1 Cor. 12.7.

Let us then be all exhorted, in these declining days, strengthen the weak
knees, comfort the feeble-minded, 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. Heb. 12.13. and provide that
that which is halting, be not turned out of the way, but may rather be healed.
And, beloved, sundry reasons there are for it. 1. The evilness of the times,
wherein we see it verifyed; that the love of many waxes cold. 2. Look we to
the carriage of all things; and see, whether we find it not true, that these
Atheists here speak of; the wicked are set up; so that, if there were not an
expectation of another life, it were better to be any thing, even the vilest
miscreant, then to profess the fear of the Lord. 3. Those many discouragements,
that we shall see raised up to the Children of God. Beloved, if ever that were
needful, that our Savior speaks, strengthen thy brethren, Luke 22.32. Now are
the days. 4. And, methinks, if there were no other reason, then that
industrious, and never wearied pains of the adversary, to subvert the faith of
Gods Children, it should move us: Shall the limbs of the devil be more
painful, to overthrow, then we to build up the Church of Christ? Thus then let
us do: And, let no man say, they shall, every one, bear their own burden; for,
even to us shall be imputed their ruin, if they perish, through defect of our
admonition.

This is an evil that I have seen, under the sun; would God, it were not found
in Jacob, even in our own congregation! to say nothing of that opinion, which
our practice testifies us, to be possessed withal, of overmuch strictness, in
the service of God. How many such pestilent instruments has Satan, every
where, that insinuate into the minds of the simple, and ignorant, opinions of
Atheism, yea persuasions thereto? Whose damnation is just.

Third sign, and property of them; they think upon Gods Name. For explication,
know we, that Gods name is, sometimes, put for the Majesty of God himself;
sometimes, for his glory; whether sense we take it, it matters not. Its true,
that a man fearing God, his property is always, Psalm. 16.8. The Lord is ever,
and continually, in his meditation: Or, if we take the other sense, this also
shall be found their practice; they think upon his name, that is, that is one
principal part of their care, and study, how God may be glorified, and his
name kept from dishonor, and blasphemy: That, whereas the uttermost care of a
worldling is, how he may grow great upon earth; the care of Gods children is,
how God may best be glorified; and he is ever devising something, within the
compass of his calling, how far glory may come to the Name of God. When David
was now at rest, and sat in his house; mark, what thoughts his mind was
possessed withal; considering what an house he had built for himself, to dwell
in; he thus speaks to Nathan his seer: Behold, says he, I dwell in an house of
Cedar trees; but, the Ark of the Lord remains in the curtains; it seems, he
more discontented himself, that that had not been his principal, and first
thought, that the glory of God should have been provided for.

By this also try we our selves, and our uprightness in the sight of God.
Surely, who so finds not this in himself, that his principal thought, and care
is, that God may be glorified; I may boldly say of that man, he is none of Gods.

Quest. Is it then not lawful, to think of the things of this life?

Answ. No doubt, yes; but, in getting of these, this is the difference betwixt
Gods children, and another. That which the man who fears God, aims at, is
this; that God may be glorified; so, in sports, no doubt lawful, so be, they
are lawfully and moderately used; but, look that this be thy end, that thou
may be fitter to glorify God, and do him service; else, thou usest
recreations as an Epicure, not as a child of God.

Well, now hear what it is, that they avouch. A book of remembrance is written
for those that fear God] This is spoken, after the manner of men, for our
capacity; that, as men use, for better remembrance, to keep a book of
memorandum's, that they may not forget; See Hest. 6.1. So, this is attributed
unto God, to signify unto us, that he does certainly remember the services of
his children.

Hence then, the collection is easy; Heb 6.10. God is not unrighteous, that he
should forget your work, and labor of love, which ye have showed to his name;
Psalm. 16.8. Thou tellest my wanderings, and put all my tears into thy
bottle; all things noted in the Lords register; See Neh. 13.14, 22, 31. Yea,
Matthew. 25, 44. Those things that the Saints had forgotten, the Lord remembers;
See Esth. 9.32.

This should encourage Gods children, in his service; yea, though they see
their services amongst men, altogether to want recompense, and reward; and
though the Lord long delay, yet, at length, in due time, we shall reap, if we
faint not, Gal. 6.9.

This also should encourage Ministers, though of all others, their labors be
most slenderly regarded amongst men, as Isai. 49.4. I have labored in vain, I
have spent my strength; nevertheless, my judgment is with the Lord, and my work
with my God. Thus should Magistrates encourage themselves, though for
conscionable discharge of duties, they receive nothing amongst men, but shame,
and reproach; let it be enough, as Nehemiah prays, that the Lord remembers
thee in this: So, in works of mercy: though, perhaps, thou fear to lose it,
even as if thou should cast it down the waters, yet, after many days, thou
shall find it, Eccles. 11.1. etc.

Again, does the Lord remember the good works, and words of his servants? No
doubt, he has also, then, his remembrance-book, his register, for the ungodly;
See Rev. 20.12. The books are opened; a glympse whereof we may see in that
little book of the conscience; which though in times of peace, it be as a book
shut up; yet, in judgments of God, lays open it self to the view of ungodly
men. Joseph's brethren, a long time, carried away the matter smoothly; but, at
length, in affliction, mark, how conscience shows its record; Genesis 42.21, 22.
Now, his blood is required: Herod had slain John Baptist with the sword, Mat.
14. Mark how, when he hears of the fame of Christ, conscience is his
remembrancer; John Baptist's blood still runs in his mind.

Now, beloved, that this one persuasion might be settled in our hearts; no
doubt, it would restrain many of our sins: and those conclusions of Atheism,
Psalm. 94.7. God sees not, or regards not, or, (his memory oppressed with
multitude) forgets, breeds all this Atheism, and profaness in practice.

Consider then, beloved, what the Lord, every where, teaches, Psalm. 50.21, 22.
I will set thy sins before thee, in order: Words, we think, are wind; and, with
us, soon forgotten; yet, says our Savior, every idle word shall come to be
reckoned for, at the day of judgment; Mat. 12.36. And, let me say, as David,
Psalm. 50.22. Consider this, ye that forget God; there is not an oath, that
thou swearest, but the Lord knows it; there is not an idle word, but the Lord
takes notice of it; not a wanton look, but the Lords eye sees it; etc. And, if
this were thought of, much wickedness would be restrained.

VER. 17. And, they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that day, when I
make up my Jewels; and I will spare them. as a man spares his own son that
serves him.


THe blessings of God upon those that fear him. They shall be unto me a flock,
peculium cordis: some read, Res desideratissima, or, as some, his chief
treasure: mark here the privileges of those that fear God; they are called
Gods peculiar, his lot, and his inheritance. Secondly, that the Lord will spare
them; which is set down in a similitude.

The blessings that this includes. 1. Singular protection: there is an
universal providence and protection, that is vouchsafed unto all his creatures;
Thou Lord shall save both man, and beast: There is a special protection, which
the Lord vouchsafes unto men, 1 Timothy 4.10. The Savior of all men. There is,
thirdly, a singular protection, which he carries over the Church, and those,
in it, that fear him; specially, of them that believe. Besides the singular
blessings, and gifts, that he vouchsafes unto them; there are common graces,
which he vouchsafes unto all; as general knowledge; more special vouchsafed, to
them that fear him, see Exodus 19.5.

That which we learn hence, is,

First, separation from the wicked; that, as the Lord singles us out, from the
rest of mankind, to be his peculiar; so should we separate our selves from the
corruptions of the times, see 2 Cor. 7.1.

Secondly, comforts that hence arise to Gods children; as assurance of defense
in all miseries, and calamities.

The next privilege promised, is sparing, or mercy; see Psalm. 103.13. Whence
observe we, that remission of sins is a blessing peculiarly belonging to the
Church of God; Ioh. 17. to these only God is a father. And it confutes the
opinion of such, as make remission of sins, a common gift: for thought it be
so, in respect of offer, and propounding; yet is it not so, in respect of
actual performance. Again, this, if there were no other thing, shows a
plentiful difference betwixt religion, and Atheism; in that, to the one, is
promised remission of sins; to the other not. This the treasure of the Church
of God: No sins are forgiven to a castaway; but, every sin, to a child of
God, Psalm. 32.1. 1 John 1.7.

And, this should comfort us against our infirmities, and imperfections, that,
alas! show themselves in every best duty, that we perform unto God; and this
that, which most humbles Gods children, their present weakness, and
imperfections considered; but, brethren, consider we, God is a father unto us;
and if he see in us, but a striving to perform our duties acceptably, that
desire is accepted, Heb. 13.18. 1 Pet. 2.5.

VER. 18. Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous, and the
wicked: between him, that serves God, and him that serves him not.


THat which, in sum, is hence observable, is this; serves God, and him that
seveth him not; the justice of God, and his truth requires it, 2 Thessalonians. 1.5.
Then shall Christ perfectly winnow the chaff from the wheat. 2. In common
judgments, the Lord delivers his, Ezekiel. 9.4.

3. The final consummation reserved for the time of the last judgment, when
the full separation shall be, Mat. 25.32.

And, this should stay Gods children, against that temptation, which arises
from that seeming confusion of things, in this life; See Psalm. 37. and 73. and
Ier. 12.1. A thing, that has troubled the Saints of God, in all times. It
pleases God, for a time, to grant the wicked prosperity, and to exercise this
Children with afflictions: Reasons. 1. To prove the patience of his Saints. 2.
To give the wicked their portion. 3. To nourish in us the hope of another life.
But alas! as their rejoicing is but short; so the afflictions of Gods servant
are but momentany, 2 Cor. 4.17. Trust then in God, and keep his way; judge not
of the happiness of Gods Children, by things present, but by their end, and
issue; Psalm. 37.37, 38. The wicked exalted, but, to be thrown down into utter
destruction; the godly afflicted, but, his end is peace.

CHAP. 4. VER. 1, 2, 3. For, behold, the day comes that shall burn as an
oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall be stubble; and
the day that comes, shall burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts; that it
shall leave them neither root, nor branch, But, unto you that fear my Name,
shall the Sun of Righteousness arise, with healing in his wings, etc.


THE former conelusion proved, by diverse effects of Christ's coming; to the
wicked, a black day; set out in similitudes.

The time of accomplishment hereof, its apparent, by the place, that its to be
understood of Christ's first coming in the flesh; and, if any question, how
this verified, then? It was Inchoative, and by way of preparation, then; and
shall be Consummate, in the day of the last judgment.

That Christ came not to save all, Ioh. 9.39. Luke 2.34. and it appears. 1.
By the event. 2. By Christ's own profession, Ioh. 17.3. By the sign, in that
grace is not given to all, to receive the benefit.

And, this reproves that fond opinion, that Christ came to save all. How is it,
then, that all are not saved? They answer, because they will not; but absurdly;
For, 1. God has power to frame men's wills, if his will were such. 2. How
unreasonable is it, that God should will to save, and man disappoint his
purpose?

Ob. Gods will was not absolute, but conditional.

Answ. Its that the Scripture teaches; that the Lord had decreed something
certain of those that he meant to save; otherwise, not likely, that he would
send his son, and he submit himself to those indignities; not having any
certainty, whether any man should accept this grace, or no. 2. Its a great
unlikelihood, that the Lord should hang the fulfilling of his decrees, upon the
mutability of man's will.

And this that deceives many, the fond, and groundless opinion, that the Lord
has sent his son, to reconcile all unto him.

Ob. The world.

Answ. Of believers only.

Ob. All men, 1 Timothy 2.4.

Answ. Of all sorts.

Ob. God, otherwise, unjust.

Answ. Not so. 1. For he is bound to none. 2. They willingly refuse the grace
offered.

Let us rather labor to know, whether we be of them, that Christ came to save.
Signs. 1. If Christ have redeemed us from our vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18.
2. Our esteem of Christ, Phil. 3.8. 3. The life of Christ manifested in us,
Romans 8.4. 4. Lively hope; hope that has life, is operative, 1 Pet. 1.3. 1 Ioh.
3.3. 5. Desire to win other, Psalm. 34.8.

Psalm. 1.4. Gods power, to an iron rod; the wicked, to a pot-sheard, Psalm. 2.9.

It should teach the wicked, to submit to Christ's Scepter, ni reverence and
fear; See Heb. 12.28. And, withal, it should comfort the righteous, in the
greatest pride and jollity of the wicked. How easy is it for the Lord, in a
moment, to consume them? Be not afraid, when a man is made rich, and the glory
of his house is increased; what, though they grow up like Cedars in Lebanon?
See Nebuchadnezzar cast out amongst beasts; Pharaoh suddenly destroyed in the
Sea: The rich man's soul taken away, in a night, Luke 12.20.

How this accomplished, in Christ's first coming?

Answ. 1. Praeparative. 2. Spiritually, in those flames of Gods wrath,
wherewith, inwardly, their consciences are filled.

Wherefore, though we see not utter destruction presently executed upon the
ungodly; yet, let this patient us, to consider that God has invisible, and
unseen judgments: And, if a man were but privy to those fears, and inward
panges, that wicked men are plunged unto, he would never envy them their
outward felicity.

Ver. 2, 3.] In these verses are set down the benefits, whereof men fearing
God, are made pertakers. 1. The sun of righteousness arises unto them. 2.
Healing under his wings. 3. Continuance of regeneration. 4. Victory over their
enemies.

Christ the sun of righteousness; because, righteous, not for himself, Cor.
1.30. Divine righteousness proper to him, as God; humane, by voluntary
dispensation under-taken, and performed for us.

This comforts against conscience of our own unrighteousness; since what
righteousness Christ had, Ioh. 1.14. Understand this: 1. Of imputed. 2. Of
inherent righteousness. Whence, those are confuted, who imagine man able to
conferr something, to his own justification. And withal, here we see, whither
we must resort, to have all our imperfections and defects supplied.

With health, or, healing under his wings] The wounds of our soul are our sins;
Christ is the healer of those, Pet. 2.24. By his stripes ve were healed: under
such a distress, then, repair unto him, Matthew. 11.28.

The next benefit is, continual flourishing, and increase of the graces of
regeneration, Ezekiel. 47.12. Trees planted in Gods garden, are watered by the
rivers issuing out of the sanctuary, and bring forth new fruit, every month.
And, by this may we try the truth of our regeneration; the seed is immortal,
and permanent, 1 John 3.9. and, such as springs up unto eternal life, Ioh. 4.14.

Verse. 3.] The next benefit is, victory over the wicked, and all the wicked
adversaries of our salvation: Ye shall tread down the wicked; for they shall be
ashes, under the soles of your feet, etc.

If any ask, how this is verified:

Answ. First, in Christ, who is our head; he has overcome for us. Secondly, in
us, after a sort, that they are not able to hurt us, Romans 8.28. Which is enough
to comfort us, in all afflictions, Ioh. 16.33.

Verse. 4. Remember ye the law of Moses my servants, etc,] Admonition here given
us, remember the law of Moses. What are the reasons of it? 1. Its a means of
humiliation, Gal. 3.10. 2. As a rule of life.

Antinomians reproved, Romans 3.20. Romans 7.9. 2. Shows the punishment due to sin,
Gal. 3.10. 3. scourges unto Christ, Gal. 3.24. 4. And, is a perfect rule of
obedience.

Hence, then, learn we all, who would, with benefit, receive Christ, to be
diligent this way; in laboring to see our imperfections. Surely, he bests
knows, and is best fitted to receive Christ, that best profits in the law of
God.

VER. 5, 6. Behold! I will send you Elijah the Prophet, before the coming of
the great, and dreadful day of Lord: And he shall turn the hearts of the
fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to the fathers, lest I
come and smite the earth with a curse.


A promise and prediction of John Baptists coming; where is. 1. A description
of John's person, by his gifts, set out in resemblance of him to Elias;
therefore, called metaphorically, Elias the Prophet. 2. The time of his coming,
namely, immediately, before the coming of that great, and fearful day. 3. By
his effect, he shall convert; the action amplyfied, by the subject, and terms,
hearts of children to fathers, and of fathers, to children: And, by the end,
lest I come and smite the earth, withour sing. As touching the sense of the
words, the quaere is betwixt us, and Pontificians, what is here meant, by Elias
the Prophet? Whether Elias the Thisbite, in person; or, John Baptist
metaphorically, and analogically, called Elias? Papists, in the question
touching the time of Antichrists coming, generally understand it, of Elias, in
person: and hence, thus conclude, that Antichrist is not yet come, because
Elias, and Enoch, who must come in the time of Antichrist, are not yet come in
person.

Their conclusion, that Antichrist is not yet come, they go about to prove, by
six signs, which must be of Antichrists coming. Two foregoing. 1. Preaching of
the Gospel to all nations. 2. Desolation of the Roman Empire. Two accompanying
it. 1. The Preaching of Enoch, and Elias, in person. 2. Bloody persecution, in
such sort, that public worship of God shall cease. Two following it. 1. The
destruction of Antichrist, after three years, and an half. 2. The end of the
world.

But, none of these are yet accomplished: Ergo. Now as touching this
controversy, at large, my purpose is not to speak: nor yet to deal with any
other reason, but this, that they take out of this text.

In the days of Antichrist, Henoch, and Elias, must come in person, to
preserve the Elect, in the faith of Christ, and convert the Jews; but they are
not yet come: Ergo. To say nothing of Enoch, but to insist in that, they urge
for Elias; that he must live in the days of Antichrist, they labor to prove.
1. By testimonies of Scriptures, and of Fathers. 2. By reasons, out of the
text. Their testimonies of scripture, are three. Mal. 4.5. Matthew. 17.11. Rev.
11.3. etc.

We will, first, propound our judgment, with the confirmation of it; and then
answer to the objections of Papists. This, then, is the truth; that by Elias is
here meant John Baptist, the forerunner of Christ Jesus. And, if any man ask,
why he is called Elias? The Angel, Luke 1.17. gives the reason, because he goes
before Christ, in the Spirit and power of Elias: This likeness there is between
them. 1. In office, reforming of the Church. 2. Gifts of courage, boldness,
liberty of speech. 3. In habit, not unlike. 4. In people, with whom they dwell.

First, we have the testimony of the Angel, Luke 1.17: Alleging this very
Scripture, and applying it to John Baptist. 2. Exposition of our Savior, Mat.
17.10, 11, 12. and Mat. 11.14.

Ob. Their reason, out of this place, its this; this cannot be understood of
John Baptist, because, speech is here of Christ's second coming? proved,
because the day great and terrible; but, Christ's first day, called the
acceptable time, and day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2.

Answ. This day of Christ's first coming is called terrible, in respect of the
wicked, Mal. 3.2, 3. So also, Mat. 3.

Ob. Mat. 17.11. Elias must restore all things, so did not John.

Answ. Its strange to see how they dare, so violently, to pervert the text,
verse. 12. Christ, by the testimony of Disciples, speaks of John Baptist; these
men will control Christ's own exposition. 2. That restitution referred to
reformation of religion, and must be understood, Inchoative.

Ob. Rev. 11.3.

Answ. The things these spoken of, cannot, in any hand, agree to Elias;
Reasons. 1. He never saw death, before his assumption; unlikely therefore,
that, after glory received, he should dye. 2. It repugnes the nature of a
glorified body, one dos whereof, is immortality, 2 Cor. 5.1.

Ob. No other Reason can be given of their assumption.

Answ. Though we know no reason, yet would it not follow, that that was the
reason: Other reasons are, probably, assigned; as. 1. Perhaps, to prevent
Idolatry. 2. To nourish hope of immortality, after this life ended. However,
this reason concludes nothing: And so have we freed the text from Popish
glosses.

Now,

When he, first, collected his Church, amongst the Israelites, what rare
endowments where there given to Moses? When all was overgrown with Idolatry, an
extraordinary Spirit put upon Elias; the same doubled upon Elizeus. John
Baptist has them renewed; the Apostles, to plant a Church, amongst the
Gentiles; greater then John Baptist, Mat. 11.11. And, what a Spirit was that
given to Luther, of boldness, courage, zeal, knowledge! etc.

By this, him, the government of the whole Church of God; a burden not meet
for any men's shoulders: And, yet, as themselves confess of such, they are men
but of ordinary measure of gifts, of knowledge, wisdom, or other abilities: Now
surely, if the Lord had sent them to such a work; we should see this seal set
unto them; gifts extraordinary, meet for such a function. Its true, that Moses
was called to the government of the (whole) people of Israel; but, consider,
and see, how the Lord gifted him, above his brethren.

And, as our Savior speaks to the sons of Zebedee, ye know not, says he, of
what spirit ye are, etc. And, let me apply it, a little more generally; you
may judge of those that undertake the office of Ministers, without any measure
of gifts, more then vulgar; suppose, a liberty to read, etc.

Secondly, this should teach us, not to detrect any office, or employment, to
which we shall see the Lord leading us, directly. For, let us well be assured,
that whatsoever work he sends us unto, he will fit us for; See Exodus 4.12. Ier.
1.6, 7.

He shall turn the heart of the Fathers to the Children. Verse. 6.
]

Quest. How can this be ascribed to John Baptist, since its the Lord that turns,
and enclines the heart?

Answ. To God, as the principal; to men, as the instruments. And thus, as we
are instruments, it pleases the Lord to grace us with the title of the work,
as, 1 Timothy 4.16. Thou shall save, thou, as the instrument.

From whence, may these two things be concluded. Lo me, and the children, that
thou have given me, Isai 8.18. See Gal. 2.8. He that was mighty, by Peter, was
mighty, through Paul; etc. See Isai. 55.10, 11. As the snow, and the rain, so
is my word, it never returns empty; See Mat. 13.4. Ioh. 15.16.

Ob. If any shall object, and say, that Isaiah is sent to harden, not to
convert, Isa. 6.10. And, Ezekiel told, cap. 2. That they will not turn:

Answ. Places understood of the greater part; but, Isa. 6. ult. there was a
tenth part returned.

Some caveats must here be remembered. 1. That this must be understood of the
settled, and stablished preaching of the word; for otherwise, God sends some,
only, to deprive of excuse. 2. That fruit, at first, appears not; but lies, as
it were, under the clods; See Act. 18.10. And, as it was, in the days of Elias,
1 King. 19.18.

Then, see we what to judge of them, to whose Ministry God gives no blessing at
all. Ier. 23.21, 22. And, this should encourage us, that are Ministers, in the
work of our Ministry; and should prevail against all impediments, seem they
never so great; considering, the Lord will sure be effectual in us.

Again, see we a little, and judge we of our selves, and we shall know, whether
the Lord has, in mercy, sent the Ministry of the word unto us; surely, if
Gods word have wrought in us, to conversion, Romans 1.16, We may then say, the
Lord, in mercy, has sent it unto us; if otherwise, he has not sent in mercy,
but in wrath: See 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. It works mightily in those that believe;
and, Col. 1.6. Its come unto you, and is fruitful.

See we yet, farther, the degrees of efficacy of the word of God. 1. It
prevails with some, to illumination. 2. With some, to work a little temporary
delight, Mat. 13.21. 3. With some, to a partial reformation, Mar. 6.20. 4. To
humiliation: All this while, thou can not assure thy self, the Lord has sent
his word to thee, for thy good: How then? Namely, when its so far powerful,
that it converts thee, turning thy heart, and changing thy whole life; thou
may, then, truly say, the Lord is merciful unto thee, Act. 26.18.

Now, notes of a changed, and converted heart, are many. 1. When sin grows
odious unto us; those especially, wherein we have oftenest, and with greatest
pleasance, offended. 2. Whenas, with freedom of heart, we serve God, See 2 Cor.
3.17. 3. When the whole outward man is reformed; the tree once good, the fruit
is good; the fountain purged, the streams are also clean, Iam. 3.11.

Lastly, Enthusiasts hence confuted, that hold the word, and Ministry thereof,
a dead letter.

The next thing here observable, is, Romans 10.17. 1 Cor. 3.5, 6. Act. 9. Paul
sent to Ananias; Act. 8.31. Philip to the Eunuch: Reasons, generally. 1. That
the glory might be Gods, 1 Cor. 2. 2. To prevent delusions. 3. We not able to
endure the terror of God Majesty, Exodus 20.19. 4. Thus God honors man's
nature. 5. Man fittest, as having experience of infirmities. 6. Proves
humility, whether we will stoop to Gods ordinance, though dispensed by a weak
man, subject to like passions with our selves.

Why ministers, rather then ordinary Christians?

Answ. Its Gods will to have it so, 2 Cor. 5.19. He has put in us the word of
reconciliation.

Ob. Common Christians convert, Iam. 5. ult. Act. 11.20, 21.

Answ. 1. Ordinarily, they prepare, convert not. 2. After faith, and repentance
general, may be means, by admonition, to stir up graces that lie dead, as Act.
18.26. and so draw to renewing repentance. 3. Extraordinarily, as by them of
Cyprus, and Cyrene.

This should teach us, as we love our souls, and desire lavation, Prove. 8.
Blessed such, as wait at the posts of the gates of wisdom. 2. Graces grow dull,
without it, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.20.

Reproved such, as forsake the gathering together of the Saints, Heb. 10.25. So
laying themselves open to peril of apostasy. 2. In that case, prayers
abominable, Prove. 28.9.

Another sort reprovable, are such, as not content with wisdom of God, desire,
and look to be instructed, and brought to God, immediately, by the Spirit;
saying, when the time comes, God will turn me; whereas, now is the time, when
God gives the means.

Thirdly, such as desire to be taught by Angels; as the glutton for his
brethren, Luke 16. And, if they could hear Christ speak from Heaven, they would
believe; falsely, as our Savior says.

Try we our selves, by this, for our conversion; and see whether, by this mean,
it has been wrought. Surely, beloved, I will not say, but education may do
much, to prepare: and reading, much, to prepare; but, if thou have no other
change, than what thou have by thine own reading, etc. Thou have weak comfort:
who ever read of any contvered by himself, or his own industry, without help of
another? Isa. 57.19. I create the fruit of the lips, to be peace.

Therefore, pray we the Lord of the harvest, to send forth laborers, Matthew. 9.
ult. Surely, we cannot say of such, as lack those, that they have the ordinary
means. I say not, but God may save some of them; for, he is not so tied to his
ordinary, but that, sometimes, he may work without it; but yet they lack the
ordinary means of conversion.

Follow, next, the terms of this conversion.

The hearts of the fathers, unto the children; and of children, unto the
fathers] To omit the several expositon of others; by fathers, and children; and
converting the hearts, each to other; the meaning (I take it) is this; that,
whereas they were alienated one from another, in their affections; father
hating son, and son, father, for truths sake, as Matthew. 10.35. So powerful
should John be, in his Ministry, that he should unite, and knit them together
in a bond of most entire affection; and bring many of them, before dissenting,
now, to unite themselves. in the worship of God.

Whence observe, that where the word is powerful, Act. 2.46. Nothing then,
holden too dear, betwixt the members of Christ's Body; and 4.34, 35. See Isai.
11.6.7, 8, 9. All those headstrong, and brutish affections are calmed, and
corrected; and, the wisdom from above, is peaceable. Iam. 3.17.

Now, then, we see,

Whence, then, comes it, that we see dissentions commonly follow it? As the
complaint is common; before this preaching came up amongst us, we had as good
fellow-like a parish, and as much good neighborhood amongst us, etc. Now, all
is in an uprore; the child is divided against the father; etc. But, I wish such
to consider, what kind of fellowship that is, where the Gospel is not
powerful; a brotherhood in evil, as Genesis 49.5. Fellowship in excess, 1 Pet.
4.4. which is enmity with God: And, moreover, know we, that dissentions which
arise, after the Gospel, arise not from the nature of the Gospel; but, from
the corruption of men's hearts, and their rebellions against the truth:
Therefore, observe amongst men, soundly religious; you shall see an absolute
concord: yea, such an one, and so soundly built upon theright grounds of peace,
as is not easily broken; perhaps, some Act. 16.39.
jarres fall out, as betwix- Barnabas, and Saul; yet such as are easily
reconciled: Whereas, every trifling occasion breaks the peace, amongst those
others. And hereby let us judge of our selves, whether the Gospel has been
powerful in us; we shall know it, by this; the knitting of our hearts together
in the unity of the Spirit, Ephesians. 4.3. Add unto this a peaceable disposition,
See Iam. 3.17. Will a man profess religion, yet delight in contentions? Surely,
he lies against the truth, and such wisdom is earthly; whereas that from above
is first pure, then, peaceable, etc. And, what shall we think of those
Salamanders, whose life is in the fire of contentions? and, never merrier, they
say, then when at war, etc.

The end follows; lest I come, and smite the earth with a curse] That is,
lest coming, and finding none ready, by faith, to entertain me, I should smite
the earth, in cursing.

Where, let us observe, that the Ministry of the word, its that,

If any man demand, how?

Answ. Because, its the means to beget, and maintain faith; it is it, that
brings to faith; and for the Elect and believers sakes, is the world upholden:
there is nothing, that withholds the utter overthrow of the world but the
Children of God: As Lot in Sodom, preserved it; Genesis 19.22. See 2 Pet. 2.8.9.

Now, beloved, this should, if nothing else, work in us, if not a love of the
Word,

And this should teach us also, if not to love, yet, not to malign, or envy the
Children of God, that live amongst us. Surely, its for their sakes, that all
men live, and the world it self is supported.

(...) Amen.

FINIS.
An INDEX of the principal points, handled in this commentary.
A
AFflictions, and judgments temporal befall as well the righteous, as the
wicked, in this life; chiefly if they share in sinning. page 7, 8. Yet, to the
righteous, they are tokens of Gods love. p. 11. But, to reprobates, testimonies
of Gods hatred. p. 17. God the author of all. p. 62, 169, 170. And it agrees
well with his justice. p. 62, 63, 122. The benefit of them. p. 11, 18, 122,
123. A mean to purge the godly, p. 123, 174. Astrologers. p. 1^4. Affections,
and desires in sinning chiefly to be restrained, (which is the keeping of the
spirit) the means to hinder actual sinning. p. 114. Acception of persons, what
it is, and when lawful. p. 84. Atheism. Antichrist, whether come. p. 194.
B
BAstards esteemed by God, an unholy seed, p. 107. Yet, as Jephtah, capable of
salvation. p. 107. Birth of religious parents a blessing, p. 13. but, it
aggravates sin to a degenerate posterity. p. 77, 78. etc. why sin called a
burden. p. 2, 3, 4.
C
Christ alone our righteousness. p. 192, 193. Christ a judge. p. 109, 190.
Charmers. p. 146. Civil, and domestical subjection approved by God. p. 23. See
m. Covenant of God, of four sorts. p. 63. revealed by Christ. p. 128.
Contentation in all estates required, with the reasons. p. 46. Conversion, and
signs of it. p. 20. Conviction of sin ought to go before admonition against
it. p. 234. A fourfold means of it, p. ibid. How wrought by Christ. p. 139.
Coming of Christ threefold. p. 125. Confession of sin how hindered. p. 99, 118,
155. Corruption in religion, what, and the danger of it. p. 60. See R.
Corruption natural cleaves to all, by nature. p. 134. And, needs purging by
Christ. Cruelty to Gods people extremely punished. p. 22. Custom of things
forbidden cannot make them lawful. p. 103, 149.
D
Defense, or excuse of sin, a sign of a wicked heart. Divine right twofold,
direct, or, by consequent. p. 157. Divorce what it is, the kinds of it;
whether lawful. p. 104. Delay of judgment, why used to the wicked. p. 120.
Dreams. p. 144.
E
ELection, what it is. p. 13, 14. of whom. p. 14. The motive of it. p. 14. The
best argument of Gods love: the notes of it. p. 11, 12. Elias, a type of John
Baptist. p. 194. Enemies destruction how to berejoyced in. p. 23. Error
incident to ordinary ministers, whether single, or collected. p. 71, 73, 74.
Examples good, to be imitated. p. 77. but yet, only in good: p. 87.
Extraordinary means granted in extraordinary times.
F
FEar of God, of several sorts; and how they differ. p. 56. The nature, and
effects of it. p. 64, 65. Properties of men fearing God, p. 181. Families to be
instructed in the true worship of God. p. 76, 126, 127. Faith rests upon the
word of God, beyond sense. p. 130.
G
GRief for the loss of the sense of Gods favor, how it differs in Gods
children, from that in hypocrites. p. 92, 93. etc. Glory of God chiefly
regarded by Gods children. p. 384.
H
HAtred of God, what it is. Hypocrisy how discovered; by it self. p. 25, 26,
^9, 47. The properties of hypocrites, deceivers of God, and men. p. 51, 52.
all, in pretenses. p. 108, 109. No hiding of sin from Gods knowledge. p. 100,
101.
I
ITeration of sin grievous, p. 90, 91. Idolaters more zealous for Idols, then
Christians, for true God. p. 137. Impartiality of God in punishing. p. 120.
Impenitency renders all services of God odious. p. 36, 97. Wherein it consists.
p. 152. It chiefly dawns. p. 152. Ignorant worship of God unacceptable. p. 152.
Judgments must be threatened, as well as comforts promised. p. 9. Behavior of
wicked under Judgments. p. 10.
L
THe right use of the law. p. 193. it must be preached, as a preparative to
Christ. p. 193. Long-suffering of God. p. 116. etc. Longing after Christ, a
sign of adoption. p. 126.
M
MAgistrate civil has to do in matters Ecclesiastical, and how far. p. 59,
60. Magic forbidden, unlawful. p. 142. Mediator none but Christ, who is
absolutely perfect. p. 129. Mass Popish explained, and refuted. p. 37, 38.
Means must be used, yet none but lawful, to accomplish Gods promises. p. 168. A
minister truly described in his characters, and proper marks. p. 67. Gods
special regard of such. p. 63. Ministers Gods ordinary instruments of
conversion. p. 69. On them the people must depend, for conversive knowledge. p.
71, 153 dangerous to despise ministers, because ministers. p. 70, 72. Vicious
life of ministers breeds a vile esteem of them. p. 183. Peoples sins,
sometimes, laid to their neglect of duty. p. 32. Marriage duties. p. 100, 106.
And, of more, than one, at once, unlawful. p. 102. with Idolaters very
dangerous, for infection. p. 86.
N
NAme of God, how taken in vain, and despised. p. 25, 43, 45. A good name a
blessing; means to gain it. p. 83, 84. The contrary, a punishment. p. ib.
P
PArents Godly, a great blessing, p. 81. Their example in evil, very prevalent.
p. 147. Particularizing in reproof of sin, with due cautions, warrantable to a
minister. p. 26, 58, 59. Partiality, what it is, and when lawful. p. 84. People
of God, a peculiar people. p. 187, 188. Perfection, and purity of the Saints,
wherein it consists. p. 38, 41, 66, 67. Peace of a Saint wherein it
consists. p. 174. Prayers rejected of God, a sore judgment. p. 30. Causes of
such rejection, and the special sins occasioning it. p. 30, 31. Preparation to
Christ necessary, naturally men want it. p. 125. Punishments of the wicked, of
diverse sorts. p. 121. Posterity improsperous, an heavy judgment with the causes
of it. p. 13^. Proving of God, what, and when lawful. p. 167. Prosperity of the
wicked dangerous. p. 177, 178, 179, 189. Purgatory an absurd fable. p. 133.
etc. Polygamy unlawful. p. 102.
R
Religious corruptions of two sorts. p. 60. most dangerous. p. ib. Religion it
self planted in nature. p. 19. the profit of it. p. 173. Reformation of
religious corruptions to be endeavored of all. p. 126. Repentance, what it is.
p. 153. Signs, and benefits of it. p. 154, 169. Never too late, if true, and
serious. p. 150, 151. Returning to same sins very dangerous. p. 90 Reasons, and
means of avoiding p. 91. Reprehension must follow conviction, with the reasons
of it. p. 112. 113. Reprobation, what it is, of whom, the motives. p. 15. 16.
Rewards of Gods services most sure p. 34. 185. 186. Riches given to the wicked,
but prove their hurt. p. 176, 177, etc. Remission of sins peculiar only to Gods
Children. p. 188.
S
SAcraments, with what due qualifications, and reverence to be received; p. 44.
Notes of sanctification. p. 12. Salvation is not of all individually. p. 138.
190. Sacriledg. p. 155, 156, 160. Servants, not to follow Masters, in sinning.
p. 89. Services, when accepted, or rejected of God. p. 95. etc. Soothsaying
condemned. p. 42. Sins most secret not hid from God. p. 109. Continued, under
judgments, more heinous. p. 19, 20, 162. They are concatenate, and lead on to
extremities. p. 172.
T
TEmpting of God, what it is, p. 166. 178. Testaments new and old, how they
differ. p. 40. 41. Threatenings, without intervenient repentance, certainly
inflicted p. 60. 61. Tithes, in the question thereof, stated. 157. etc.
V
VNthankefulness most odious where favors, have been great. p. 35. 36.
Universality of grace. p. 40. Vows described, in the full nature of them. p.
52. 53. etc.
W
Warning given by God, before execution of judgments. p. 461. Wearisomeness in
Gods service rejected, with the causes of it. p. 50. Wicked, how to be
conversed with. p. 161. 162. are easily destroyed p. 191. Will Worship
forbidden. p. 25. Wives subjection enjoined p. 106. Word of God the sole pillar
of the promises. Witchcraft unlawful in all kinds. p. 14. Words sinful engage
to wrath. p. 117. 118. Worship of God not slightly to be performed. p. 27. But
with reverence and fear. p. 42. Word, and worship, translated from a people, an
heavy judgment. p. 37.
Places of Scripture explained in this Commentary.
Act. 11.20, 21. p. 129. Genesis 4.13. p. 2. Genesis 42.21. Levit. 27.30. Number. 23.21.
p. 34. Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. p. 144. 1 Samuel 2.30. Job 20.20. Job. 21.15. p. 173.
Psalm. 2.6. p. 180. Verse. 9. p. 192. Verse. 12. p. 132. p. 138. Psalm. 34.^. p.
138. Psalm. 37.37, 38. p. 165. Psalm. 50.21, 22. 117. Psalm. 73.13, 14. Psalm.
94.7, 8, 9. p. 101. Prove. 1.10. Prove. 4.23. p. 114. Prove. 30.8. Eccles. 7.10.
p. 80. Eccles. 9.1. p. 12.18. Isa. 1.12. p. 27. Verse. 15. p. 89. Verse. 24. p.
117. Isa. 9.9, 10. p. 19. Isa. 10.17. p. 163. Isa. 27.7, 8, 9. p. 18. Isai.
51.2. p. 80. Ier. 3.15. Ier. 5.3. p. 162. Ier. 23.33. p. 6. Ier. 32.40. p. 65.
Ier. 48.10. Ezekiel. 18.20. p. 80. Hos. 6.5. Mat. 5.16. p. 48. Mat. 17.11. p. 195.
Mat. 1^.8, 9. p. 104. Mat. 22.14. p. 48. Mat. 23.5. p. 90. Luke 17. p. 125.
Luke 3.5. p. 125. Luke 16.15. Luke 18.7, 8. Luke 19.40. and verse. 42 Luke
22.32. p. 383. Ioh. 3.17. p. 137. Ioh. 5.14. p. 135. Ioh. 9.39. p. 137. Ioh.
16.8, 9. p. 116. Verse. 13. p. 117. 1 Ioh. 4.1. p. 117. Act. 4.12. p. 129. Romans
1.16. Romans 8.28. p. 196. Romans 11.22. 1 Cor. 1.30. p. 192. 1 Cor. 7.6. p. 159. 1
Cor. 9.1. etc. p. 160. 1 Cor. 11.29. p. 43. 2 Cor. 1.12. p. 133. Gal. 2.13, 14.
Ephesians. 4.6. 1 Thessalonians. 5.20. 1 Timothy 1.9. p. 138. 1 Timothy 4.8. p. 173. 1 Timothy 4.16. 1 Timothy 5.21.25. p. 84. 2 Timothy 2.9. Tit. 2.14. Heb. 6.10. Heb. 10. Heb. 11.41. p.
123. Heb. 12.6. p. 17. Heb. 12.28. p. 42.44.56. Iam. 2.1. p. 85. Iam. 5.5.6.
Rev. 11.3. p. 196. Rev. 18.4.

