A DIVINE CORDIAL FOR A Devout Soul.

Composed out of a serious Discourse upon the Sin against the HOLY GHOST: As
it was laid open in the full Nature and Appendices thereof.

In a SERMON Preached at Taunton in the County of Somerset, upon Monday, April
4. 1653. In the Assize Week.

By WILLIAM SCLATER, Doctor in Divinity, Now Preacher of the Word of God in
Broadstreet, LONDON.

Matthew. 12.31, 32. Wherefore I say unto you, all manner of Sin and Blasphemy
shall be forgiven unto men: But the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not
be forgiven unto men. And whosoever speaks a word against the Son of man, it
shall be forgiven him: But whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall
not be forgiven him, neither in this World, nor in the World to come.

LONDON: Printed by M. Simmons, and are to be sold by William Hope at the Blew
Anchor behind the Exchange. 1653.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL George Luttrell of Dunster-Castle, Esquire; High Sheriff
of the County of Somerset: All true felicity.
SIR;
THis Sermon (solid, I hope, though not polite, or trim enough, perhaps, for
this age) as it was by an unexpected providence, in a solemn, and Honorable
Assembly, preached at your instance; now also, upon your motion, together with
the entreaties of the primest Auditors, drawn forth into a more general view:
It cannot but claim a double interest in you, both as an eminent Hearer (such
as your station rendered you) and as a Patron, such as its own tenuity cannot
but want: It comes to you, not that you (chiefly under so great a surfeit of the
Press) need it, but that it needs you: The honor of whose worthy family and
Progenitors, it has still been to be Mecaenates Scholarium, and your Castle
(like the old Parnassus) as it were an Academy for learning, and learned men:
It Is written of Abel (righteous by Gods own testimony of him) that being dead,
he yet speaks, (...), or, Heb. 11.4.
is yet spoken of; his exemplary piety carrying with it a kind of Vocal
Oratory to persuade even the ages to come unto imitation, that whilst the
luster of his graces sparkle in the lives of successors, his memory cannot but
be perpetuated: And long may whatsoever was eximious in our Ancestors, find
still a continuation in your self.

But indeed, that being properly a man's Sed genus, and proavos, and quae nen
fecimus ipsi vix ea [nostra] voco -- Ovid.
own in virtue, which is personal; your own merit being (as I question not)
copious, may claim a Panegyricke, as ample; to the sound of things commendable
your name and actions (like Unisons in Music) answer, and (out of no long
acquaintance) I observe your modesty to adorn your endowments; it resembles
shadowing in the Art of Limning, which turns extremely to the advantage of the
Limner, by setting off the excellency of his Pensill: Yet however you delight
not to be praised to your self, notwithstanding your pious ingenuity will
constantly have eye unto things praiseworthy. It was a goodly sight to behold
Gods Tabernacle, and David's Palace situate together on the same Sion; so is it
to see Goodness and Greatness like those living Creatures, and those wheels
(in Ezekiel. 1.19.
Ezekiel) to move, and to be lift up together: When all is done, godliness is
the greatest 1 Timothy 6.6.
gain, and religious practice the highest 1 Samuel 2.30.
honor: Whilst this is your aim, your Name shall become as some precious
Ointment poured out, your self, your virtuous Consort, and all your relations,
shall be blessed out of heaven with the exuberancies of Gods both hands, you
shall augment the reputation of your house, and the already purchased
estimation of your Country: If my weak endeavors in this present Sermon may
prove any furtherance this way, I have my desire, as, who am,

SIR, Yours, To be Commanded in the Lord. WILLIAM SCLATER.

WHAT THE SIN Against the Holy Ghost, is.
1 JOHN 5.16, 17. There is a Sin unto death: I do not say that he shall pray
for it.

All Unrighteousness is Sin, and there is a Sin not unto death.


IT was not in my purpose, nor came it at all within the Compass of my
Thoughts (Right Honorable, and Beloved) when I came late, the other evening,
unto this Tanton.
Town (so well spoken of for Religion, and discreet zeal for Gods Ordinances)
to become a Speaker here, this morning, on so solemn an occasion: Yet since the
divine providence has so disposed, I willingly submit thereto, choosing rather
to expose my weakness to the pious candor of this so intelligent Auditory,
than to decline so fair an occasion, to bring some glory to God, in the Mat.
25.16.
use of my Talent, after my Romans 12.3. 2 Cor. 10.13.
measure.

And so, without farther Apology, I address my self to my Text; for the
clearer explanation whereof, it may not be amiss to reflect a little upon the
precedent Context, and the Circumstances thereof.

this Chapter, shows us (as the Diamonds set in the Rings of these three
Epistles) sundry eminent and eximious Privileges belonging to the regenerate
sons and daughters of God: such are, 1. Assurance of audience in Prayers,
provided they order their devotions according to his will, ver. 14. 2. Immunity
from Apostasy. 3. Knowledge of Regeneration. 4. Certain and infallible
persuasion of the truth of mysteries of Faith, Knowledge of the True God, and
Union with him in Christ, v. 20.


And verse the sixteenth he amplifies that Blessing of being heard in prayers
by extent of it; that privilege appertaining to them. Not only as it may serve
for supply of their own personal wants, but also as it may benefit and
advantage others; we say indeed in our Creed, I believe in God, to denote, that
it must be our own particular faith that must save us; but in our Lords
Prayer, Our father, which art in Heaven, to imply that our Prayers may further
the good of others besides our selves; wherefore S. John withal insinuates an
Exhortation, that as they had received this favor of God to be heard in their
requests both for themselves and others, so they would improve, and use the
same, not alone for themselves, but likewise to the help and behoof of others.
Wherein are these observables.

1. The duty exhorted unto, Prayer. 2. The Object of this Duty, with a
limitation, A Brother not sinning unto death. 3. Reason, from the profitable
effect, He shall give him life.
In the latter end of the sixteenth verse he subjoynes the reason of that
limitation; as if he had said, marvel not, that I interpose that restraint, A
Brother sinning not unto death; for there is a sin unto death, for which no man
may pray: And then is added a prolepsis, ver. 17. Is not all unrighteousness
sin? all sin deadly? to which he answers, 1. By Concession, yes, All
unrighteousness is sin. 2. By an (...), or correction, but there is a sin not
unto death.

This the Context, and order of the words. My present discourse, wherewith I
shall now entertain your patience, shall be confined to the Reason of the
Apostles Limitation, forementioned, namely, the sin which is here said by the
Apostle to be unto death. A difficult question, and so difficult, Vt forte
nulla major, as S. S. August. Ser. 11. de verb. Dom.
Austin protests, That scarsly is there any one found more in all holy writ;
this being a sin which is rarely, if at all to be deprehended, or discovered by
man in this life.

I shall proceed herein after this order.

1. Endeavor to open the nature of it, what it is, or wherein it consists.
2. To unfold the reason of the style, or titles that are given it in the
Scriptures. 3. The dangerous issue, and effect of the same.
I begin with the consideration of the Nature of it; and shall proceed therein,
as Rhetoricians speak, (...), first, removing the erroneous opinions both
ancient, and modern hereabout; and then, set down the positive Truth.

Saint S. Ambros. l. 1. c. 9. De Paenit.
Ambrose acquaints us of the Novatian Heretics of old, who by sins unto
Death, that is, such sins as are mortal in the event, understood all sins that
are committed against Knowledge and Conscience, voluntarily after Baptism; and
to men so sinning they intercluded the hope, and denied the benefit of (...),
Epiphan. l. 2. c. 59.
pardon: But all this not more uncomfortably, than unsoundly: for, besides what
we find in S. Cyprian. De lapsis.
Cyprian, and other ancient Fathers of the Church, touching the restoring of
relapsed Christians, who having fallen through fear, under the rage and
violence of the Primitive Persecutions, were, notwithstanding, upon their
Exomologesis, and testimony given of their Repentance, and desire of
restitution, admitted again into the communion of the Church: We know that
Moses prayed for the Jews sinning voluntarily, Exodus 32.11. so also Samuel, 1 Samuel 12.23. and S. Stephen, Acts 7.59, 60. and their prayers were heard: We
read likewise of some in Pergamus, even in this Apostle S. John's own time,
who (after Calling) held the hateful Doctrine of the Nicolaitans, who yet were
again invited unto Repentance, Rev. 2.16. and by that means came within the
number of such as might be prayed for.

Among the Moderns, are the Romish Imposters, for the Rhemists on this place,
give this sense; If any sin unto death, that is, commit any mortal sin, and
impenitently persists therein, unto death, for such an one pray not, namely,
say they, after death; and out of this place would they, by (...) 2 Pet. 3.16.
torturing the Text, infer their doctrine of prayer for the dead: and their
reason is, because no one may be dehorted from praying for any sinner, while he
is living, in as much as there is hope of pardon, and repentance for every
sinner living: But first, the very ground is false, for the Scripture says
expressly, There is a sin committed even in this life, that is not capable of
pardon, neither in this life, no nor in the life to come, Mat. 12.31. Yea, it is
impossible to some, even living, to be renewed unto repentance, the means of
pardon Commodissime accipitur hic locus de peccato in spiritumsanctum. Jo.
Gerard. loc. com. tom. 2. c. 24. s. 108.
Heb. 6.6. Yea, we read in the Theodoret. Hist l. 4. c. 17.19.
History of the Church, that the primitive Christians observing the obstinate
impenitency of that Monster Julian the Apostate, made set prayers, not for him,
but against his malice, and against him for his desperate malice sake; they
having, happily, therein a spirit of extraordinary 1 Cor. 12.10,
discerning then, as David before had a spirit of Prophecy, when he made
imprecations upon, and prayers against his adversaries, Ps. 109.2. As touching
prayer for the dead, as, among all the variety of Sacrifices appointed for the
Jews of old, there was none at all for the dead; so neither has it any
precept, promise, or example, in all the allowed Canon of sacred Scripture now
extant. And thirdly, that this place is to be understood of such as live, it is
apparent from this very Text, because no man can [ (...)
see] his brother sinning after death; besides this, even by the School-mens
own confession, souls departed are extra statum merendi, and demerendi, out
of a condition of meriting or demeriting by action; and if souls in their
imaginary Purgatory, make an end of sinning, in vain shall we pray for pardon.

Leaving then these erroneous conceits about this sin, come we, next, to
examine the Nature of it, according to the Orthodox judgments of Reformed
Divines, well traveled in this question, and regulating their resolves herein
according to the word of God.

Now, we shall the better discover this, if we particularly view the several
parts and branches thereof; for it is a compound sin, consisting of many
ingredients.

I shall draw up all under these heads, searching, 1. What it supposes. 2.
What it implies. 3. What it draws with it.


Or, in other Terms, to the same effect.

1. The Antecedent. 2. The Concomitants. 3. The Consequents of this sin.
First of all, the necessary Antecedents, or supposals of this sin, and these
are, 1. Knowledge of the Gospel, and of the truth therein revealed concerning
Jesus Christ, and all the rich and 2 Pet. 1.4.
precious Promises of life and salvation, in and by him: wherefore, they are
said to be once enlightened, Heb. 6.4. Vide Haec verba exponentem optime. Jo.
Gerar. Tract. de Paenitent. c. 4. s. 16. tom 3. loc. Com.
(...), to have a great measure of Illumination in the mysteries of the Gospel;
and again, Heb. 10.26. to have received the knowledge of the truth, and to
have known the way of righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.21. and 1 Timothy 4.1. to have
dogmaticall faith, or doctrine of trtuh, men ignorant of the Gospel may sin
mortally, and unto death, yet, during that state of simple ignorance, for want
of the right means of illumination, are not capable of this sin, therefore also
Paul, though he was a Blasphemer, an Oppressor, exceedingly Act 26.11.
mad in persecuting the way, and professors of Christ, yet was received to
mercy, for what he did, he did 1 Timothy 1.13.
ignorantly, in the time of his unbelief: and therefore Divines truly judge,
that howsoever Turks, Infidels, Pagans, perish (without repentance)
everlastingly, through ignorance of the truth, yet sin they not against the
holy Ghost, not this particular sin here said to be unto death. 2. Besides this
knowledge, which happily may be occasioned by some general declaration of the
truth of the Gospel; there must be not a confused apprehension alone, but also
a clear and distinct understanding, and a full conviction of the judgment, so
that they cannot but see, and know, that it is the truth which they set
themselves against; therefore the terms, Heb. 10.26. and 2 Pet. 2.21. are
remarkable, it is not (...), but (...), not a bare notice, and literal
understanding of the truth, but (...), an acknowledgement of the same; as they
spoke, Acts 4.16. What shall we do to these men, for that indeed a notable
miracle has been done by them, is manifest to all them that dwell in
Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it. To this purpose is that saying of our
Savior, John 15.22. If I had not come, and spoken unto them, they had not had
sin, that is, not simply none, but none in comparison; but now they have no
cloak, (...), no color, or In spiritu^ sanctum peccant, qui divinae veritati,
cujus fulgore sic perstringuntur, ut ignorantiam causari nequeant, tamen
destinata malitia resistunt, in hoc tantum ut resistant. Calvin Inst. l. 3. c.
3. s. 22.
pretense of plea, by way of excuse. 3. To these some add a third degree, as a
preparative also to this sin, and that is some kind of formal profession of
what they have entertained into their judgments; so Simon Magus joined
himself to the Disciples, Acts 8.13. submitted to Baptism, as one (it seems)
desirous by that Character, and cognizance to be known, and taken for a
Christian: some partiary obedience, and reformation they yield to the truth,
intermiting the practice of their old sins, and out of some Heb. 6.5.
taste of the good word of God, being affected with the comforts it conteins,
they take some fleshly Mat. 13.20.
joy therein, in hope to partake the blessed state of Gods Children in the life
to come; in which case S. Peter says, that they are washed after a sort, from
their old sins, and have escaped the pollutions of the world; 2 Pet. 2.18.20.
But to this third step they ascend not all, who fall into this sin; The Mal.
12.24
Pharisees, that gave first occasion to our Savior to speak of it, we read not
either to have reformed their errors of life, or judgment, or so much as to
have entertained the Gospel, and truth taught by our Savior, into profession,
yet have this sin charged upon them: and therefore me thinks its no absurdity
to say, there are degrees even in this sin unto death; but knowledge, and
conviction sufficiently disposes unto this sin. And thus far of the
Antecedents.


Secondly, Follow next the Concomitants, or those things which do accompany
this sin, or which it does imply.

Now herein are considerable, partly the Facts, and partly also the Motives of
the committers of this same.

The Facts, some are common to all; some, peculiar to those that have highest
dispositions toward saving grace: In relation to the former sort, there is, 1.
Abnegation and denial of the truth of the Gospel received, against distinct
Romans 1.32.
knowledge and John 8.9.
conviction of enlightened conscience; and this denial usually joined with
blasphemy, and reproachful, contumelious railing against Oods truth, as those
Pharisees, Mat. 12.24. though they could not but see Gods power in the miracles
wrought by our Savior, yet blasphemously impute those mighty works of the
Spirit of God, to the Prince of devils, even to Beelzebub, that is, to the Lord
of Flies, as the Hebrew word imports. 2. Opposing and oppugning by all means
the propagation of the truth; its noted of Pharisees, that they had made an
Ordinance, that whosoever confessed, or joined himself to Christ, he should be
cast out of their Synagogue, as was the blind man miraculously restored to
sight (though borne blind) by Christ, Joh. 9.34. and as it is noted of Julian,
that infamous Revolt, not only by fear and fraud, but even by rewards and
preferments, he labored to draw Christians to blaspheme, and to abjure the
Galilean (as that miscreant Christum subirde Galilaeum [per ignominiam]
vocitavit, and sepre^ centra eundem libros blasphemos evomuit. Ignatius.
Venetus, in vita ejus.
scoffingly called Christ) and to join with him in the worship of Idols. 3. To
these may be added violent persecution of the Professors of the Christian
Truth, for Truths sake, to the utmost of power, Joh. 8.40. They [sought] to
kill Christ himself who told them the truth, which he had heard of God; and
John 5.16. it is said, that the Jews persecuted Jesus; yea, and after his
crucifixion, made use of all manner of instruments, whom they thought likely to
be brought over to their party, some devout, and honorable women (abusing the
weakness of the sex to strengthen their own violence) and the chief men of a
City, to raise persecution against Paul and Barnabas, for preaching Christ
Jesus unto the people at Antioch. 13.50.


Now, in those that are brought nearer unto Christ, there goes with this sin,
a wilful desertion of the truth, and Apostasy from it; 2 Pet. 2.21. They
turn back from the holy Commandment delivered unto them. But, this point
being very tender, it must accordingly be handled with caution and wariness;
and therefore you must here remember that ancient distinction, betwixt lapsus,
and prolapsio, particular falls, and falling away: A spiritual man may be
overtaken in a fault, Gal. 6.1. (...), by a slip with his foot ((...)) yea,
very grievcus falls. We read of Gods own dear servants, who yet have recovered
their standing in the Church of God; even a just man may fall seven times a
day, that is, often in the John 9.4. (...), St. Chrysostom.
day of his lifetime (whether ye understand that fall of sin, as some, or by
sin into affliction, as others expound it) yet he still keeps the name of a
just man, for that he rises again, Pro. 24.16. Though he fall, says the
sweet singer of Israel, he shall not utterly be cast down, for the Lord
upholdeth him with his hand, Psalm. 37.24. Corruption even in the most mortified
Saints, sticks like to the spriggs of Ivy in an old wall, which though it be
often lopped, yet it will be sprouting again forth, and hardly at all removed,
or universally eradicated till the old wall it self be pulled down; sin that
Romans 7.24.
body of death will not, as a Jebusite in Canaan, quite out of our coasts, till
the death of the body, and by the occasion of sins inhabitation, variety of
temptations, from the world, from the flesh, and from the devil, like the sons
of Zerviah to David, prove 2 Samuel 3.39.
too hard for the best men, ofttimes, in many particulars: That of Peter is
almost peerlesse, so against his knowledge and conscience, execrably denying
the knowledge of Christ, Mat. 26. And the like read we of sundry in the
Primitive Church drawn, through fear, to deny the truth, and to worship Idols;
concerning many of whom, the Fathers of the Church, Ambrose and Austin
concluded, that they were not to be denied penance, or pardon, their very [
Neh. 1.11.
desire] to be restored to the Church, testifying, that there falls were of
infirmity, not of malice; wherefore, partial declinations, whether in
judgment, as those effascinated Galatians declined, Gal. 3.1. Or in zeal, and
affection, as the Angel of the Church in Ephesus, Re. 2.4. or in practice,
wherein all of u^ com short sometimes, either in the matter, or in the manner,
or in the measure of performance; yea often inordinate acts, like sprigs, or
suckers under the choycest graff, break forth; these partial declinations, I
say, must be distinguished from this Apostasy, which we call whole, it being as
Jun. in Paral.
Junius has described it, Totius, ex toto, in totum defectio, a defection of
the whole man, inward and outward, in judgment, conscience, will, memory,
affections, from all Gospeltruth, and gracious goodness, to all impiety,
joined with an obstinate full resolution never to embrace the same, or any part
thereof again.

These are their Facts.

The Motive thereto, which specially gives the form, specifically framing it as
it were to its proper nature, is Malice, obstinate spite, destinate hatred,
wherein they are carried against the Gospel, and all those that embrace and
profess it, treading under foot (even as Mat. 7.6.
swine do Margarites, and precious pearls) the Son of God, counting the blood
of the Covenant, wherewith they were sanctified, an unholy thing, doing despite
unto the spirit of grace, Heb. 10.29. that made S. August. de Temp. Ser. ^ 59.
Vide P. Lombard. 2. s. Did. 43. lit. A. B. C. D.
Austin describe it thus, Cum post agnitionem Dei per gratiam Domini nostri
Jesu Christi, quisquam oppugnat fraternitatem, and adversus ipsam gratiam, qua
reconciliatus est Deo, invidentiae facibus agitatur: When grace, for pure grace
sake, is maliciously resisted, so that the grace of the spirit is the very
ground of this whole pertinacious spite against the Spirit, the 1 Pet. 5.10.
God of all sanctifying and saving grace. And this is the reason S. Peter thus
sinned not, because not spite, but fear prevailed with him; That has also
made it questionable, whether Vide Pererij Disputat. ad 10. c. 13.
Judas sinned against the Holy Ghost, in betraying his Master, because his fact
seems not to have issued so much out of malice against our Saviors person or
doctrine, but from his covetousness, and love of Joh. 12.6.
the money-bag, which the Apostle calls the 1 Timothy 6.10.
root of all evil. That made it disputable also, whether Demas his forsaking
the Apostle, be censurable of this sin, for that not hatred of Paul's person,
but love of the 2 Timothy 4.10.
present world withdrew him: Yea, as we say not every 1 Ioh. 3.14.
love of Gods children is a token of our translating from death to life,
unless they be loved, eo Nomine, because they are gracious; so not every
hatred, or persecution, no not malicious of Gods children is to be so censured,
except grace be that that men's malice is carried against, as it was in wicked
Cain, against his righteous brother Abel, 1 John 3.12. It is a general
backsliding from the whole truth of the Gospel acknowledged, and a malicious
oppugning of the same, and that by all imaginable wicked means whatsoever.

And thus far also of the Concomitants of this sin unto death.

Thirdly, and lastly come to be observed the Consequents, or dangerous effects
of the same sin.

And these are, 1. Obstinate, and final impenitency; obstinacy is, Induratae
mentis in malitia pertinacia, as Pet. Lomb. nbi supra.
Peter Lombard describes it, a stubborn froward persisting of an hardened heart,
in wilful malice, by which a man becomes, and is made impenitent, Heb. 6.4.6.
It Is impossible, not difficult only, as some mince the matter) says the
Apostle, that such enlightened Apostates should be renewed again unto
repentance; and this too, not through defect in Gods mercy, which is as
himself it, Psa. 145.9.
boundless, infinite, incomprehensible, but through the just judgment of God
upon contempt of such grace offered to them, giving them up unto a Romans 1.28.
reprobate mind, and unto Romans 2.5. Exodus 7.13. Romans 9.
hardness of heart, and to such a state as they cannot repent, Romans 2.5.
sometimes, perhaps, some of them com to a (...), to some after thought-taking,
when they struggle with the wrath of God on their guilty black conscience, and
wish as Judas, that their sins had never been committed, only through horror
under the apprehension of the everlasting vengeance of God that awaites them;
but never to a (...), or a change of their minds; so that impenitency final is
one Consequent of this dreadful and deadly transgression. 2. Peerlesse
vitiosity in heart and manners; such men thus totally fallen, and finally
rendered impenitent, become in all vitiousnesse far Mat. 12.44, 45.
more vile then ever they were before their calling, 2 Pet. 2.20. their latter
end is worse with them, than their beginning: and it has been found most true
in all experience, that none ever have proved more swinish to wallow in the
mire of all 2 Cor. 7.1.
pollutions of flesh and spirit, then have vile Apostates; nor ever any more
insatiable Horsleaches, to suck out the blood of the saints of God, than such
who have metamorphized their first Christian profession, into an after
degenerous and Antichristian persecution. Vid. Nicholan. de Clemangis.
Rome, since it became Antichristian has proved more vile, then when it was at
first Paganish. 3. Irremissibility, and final impardonablenesse: Wherefore I
say unto you, says our Savior,( Conf. Mar. 3.29. and Luc. 12.10.
) Mat. 12.31, 32. all manner of Sin and Blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men:
But the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men. And
whosoever speaks a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: But
whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this World, nor in the World to come. Now that all sin, and all
manner of other sins (but this one) have been forgiven unto men, namely unto
men capable of forgivenes, such are only the elect of God, and the believing
penitents (for its a known Maxim in Orthodox Divinity, Nulla peccata
remittuntur reprobis, No sins are pardoned to the reprobate, and the
obstinately impenitent) This, I said, I shall manifest unto you; for as in the
brightest serenity of the Moon, so the Church (which Solomon resembles unto
the Moon, Cant. 6.10.) has when it is at the clearest, in its militant
condition here below, some blots, and spots that do blemish often the
pulchritude and beauty of it: insomuch that we read of some great Saints
sinning, particularly, even gross and enormous sins, so Genesis 9.22.
Noah fell by drunkenness, Genesis 19.33.35.
Lot by incest with his own daughters, 2 Samuel 11.4.
David by adultery, 1 Kings 11.5.
Solomon by idolatry, Mat. 26.74.
Peter by perjury, even all the Mar. 4.40.
Apostles by partial infidelity, yet these found place for repentance, and
upon that, remission and pardon; ye shall read in the Mat. 1.
Genealogy of our Savior Jesus Christ, a catalogue of persons Genesis 30.39.
speckled like Jacobs sheep (watered in the gutters of Laban) into variety of
sins, some Jews, some Gentiles, all, or most of them tainted; for this end,
among others, recorded, that miserable sinners might know that Christ came into
the world as the universal Physician, both able and willing to Psa. 41.4.
heal every diseased soul, yea such a Physician as comes home often unsent for,
going Acts 10.38.
about doing good, and curing all Luke 4.40.
kind and Mat. 4.23.
manner of diseases; he is that Luke 10.33.
pitying Samaritan, who cannot pass by a Pro. 18.14.
wounded spirit without pouring in the oil of his mercy, had such but first a
Hos. 5.13.
sight, and 1 Kin. 8.33.
sense of their own wounds; yea, he was such a Physician, who for to save the
lives, and to redeem the souls of penitent patients from death, most cheerfully
Jo. 10.17, 18.
laid down his own life, Luke 23.34.
praying for them that Matthew. 27, 29, 30, 31.
mocked, Mat. 27.39. 1 Pet. 2.13.
reviled, Mat. 27.35. Phil. 2.8.
crucified, Acts 2.23. and 3.15. and 7.52.
murdered him; yea here in this Scripture (but now named to you) that the
blasphemy of the Son of man, that is, of Christ himself, who veiling for a time
the glorious splendour of his Divinity, by the flesh of his obsure Humanity, was
supposed by the ignorant Jews, to be but a Phil. 2.7, 8.
mean man, though he were, at the same time, the Psa. 24.7, 8.
King of glory, and so they filled their mouths with reproaches of him,
charging him with whole volleyes of the highest blasphemies, stiling him Mat.
27.63.
deceiver, Mat. 11.19.
glutton, contemptuously, Jo. 8.48.
Samaritan, Mat. 12.24. Joh. 9.29.
this fellow, a Mat. 11.19.
friend of Publicans and sinners, one who had a Jo. 8.52.
devil, and what miracles he did, he wrought them by the Mat. 12.24.
Prince of devils; O horrid! lo yet and see, even this blasphemy, so high, so
notorious, so dishonorable, is pardonable to the repenting blasphemers; but
the blasphemy of the Holy Ghost, (...) [mipescha rab] that great offense, with
an (...), so called by King David, who prayed earnestly to be preserved from
it, Ps 19.13. This blasphemy (God in his justice denying the grace of
repentance to it) this is utterly irremissible, everlastingly unpardonable,
even unto all eternity; wherefore, it is added, Neither in this world, nor in
the world to com, not, in this world, because, say some, blasphemy coming (at
least during the Jewish administration) under the cognizance, and power of the
Magistrate, it was no way, by no means capable of any reprieve at all, but the
soul Lev. 24.16. Vid. Simon majolum, lib. De perfidia Indaeor. p 73. and 241,
242, etc. Blasphemia, and spiritus Blasphemiae differunt: spisitus blasphemiae
suspirat ad odium Deis sicut spiritus sanctus ad dei amorem; Blasphemia
remittetur, spiritus a Blasphemiae non. Joh. Altenstaig in ser. Theolog. in
voc. Blasphemia, p. 102, 103. v.d. Dieterie: Dn: 19. post Trin. p. 747, 748. in
4o.
so sinning must be cut off without mercy, from Gods people, and be stoned to
death; or more generally thus, not in this world by any promise, or assurance
of it at all from heaven, or the word of God, the patent of penitents (but not
of such final impenitents) for pardon: nor in the world to come, understand it
thus, not as supposing, by that expression, any hopes remaining (after death)
to any other kind of sinners, whose life expired, as it was lead in a course of
presumptuous impenitency (as the great Patrons of purgatory would persuade
their ignorant and besotted proselites) but this is only a distribution, or
divisive speech, intended not to signify things diverse, but to aggravate and
to exagerate the same thing; and used it is, it may be, purposely to lay a
stumbling block in the way of the obstinate, to restrain and to withhold them
from sinning so desperately, and with an high hand against the Lord, so as
thereby they wilfully cut themselves off from all present, future, or succeeding
hopes of mercy to their graceles souls: In a word, the sin against the father
is remitted by the redemption of the son; the sin against the Son is pardoned
through the application of his merit, by the Holy Ghost, but the sin against
the Spirit has no remission, because there is no way of expiation, there being
by God in judgment intercluded the way to the mean of mercy, which is
repentance; such men therefore (so sining) shall the spirit himself Jo. 16.8.
convince of judgment unto confusion; for says the great Apostle, If we sin
wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain searful looking for of
judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries, Heb. 10.26,
27. And for this cause is it, that this sin is here styled by S. John, (...), a
sin unto death, and that, not only because in its own nature it deserves the
common death, consisting in the separation of the soul from the body, for this
is the wages of every sin, Rm 6.23. but because it being the will of God to
shut up under final impenitency the men so sining, it merits, and so shall
infallibly incur not that only which is called the Iosb. 23.14.
common way of all the earth in the temporal death, but also the sentence and
sense of the Rev. 2.11.
second death; which second or eternal death consists in the Mat. 25.41, 46.
2 Thessalonians. 2.9.
everlasting separation of both soul and body, from Gods gracious and glorious
presence (which is the punishment also) and withal (which is the punishment of
sense) the plunging of both into inexpressible torments with the devil, his
accursed Angels, and all other damned blaspheming spirits, even for ever and
ever.


This is the sin, for the nature of it very heinous, and for the danger of it
(as ye have it thus declared to you) most dismal and full of horror.

A word or two further of the style or titles given hereunto in holy writ,
which was the second general Head of my division proposed; of which succinctly,
that (withal considering the great affairs ensuing) I may hasten to my
Application, in which indeed consists all the marrow, and Psa. 36.8.
satnes, even the very life and vigor of every solid Sermon, and divine
discourse.

The style or title given to it by our Savior, is, as ye heard but now, Mat.
12.31. The Blasphemy of the holy Ghost, that is, the endeavoring to dishonor
the holy Ghost, it is a Greek word, (...), as it were hurting (if I may dare so
to express it) the fame, and blurring the glory of the holy Spirit? But why of
the holy Ghost? and not of the Father, or of the Son? is not the whole Trinity
one Spirit, Joh. 4.24. each person is God, equal in majesty and glory, and God
is a Spirit?

There is an inquiry made, Whether, indeed, a man may not so sin against one
person of the Trinity, that in that Fact, he sins not against the whole
Trinity? To which the resolution is, That virtually, and in the issue, the sin
reaches to the whole three persons; however, intentionally, one alone be
stricken at. Alex. Hal. f. 704. in front


Alexander* Halensis (the Patriarch of the School Divines) Durand. l. 2. did.
13. qu. 1. in senti.
Durandus, and other of that rank, conceive, that there are divine properties,
in respect of their exercise, appropriated to the several persons, as power to
the Father, wisdom to the Son, and goodness to the holy Ghost; so that a sin
of weakness or infirmity, is committed against the Father, that is, against the
power of God; a sin of ignorance is committed against the Son, that is, against
the wisdom of God; a sin of wickedness, malice, or hatred, is committed
against the holy Spirit, that is, against the goodness of God. But waving
these curiosities, spun upon the wheel of men's quaint apprehensions, however in
themselves (thus applied) not wholly impertinent, this blasphemy is so called,
not because it is intended so much against the S. August. l. 1. c. 11. De. Trin.
person of the holy Ghost, the third person in the blessed Trinity, as against
the proper Vrsin. q. 7. Catech.
operation and efficacious work of the holy Ghost. Dr Gerard: qua supra. s. 109.
Gerard (a most learned Lutheran Divine) thus gives his exposition of this
style; It Is so styled, says he, partly in regard of the ministration of the
spirit, which is the glorious Gospel, he applying and sweetly diffusing into
the hearts of all contrite and disconsolate Christians, the comforts and
promises of grace therein contained, through the blood of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor.
3.8. in respect whereof he is likewise styled, The Comforter, John 15.26. And
partly also in regard of his office, which is illumination, and enlightening of
the minds of his elect, Ephesians. 1.18. in respect whereof he is in his operation
compared to fire, Mat. 3.11. as well for light, as for heat, and therefore the
shunning of that light is called, the Quenching of the Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.
And lastly, in regard of his gracious testimony, and witness, testifying and
witnessing to the spirit of believers, That they are the sons of God, Romans
8.16. To which also may be added his directive manuduction, leading the elect
into all necessary fundamental truth, Joh. 16.13. And so much, in sum, for the
reason of this style given hereto in holy writ.

We may not, in the next place, omit to take notice of the Epithet that is
given to it in another Scripture, at which I gave a glance but now; it is in
Psa. 19.13. where it is called by the Prophet, The [Great] Offense, so indeed
by an (...), even without peer, Non est majus delictam, amongst all sins that
Cast-away's fall into, as there are many foul and erroneous, none so great as
this: Truth is, whatever a man can think of to aggravate a sin to the height of
heinous, in this all concur: Their Facts imply Heb. 10.29.
Contempt of the Son of God, profanation of the blood of the Covenant,
contumely to the holy Ghost; besides all this, Foulest ingratitude to that God
who offered so great grace to their souls, declared by their blaspheming the
truth, oppugning the speaking of it, so glorious to God, so healthful to men;
Circumstances yet make it fouler, the Motive especially, for That it issues out
of malice, and destinate spite against the majesty of God. No marvel then
was it, that our Savior taught it to be unpardonable, that is, not as some
interpret, hardly pardonable, but utterly incapable of pardon, through a just
Ordinance of God, shutting up the fountain of his mercy against the souls of
such impious and godless miscreants: and hither, to this purpose, may well be
applied that passage in Solomon's Proverbs, Pro. 28.18. where he says, that
whosoever walks uprightly, shall be saved, but he that is perverse in his ways,
shall fall at once; the emphasis lies in that clause [at once] Semel dicitur
cadere qui irreparabiliter cadit, as Alex. Hal. part. 4. qu. 12. mem. 5. art. 1.
Halensis expounds it, he is said to fall at once, who falls beyond hope of
recovery, irreparably, and so that texs is meant, not of a common slipping
aside, but of a final back sliding (Perversis graditur viis, id est, perfect
versis) which happens in final impenitency: and this passage of Solomon seems
to me to be equivalent to what our Savior pronounced on those blasphemous
Pharisees, Joh. 9.41. when he declared that their sin [remained] that whereas a
sin of ignorance (though in it self enormous) might be capable of pardon,
which is evident from many Scriptures and examples, as Number. 15.27, 28. Psalm.
19.12. Heb. 9.7. 1 Timothy 1.13. Acts 17.30. Yet, their presumptuous blaspheming
against professed knowledge, clear sight, and evidence of truth, this their sin
was not a slight or a transient act, and so to be passed over as sometimes God
did Jacob, without being [seen] or observed for punishment, Number. 23.21. but it
is a sin [remaining] as it were written with the Ier. 17.1.
point of a diamond; the Actors of it being, as the Prophet speaks, always Ps.
109.15.
before the Lord, Legatur Beza ad 1 Io. 5.16. fuse explicantem naturam peccati
istius: Confer: Bp. Usher, in his Sum of Christian Religion p. 151, 152. Edit.
1648.
that he might have both them and their sin in his sight, and remembrance,
never to blot out, or to remit it.

So then, to recapitulate the sum of all, the Sin against the Holy Ghost is no
less then, A wilful malicious, and obstinate denying of the foundation,
renounsing Christ Jesus as the Mediator and Redeemer of the world; It is a to
tall Apostasy from the Faith, when the whole man revolteth from the whole
Christian Religion, wholly, with an obstinate resolution never to return to it
any more; neither is it possible for him that is guilty thereof to mourn, and
lament for his sins; his stubborn and reprobate heart is not so tender, but
being past all sorrow and feeling, rather (as Mr Jo. Down in Tract: against Mr
Baxter.
one farther adds to express the measure of it) rejoices and boasts in his
desperate and malicious obstinacy. Soli filij irae iram non sentiunt, sed
laetantur, and exultant in rebus p^ssimio. Ber. P^. 52.1. Iam. 4.16. Deuteronomy.
29.19.


This is the sin, for nature most heinous, for the issue most dangerous,
dreadful, formidable; in the mention whereof, methinks the powers of men's
souls cannot but be shaken, their thoughts trouble them, and as Dan. 5.6.
Belshazzar's at the fight of the handwriting upon the wall (whilst he sat
quaffing in the vessels of the sanctuary) the joints of their loins be loosed,
and their knees smite one against another.

Psa 147.20. 1 Cor. 1.21.
their care may be increased to preserve themselves from it: It Is a great
favor God has granted us, that unto us he has vouch safed, in the means, the
knowledge of himself, in the face of Jesus Christ, he has not dealt so with
many Nations more, that herewithall he has daigned also to Ephesians. 1.18.
enlighten the eyes of our understanding, to know the Ephesians. 3.3, 4. 1 Timothy 3.16.
mystery of Godliness, he has not dealt so with many Children of the Church;
many (the more is the pity) live still in gross ignorance of necessariest
Articles: To some of us yet more, that he has given us Phil. 1.29. Ephesians. 2.8.
faith to believe it; woe is me! that there should be amongst us many of ripe
understanding, that yet dare question the truth of the Gospel: yea, to some yet
more, he has granted Phil. 1.9. (...).
sense of the comfort, of the 1 Pet. 2.3. 2. Cor. 2.14.
sweetness, and perhaps also of the Romans 1.16.
power thereof to reform us: Josh. 23.11. Heb. 3.12. Preservatives against the
sin against the Holy Ghost.
Take heed Brethren, that so great favor of God be not frustrate by our
unthankefull Apostasy.

Among many Preservatives that might happily be set down, to keep men from
Apostasy, and from this great sin, give me leave to offer to your
considerations, these following.

1. Labor by all means to fasten on your hearts the 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
love of that saving truth wherein you have been enlightened; strong delusion is
sent upon men that received not the love of the truth; there is a disease of
latter times called the Rickets, when Children rather swel then grow in the
upper parts, and find a luxation of members, and a debility downwards; so it is
become now likewise a disease in the spiritual part of men, they swel like the
ancient Gnostics with knowledge in the brain, with 1 Cor. 8.1. (...) [(...)] 1
Cor. 8.1.
puffing speculations swiming in the head, but have little affection of what
they so apprehend in pure notion: but my brethren, when all is done, it is not
the understanding head, but it is the understanding heart, that avails to
solid happiness: The red Rev. 12.4.
Dragon in the Revelation, is observed to have drawn the 3d part of those who
were as stars for light, with him unto the earth; wherefore, the most
experienced Casuists have resolved, That Gods School is more of holy sanctified
affection, then of mere notional, or floating speculation: and so it has been
found true in all Histories of the Church, that unsanctified wits abounding
with variety of learning, as Arrius, Porphyrie, and other like; Satan has made
use of to corrupt, and to deprave the truth of the Gospel.

2. Carefully preserve Conscience from known disobedience; it is dangerous to
slight the strokes thereof, when it 1 Samuel 24.5.
smites thee for the act, and perpetration of that, whereof thy conscience is
Joh. 8.9.
convinced it is sin; when men stop their Psa. 58.5.
ears against the directions of that secret Monitor which God (as his principal
Vicegerent in the soul) has placed in every bosom, they are in great peril
of a down-fal; yea, that is the means, at length to make it filent, and so by
degrees in the issue, through Ex consuetudine peccandi Dei metus amittitur, and
contemptus incutitur. S. Aug.
custom, Ephesians. 4.19. Primo declinantes a medio capimur, capti occaecamur,
occaecati obduressimus, obdurati desperamus: Cas: in Eth:
sensles, which in sensibility is the most dangerous state of the conscience,
Scio longius a salute absistere membrum quod obstupuit, and aegrum sese non
sentientem, periculosius laborare, as S. Bernard speaks, A stupefied member is
hardly curable but by corrasives, if at all by them; and there is by far more
hope of the curation of one sick (though very far gone) who is senfible of his
malady, then of him, who before he does, or will see his disease, is swallowed
up in a miscarriage: That one example is memorable of Hymineus and Alexander,
who having not joined to their Science Conscientia mala sine desperatione non
est. S. Aug. praef. super. Psalm. 31.
Conscience, having put away the one, they lost the soundnes of the other, and
made shipwreck of their Faith, 1 Timothy 1.19.20.

3. Cherish by all means the sweet motions of grace, and of the spirit of God:
1 These: 5.19. O take heed, vex him not. Isa: 63.10. grieve him not: Ephesians: 4.30.
rather let thine ears hear that word behind thee, saying: This is the way, walk
ye in it, Isa. 30.21: it may be there are many of you here present, who now
hear this no^se this day, in the Ministry of this very word now spoken into
your ears. Be afraid how ye neglect to be Joh. 16.13. Psalm. 143.10.
lead and guided by this good spirit of God speaking to you in that very Isa.
59.21.
word which himself has 2 Timothy 3.16.
inspired; its said to recount the case of many men in this behalf, that throw
off such motions with disregard, and deem them (through the Jer. 17.9.
deceitfulnes of their hearts, the Heb. 3.13.
deceitfulnes of sin, and the cunning insinuations of Satan) but fits of
melancholy arising from the natural complexion of the body, or some sudden
qualnes of conscience that do surprise them. Beloved Brethren, I beseech you
consider that when God offers such grace, he offers himself to you as to
Children, if ye be Romans 8.14.
led by the Spirit of God, and that not only in point of Psalm. 25.12. Mic. 6.8.
direction. and of Isa 30.21.
instigations (unto which steps is possible, as if I had time might be
demonstrated for an unregenerate man to ascend) but chiefly in respect of
prevalence, so that by way of eminence, and ruling predominancy, you are led by
him, then are you the sons of God in good earnest: 4. Prudently notice, Rom:
8.14
and with all spiritual Ephesians. 5.15. (...).
circumspection, observe thy declinings, and abatements of thy measures of
grace, and how thy devotion, or zeal (which should not like Ioshuas sun stand
Josh. 10.13.
still, but like David's sun rather rejoice as a Giant Psalm. 19.5. 2 King. 20.10.
to run a race onwards in its course) how it does Isa. 38.8.
go back like Hezekiahs sun, in its degrees; and never leave the strick rest
use of the most conscientious means, till thou have recovered thy ancient
measures: Rev: 24.5. Yea I will be bold to say thus much further: No Christian
can possibly have any solid assurance upon firm grounds, of any truth of saving
grace begun in the heart, who is not careful to cherish, and to increase it by
those means which God has sanctified to that end, and therefore he gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and
Teachers for the work of the Ministry, not only to gather the Saints together,
by 1 Cor. 3.5, 6, 7.
planting of true Doctrine in the Church; but also to 1 Pet. 5.10.
confirm, strengthen, settle, stablish, yea to [perfect] the same Saints, under
the use of the same means of their first calling; see to this purpose: Ephesians:
4.11.12, 13. to the same effect is it, thas we read Cant: 3.1, 1, 3, 4 Where we
may easily discover the behavior of the Spouse, or Church of Christ
languishing under the absence, or the withdrawing of her Mystical Husband
Jesus Christ: what does she do? Why, make diligent enquiry, and strict search
after him, leaving no ways or means unattempted, and is restles till she had
again found him whom her soul loved: in those ways wherein (in all
probability) she had left him, in those when she sought him. Yet there seeking
she found him not: By night in my bed I sought him whom my soul loves, I
sought him, but I found him not; in her Bed the plase of ease, and rest, (she
means when she had too Indulgendum somno est, ut corpus reparet, non resolvat,
and vires revocet, non enervet. Chrysolog. ser. 24. Non sit sepultura
suffocati, sed requies lassi. Hieron.
much indulged thereto) lulling her self a sleep in a supine regardlesnes, and
security, there she found him not: Christ has no inward sensible communion
with a resty, unactive, lazy soul, for Christians must not be Cretians, (...),
Tit. 1.12.
slow bellies: Well, what course does she take next, I will rise now (says
she) leave my drowzy temper, and being risen, I will go about the City in the
streets, and in the broad ways, I will seek him whom my soul loves, that is,
among those who stand Matt. 20.6.
idle, and loitring in the Market places, unemployed in their own, though 1
Pet. 4.15.
busy bodies enough, perhaps about the doings of others, or else such as
following the guize of wavering times, meteorizing as it were, and unresolved,
or indifferent in the matters of Religion, run on in a full career the smooth
broad ways to what is dangerous, she sought him there, but she missed of her
aim, she sought him, but she found him not: Well, do but observe her in her
carriage but a little farther, and then, but not till then, she finds him. The
watchmen that go about the City found me to whom I said, Saw ye him whom my
soul loves? What are these Ezekiel. 3.17. Heb. 13.19.
Watch men? but those spiritual Pastors, or Ministers, whose office is to give
warning, upon due, and seasonable discovery, of the danger of the Souls
enemies, as themselves watching over them for good, even as those who must give
account in the day of judgment, Hebr. 13.17. Well, the text adds, It was but a
little that I passed from them, but I found Him, whom my soul loves; to imply,
that whilst she sought for Christ, where indeed He was to be found, namely, by
the footsteps of the flocks, and by the shepherds tents: Cant: 1.8. there, if
any where, among such Instruments of conveying him in the Ministrey unto her
soul, He was to be heard of, and actually found; By the same Messengers who
were first Romans 10.15.
sent by God, with a Commission to preach the Gospel of peace, and to bring
glad tidings of good things; even by the same (if not in individual, yet in
kind) did, and does the Church again recover the presence, and with it the
joy, and sweetness thereof to her distressed spirits: to the like purpose also
may we hither apply that gloss which S. Bernard gives upon the withdrawing of
Thomas from the company of the other Apostles unto whom the Lord Christ
manifested Himself after his resurrection, but not unto him being then Joh.
20.24.
away; Falleris Thoma sancte, falleris, si ab Ap^stolorum collegio segregatus
invenire Christum speras: O Thomas, thou art deceived, if thou hopest to find
Christ severed from the congregation of the Apostles, and Saints of God;
Wherefore is it, that the Apostle so zealously exhorts the Hebrews, Hebr:
10.25. not to forsake the assembling of themselves together, as the manner of
some is: and, that man after Gods own heart, see how restless his soul is, till
he could (after a forced absence from thence) again visit those amiable
tabernacles of the Lord of hosts; mark, I beseech you, what pathetick metaphors
or similitudes he borrows to illustrate, or express his zealous anhelations,
and gaspings after God; the one of a woman under her (...) (with whom there is
pallor in ore, and tremor in cord) her fits of longing, which if unsatisfied
endanger swooning, yea often life it self: Psalm: 84.2. My soul longs, yea,
even faints for the cou^ts of the Lord: my heart and my flesh cries out for
the living God. The other of the Heart braying after water, and ready even to
sink down dead before the bloody pursuers; As the heart Psalm 42.1, 2.
pants after the water brooks, so pants my soul after Thee, O God; My soul
thirsts for God for the living God; When shall I come, and appear before God?
His meaning is, to declare the sweet communion he lately had, and now most
fervently again desired to renew with God, under the enjoyment of his restored,
soul saving Ordinances, dispersed in the Sanctuary: so that this may well be
set down as another preservative against this dangerous downfall.

5. Take heed, how thou do allow, or bear with thy self in any presumptuous
sin, yea though but in one single particular: If thou willingly lie down under
the power, dominion, Romans 6.12.
reign of any one known sin, whereof thy judgment and conscience, upon clear
evidence of Scripture is convinced that it is a sin, thou can not promise thy
self an immunity, or freedom from the greatest sin: alas! what odds is it, in
the issue, whether i^ the ship sink, or be split in sunder, it be by some
insensible, secret leak, or by some violent blast that dasheth the ribs thereof
against the rocks? or, if a bird be taken in the gin, whether by one claw, or
by the whole body, so it come into the hands of the fowler, as a prey? and,
indeed, the Apostle, 2 Timothy: 2.26. uses the very same metaphor of men held
captive at the will of the Devil, they are (...), taken alive, even as a Bird
is trapped in a snare, and at the pleasure of the Devil to tempt, or to torment
him: one mire may defile a sow, one sword destroy a man, one disease, as well
as a thousand bring him to his grave, even one sin unrepented of, endanger the
soul to Hell. Now, for the proof of this, consult I beseech you, with that
clear Text, Psalm: 19.13. Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins, let
them not have [dominion] over me: then shall I be upright, and I shall be
innocent from the great transgression: from this Scripture it is very clear
that even David himself could not secure himself from this sin, in case he had
born with himself under the [reigne] of particular presumptions: Certainly, I
dare say he was of his mind, a man as he, enlightened a Member of the Church,
living under the dominion of any sin, was endangered to the sin against the
Holy Ghost, which here he calls the great transgression: When Conscience once
grows incensible of sin, as through [ Tanta est corruptela malae consuetudinis,
ut ab ea igniculi extinguantur a natura dati, exorianturque vitia contraria.
Cic. li. 1. de Leg.
custome] of evil every conscience does; what sin, or degree of sin can a man
secure himself from? Ephesians: 4.19. When a man is once past feeling, he gives
himself to commit sin with greedines, then follows often in Gods Judgment,
spiritual desertion, God gives a man over to the swing of his own corrupt
heart, and to the power of Satan; and he must needs go (we say) whom the Devil
drives: Wherefore dear Christians, and Countrymen, Heb 13.22.
suffer the word of exhortation, and let the admonition be that of Paul, 2 Timothy:
2.19. Let every one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity. The
pure grace of the glorious Gospel is no Romans 6.1. Gal. 5.13.
warrant for any impure, ranting licentiousnes: Tremble to bear with thy self
in any sin against conscience, nor to let sin reign in thy mortal body, lest
thou endanger thy self to (...) sin, which is unto death.

Beloved, its a great mercy of God to be born in the Church, and to enjoy the
privileges (though but out ward) of it, and yet this think of: The state of
the children of the Church may prove worse a great deal, than the state of
Jews, and Pagans, that never yet gave entertainment to the Gospel, though they
have sins enough to damn them, yet they are out of danger of this sin
unpardonable; therefore be exhorted, and the more also, for that its strange to
see the strong 2 These. 2.11.
delusion sent upon many, that though they Deuteronomy. 29.19
bless themselves in their wickedness, and add drunkenes to thirst, yet seem to
be out of danger of other gross sins; whereas its demonstrative from what has
been thus collected from this of David, that no man can promise himself a
freedom from the foulest sins, in whom any sin reigns.

Lastly, (for I hasten) let not that be forgotten of the Apostle, Heb: 6.1. who
upon this very ground, admonishes saying, Let us go on unto perfection:
compare 2 Pet: 3.18. For its impossible that if we fall away, (he means
universally) we should again be renewed unto a true repentance; he seems to
take it for granted, that there is no mean between seeming sufficiency, and
certain Apostasy: and this withal remember, that our growth will be expected,
and accounted for, according to the measure of our 1 Cor. 3.6, 7. Heb. 6.7.
watering, and those means of grace which the Lord has afforded us; it shall
be charged more heavily upon the score of Chorazin, and Bethsaida, and
Capernaum in the day of Judgment, than upon Tire and Sidon, yea or upon Sodom
and Gomorrah, though those Cities were of most prodigious, and even Romans 1.26,
27.
unnatural abominations: the reason is, because they had more means by
preaching miracles, etc. than the other had.

To draw toward a conclusion: Beloved Christians let every one now, upon these
several intimations, seriously Psalm. 77.6.
commune with his own heart, and let his spirit make diligent search, examine
and Lam. 3.40.
cry himself into what degrees of this sin he has grown, that as Peter spoke
to that Act. 8.22.
Simon, If it be possible, his sin may be forgiven him, whilst every one
endeavors to recover his first estate, and to do his first works. Rev: 2.4.

We have been many of us brought past the antecedents of this sin; the Lord
has declared unto us the truth of the Gospel, and oh, how precious, not only
in regard of the rarity, but of the valuation and esteem, as the word of God in
the days of 1 Samuel 3.1.
Samuel, was the light thereof, when it first brake out in these parts? I doubt
not but with many of us, illumination has been so clear, that we have been
convinced, and some kind of profession most of us have made of the Gospel. And
yet alas! lamentable is the state of many Act. 7.51.
resisting the truth, and too much 2 Timothy 2.25
opposing against it, whereby the course of the Gospel is not a little stopped,
at lest in the purity thereof: Hereunto may be added Joh. 9 28. 1 Cor. 5.11. 1
Cor. 6.10. (...), raylling dicitur, a (...) and (...), as it were to excoriate,
and skin a man: or, (...), Eustathius: A word wounding like a sharp spear; by
David the wicked tongue is compared to a sharp razor, Psalm. 52.2.
railings, and blasphemies of the multitude; How many scandals raised, I say
not of the persons of the Ministers (though God, wheresoever he has on earth a
Church to gather, or to perfect, he will have a Ministry, even in despite of
Hell it self, unto the end of the world) but of the very Doctrine of the
Gospel: And is it not too true, that as Ishmael prosecuted Isaac, Gal: 4.29. so
it is now: if any profess but a* desire to keep conscience void of offense
toward God and man is commonly* the byword of the People. Brethren, these are
fearful steps, I may not say of malice, for then I would tremble, yea I am
forbidden in my Text, to pray for men so sinning: But thus far many have gone,
O let such labor to recover themselves. Faxit.

Hitherto of the first, and general use of this point: Heb. 13.18.
I come now to apply it with a more particular respect unto such of Gods
servants as have a more special interst in his favor, such as are actually
regenerate, Act. 24.16 Use 2.
and born of God. Dearest Christians, this is that which may prevent your own
discomfort, that issues many times out of groundles fear, lest your state be as
that of those guilty of this sin, hopeles in such sort, that very infirmities,
especially where has been knowledge of Duty, and perhaps some reluctation of
conscience, are censured this great sin: But take heed, bear not false witness
against thy self, yea or against the truth of the promises, and of that Jer.
32.40.
everlasting Covenant of grace made to thy soul, and 2 Cor. 1.20
ratified in the Heb. 10.29.
blood of Jesus Christ, whose blood speaks Heb. 10.29.
better things then the blood of Abel; Abels blood Heb. 12.24.
cried unto Heaven or vengeance, but the Genesis 4 10.
blood of Christ for mercy: 1 John 1.7.
Know thou this, whosoever thou art that indeed fear God in 2 Cor. 1.12.
simplicity of heart, so long as a man holds the way of righteousness in the
course of his life, though (like the exorbitancy of a wheel, temptation may
justle him out of the track) he have his steppings aside in particulars, yet
hereof let him be secure, this sin he is not fallen into, for that implies an
utter for saking of the whole, 1 Pet. 2.21
way of righteousness: and generally so long as we keep in us the love of Gods
truth, and of Gods Children, for truths sake, we are out of gunshot of this
sin: yea, if God at any time 2 Timothy 2.25.
give thee repentance for any sin which thou hast-committed, conclude it not
this great sin, which is unto death.

And yet possibly, it may sometime so fall out (for as in Water face answers
to face, so the Heart of Man to Man, Preverbs 27.19. and it has been the case
of diverse others, even renowned Saints) I say it may sometimes befall a godly
soul, what it did to David, and Heman; the one Psalm: 77.7.8.9. passionately
bemoaning himself, and dolefully putting the question, (as speaking after his
present sense.) Will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favorable no
more? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore?
Has God forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender mercies?
Selah. Compare Psalm: 38. and also Psalm the 6. and Psalm 32.3, 4. and the
other almost throughout the whole 88th Psalm complains of the Lam. 3.44.
clouds from heaven, yea of the very Job 26.14.
thunder of Gods power and wrath rattling over him, and sensibly felt in his
soul within him: O Lord God of my salvation, I have cried Day and Night before
thee, O incline thine ear unto my Cry, for my soul is full of troubles, thy
wrath lies hard upon me, and thou have afflicted me with all thy waves, Selah.
Mine eye mourns by reason of affliction: And again, verse. 14. Lord, why
castest thou off my soul? Why hidest thou thy face from me? I am afflicted,
and ready to dye from my youth up, while I suffer thy terrors, I am
distracted; thy fierce wrath goes over me, thy terrors have cut me off.
Beloved, here under these mournful expressions ye see what Job 3.5. Joel 2.6.
blackness now was upon the perplexed spirits even of these great Saints of
God, for the present time: and to the same effect is that of Hezekiah, Isa.
38.14, 15. Like as a Crane or a swallow, so did I chatter, I did mourn as a
Dove, mine eyes fail with looking upward: O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake
for me, and ease me, -- I shall go softly all my years, in the bitterness of
my soul. In like manner St. Paul of himself, 2 Cor. 7.5. We were troubled on
every side, without were fightings, within were fears. And this many times is
very much occasioned by entering Comparisons of our own state with others, on
whom (as we think) Job 29.3. Psalm. 50.2.
God shines altogether, and so we entertain conceits, as if the Lord had clean
crossed us out of his Book, that he Job 30.20.
regards us not at all; that he looks upon others, but passes by us like a
Jer. 14.8.
stranger, to whom we are not known: Then we think our own case to be Lam.
1.12.
none such, when we take Ieisure to look upon others, and comparing them with
our selves, say their Psalm, 23.5.
Tables are furnished day by day, whilst earth and Psalm. 42.3.
ashes and tears are our bread; they Amos 6.5.
sing to the Lute, and to the Viole, and they see their children Psalm. 17.14.
dance before them; and (as that not more learned, than devout Divine M. Mr.
Hooker; treat: of perpetuity of Faith in the Elect, p. 95.
( Hooker goes on, in flowrs of heavenly Rhetoric to set this out) our hearts
are heavy in our bodies as lead, our sighs beat as thick as a swift pulse, our
tears Psalm. 6.6.
do wash the beds wherein we lie, whilst others wash in their paths in Job
29.6. Job 29.3.
butter, as Job says: The Lords candle shines fair upon their foreheads; we
are hanged up like Ps. 119.83.
bottles in the smoke, Psalm. 31.12.
cast into corners like the sherds of a broken pot: Tell not us of the promises
of Gods favor, tell For my own part, I, in such a case of comparisons (which if
in any, surely in spiritual things are if not odious, most discomfortable) I
should advise a disconsolate soul, not to judge, or esteem his spiritual state
by another measures, but by his own integrity, and soundnes, and to consider
himself not by the degrees of inherent sanctification by way of vigorous
exercise, (which may be interrupted, Mar. 4.40. in himself) but by the
stability of Gods donation, or gift of that grace in it self, which is
irrevocable, Romans 11.29. and then rest confident, that (as Dr. Field expresses
it ( l. 1. c. 7, 8. of the Church) saving grace wins infalibly, holds
inseparably, and leads indeclinably, of which whosoever is partaker shall
undoubtedly be saved.
[such] as do reap the fruit of them, they belong not to us, they are made to
others. Now Brethren, the Lord be merciful to our weakness, but thus it is
sometimes: But thou will now say unto me, what must my demeanor be under this
sad distemper of my spirit, thus as David's, Even overwhelmed within me, Psalm.
142.3. Why, do thou as those very Saints of God (in the like condition before
thee) did; review Psalm. 77.10. After the Prophets lamentation, upon his more
advised thoughts, he said, it was his [infirmity] so to do, and then he called
to remembrance the years of the right hand of the most High: The right hand is
both the strongest, and withal the most ready to use, upon all occasions; so
with the Lord most high there is an omnipotent power Isa. 26.4. Isa. 63.1.
an everlasting strength, and, He is mighty to save, the Psalm. 103.8.
slowest to conceive a wrath, and readiest to forgive a sin: Tam pater nemo,
Tam pius nemo, Tertul. Take the Apostles counsel, Heb. 10.32.35. Cast not
therefore away your confidence, which has great recompense of reward; Chide
down thy diffidence and distrustful passions, and say, Why art thou thus cast
down o my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God, for
I shall (...), yet there is hope left thee. St. John the Apostle said it in the
Eclesiast. Hist. to a wild young man, Ez. 10.2.
[yet] praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God, Psalm.
42.11. and 43.5. What? do not the promises belong to thee? a Psalm. 116.16. Number.
12.7, 8.
servant? a Jam. 2.23. Joh. 15.14, 15.
friend? yea, a Romans 8.14.17. Heb. 12.7.
son, yet more, an heir, a joynt-heir with Jesus Christ himself? and by that
means Psalm. 34 7. Cant. 6.8.
encompassed with a guard of heavenly Heb. 1.14.
Angels, even Angels of Psalm. 103.20. and 2 These. 1.7.
might, and power to protect thee against all the powers of Hell, and
darkness? To whom but unto thee, who art a regenerate soul, does that promise
appertain (...).
Heb. 13.5. I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; there are five Negatives
in the Greek repeated, to assure Gods people, that he will never forsake them;
it may be rendered according to the Greek (as one does it) I will not not leave
thee, neither will I not not forsake thee: Repetitions are no vain Tautologies
in holy Writ, they are used as Pharaoh's dreams were Genesis 41.32.
doubled, to assure the Saints of the more certain confirmation of what the
Spirit of truth has spoken: To thee, I say belongs that rich, and 2 Pet. 1.4.
precious, even honorable promise of Almighty God; alas! alas! it is not for
swine to expect such pearls to be cast away upon them, Matthew. 7.6. This is a
teat of comfort only for the Child to suck, even to Isa. 66.11.
suck out and be satisfied, as from the breasts of Consolation; this is not
meat for every mouth, but a chosen moisture provided for Gods Inheritance
only; this is Wine of Gods own Cellar, laid up for his Spouse alone, that is,
for the devout soul dedicated unto Gods service: Wherefore lift up the hands
which hang down, and the feeble knees, Heb. 12.12. O take heed of that ugly sin,
of all others the most odious, and black in the eyes of that God whose glorious
grace Romans 5.20.
superaboundeth over man's sin, I mean that monstrous sin of Despair, by
which Judas the Traitor sinned more (says an ancient Father) than by betraying
his Lord, and Master Christ; and therefore was it that S. Austin gave the lie
to Cain, when under the guilt of his awakened conscience he cried out, Genesis
4.13. My sin is greater then can be borne, Mentiris Cain, says that devout
Father, who himself, by his own Confessions (after the extravagancies of a
vain youth, wherein he followed too much the Eccl. 11.9.
fight of his eyes, experimented the sweetness of those overflowing mercies,
which do so much Jam. 2.13.
rejoice, and triumph, as it were, above judgment; Mercy flowing from the God
and 2 Cor. 1.3.
Father of all comfort as water does from a Spring or Fountain most genninely,
and freely; but Justice comes forth as liquor from the Wine Press, when the
grapes are squeezed, and after a sort Genesis 40.11.
wrung out from him hardly; God does not afflict willingly [delippo] or, from
his heart, nor grieve the children of men, Lam. 3.33. There was never any man
perished for want of mercy in God, but for want of his own repentance in
himself; as it was a sin in the Israelites to limit Gods power, Psalm. 78.41.
so is it also to limit his mercy; What sin can be imagined or committed too
great for God to pardon? Wherefore, once again let me exhort thee; Crush that
Cockatrice of Despair in the very first Isa. 59.5.
Eggs thereof, and dash that Babylonish brat in Psalm. 137.9.
infancy. Beloved, Desperation what it is.
Desparation is a kind of (...) or affection growing out of the sense of sin
and wrath, it is malum arduum instans, and ineluctabile, as one styles it, and
ordinarily it proceeds from the misjudging of Gods affection, and good will
toward men, the soul conceives of him, as of one that has utterly cast off
all care, or respect toward it; whereas the LORD himself is thy keeper, the
LORD is thy shade upon thy right hand, Psalm. 121.4, 5. and has commanded thee
to commit the keeping of thy soul to him, in well-doing, as unto a faithful
Creator, 1 Pet. 4.19. And by so doing, we have all a sure promise, 1 Pet. 1.5.
To be kept by the power of God, through faith and salvation, A salvo
conservantis conductu, non a vacillante conservati progressu: as an Orthodox
Dr. Pride. Lect. 6. Sect. 2.
Divine glosseth those words; We are kept by the saving guidance of God the
Keeper, and not left to the wavering unsteady progress of our selves, who are
kept by him. What shall I say more? sooner (says a reverend Bishop King Lect.
26. on Jon:
Divine) shall God forgive the Apostasy of the Reprobate, lapsed, and damned
Angels, then this damned sin of Desperation: Give me leave among many (that I
may contract this Discourse) to present to you one Mean, or Remedy to
prevent, or else to remove this evil; Which evil, if given way unto (through
the inveterate malice, and envy of the Devil) it may like that Iona 4.7.
worm in Jonah's Gourd in a night, eat out all the very sap, and life of
divine comfort: the Mean is this, A remedy against despair.
Diligent and prudent observation of Gods dealing with others of his servants
finning though grievously in particulars; and withal of our own personal
Psalm. 77.10, 11. Heb. 10.32.
experiences that (in former times) we our selves have had of Gods goodness in
our own souls; Romans 5.4.
Experience is the nurse of Hope; Per ea, quae agnoscas praestita, discas
sperare promissa, by those things which you have known performed, learn to hope
for those things which are promised; to which meditation let us also join the
serious consideration of that glorious Attribute in God, his If a man have
received true assurance of Gods favor, though but once in all his life: yet by
that one figne, he may assure himself of his salvation, upon this ground, John
13.1. that Gods love is unchangeable, though ever after we live in temptation,
Perk. on Mat. 7.23.
Immutability and unchangeablenesse, Mal. 3.6. Jam. 1.17. and that in respect
both of his power and goodness: make this reckoning, that the Benefits which
he has bestowed, are (says judicious Hooker) as it were bills obligatory, and
sufficient Sureties, that he will bestow Mat. 25.29.
further; Neither is his hand Number. 11.23 Isa. 50.2. and 59.1.
shortened, or his good will, no nor does he fail to [remember] his Covenant of
love made with Believers, Psalm. 111.5. The Lord, says the Apostle, is not
unrighteous to forget, Heb. 6.10. As his hand is not shortened, so neither his
arm weakened, that it cannot save as it has done; He is the same yesterday,
and to day, and for ever to his chosen, Heb. 13.8. His past, or present mercy
is still a warrant of his future love, because whom he loves, he loves unto
the end, John 13.1. Understand it amore benevolentiae, with the love of
benevolence; though not amore beneficentiae, in regard of the manifestation of
actual benificence he withdraw for a time his hand.

And that I may shorten the way, by Examples, which seems often too long, by
Precept; I shall offer two, and those most notorious to your consideration: One
is of Peter the Apostle, and the other of Mary Magdalene, out of whom it is said
that the Lord had cast no less then seven devils: Go, says the Angel, Mar.
16.7. to the woman, who came to see the Sepulcher wherein Christ was laid; Go
your way, tell his Disciples, and Peter, that he goes before you into Galilee,
there shall ye see him, namely, after his Resurrection. Why is Peter here
mentioned by name more, or rather than any of all the other Disciples or
Apostles? surely it was a special dignation, and act of grace in Christ, to
single him out by his name; as is observable in God toward his favorite Jacob,
Isa. 43.1. Fear not, o Jacob, for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by
thy [Name] thou art mine: Now Baronius and the Fry of the Roman Catholics,
from this priority of Order wherein S. Peter was now preferred, in a personal
nomination, would coin an argument for the ecumenical, universal supremacy of
the Pope, as the alone visible Monarch of the whole catholic Church
disseminate all the world over, usurping withal an uncontrollable jurisdiction
over all powers and consciences, by pretending to a personal succession of
Peter in the Sea of Rome, although indeed he resemble him in nothing rightly,
but in the Mat. 26.70.
denial of his Master: But away with those parasites of that 2 These. 2.3.
man of sin, and leaving those bladders of Antichristian haughtiness and
pride, to be crushed by the feet of that supreme head of his Church, Ephesians.
1.22.
who is now hastening to the Rev. 17.1.
Judgment of the great Whore; Amen, even so Rev. 22.20.
come, Lord Jesus, come quickly: O how would it joy thy Saints to see her lie
in the Psalm. 7.5.
dust. I wis, there is other honey which the believing Bees may suck from the
sweet flower of this example of Peter, who had the honor, and happiness to be
thus saluted, before others, after his Saviors Resurrection: Go and tell
Peter! Would any one have thought Peter in a capacity of regard from Christ,
whom against a solemn Mat. 26.33.35.
protestation to the contrary he had denied, and abjured, even then too, when
his fidelity to his Lord and Master should specially have appeared in the time
of his ignominy, and reproachful usage by his cruel Judges: Yes, my dear
Brethren, ob hoc ipsum, quia gravius deliquit, as Granatensis, with sundry
others, observes, for this very cause, for that he had more grievously fallen,
yet having Mat. 26.75.
wept bitterly after that fall, and repented for it; hence it was, that upon
that planck of Repentance, after so dangerous a falling, he swam safe again to
the shore of favor, and was received to mercy: The like meditation also may
arise out of the ninth verse, from the instance of Mary Magdalen, out of whom
he had cast seven devill^, and yet (...), he appeared to this very Mary, and
that (which much heightens the Emphasis) to her too [first] before to any
other, yea before he appeared, for ought we read in Scripture, to Mary his
Virgin Mother; First, to a woman, that as a woman had been 1 Timothy 2.14.
first in the transgression, so should she be the first who partook in the
manifestation of the complete Redemption; when our Savior by his rising from
the dead gave an Acts 17.31.
assured evidence, and an infallible proof, that all the debt which was due to
Gods Justice for the sins of Believers was now fully discharged, in that Christ
their surety, who undertook to satisfy, was acquitted from the prison of the
Grave, the payns of death being loosed, because it was not possible that we
should be holden of it, Act 2.24. Look then, as the woman that was made of a
man, brought in sin, and death, so the man that was made of a woman, brought in
righteousness and life:

But was it not strange, that our Savior should above all other women in the
world, show himself, and all this favor to Mary Magdalene, one who had been
such a loathsome sink of uncleanness, that seven devils, or a multitude of
heinous crimes possessed her whole self, as if she had lain down wholly under
the full power and dominion of all, or most of the devils in Hell; Yet, first,
to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven devils: Surely this was
done, says Jansenius, and with him many Divines, In consolationem
paenitentium, to be for the infinite comfort of poor Penitents; as Mary
Magdalene had curled (probably) and crisped her frizled locks for wanton
dalliance, and lustfulnesse, so being forgiven much upon her Repentance, she
testified her love to that Savior who had pardoned her, by Luke 7.38.
wiping his feet with the hair of her head, and washing them with her tears,
cleansing those unchaste, and adulterous Ier. 9.21.
windows, by which Death had entered, and so often endangered her soul to
damnation: So true is that sweet meditation of St. S. Cyprian, De Caena Domini,
Sect. 16.
Cyprian, upon the gracious act of Christ in pardoning the penitent Thief on
the Gross, about his last expiration, quecunque necessitas cogat ad
poenitudinem, Nec quantitas Criminis, nec brevitas temporis nec vitae
enormitas, nec Horae extremitas, (si vera contritio, si pura fuerit voluptatum
mutatio) excludit a venia; That is, neither the greatness of the Crime, nor
the enormity of the life, nor the extremity of the last hour, provided that
Cordial, and serious Repentance seasonably intervene, and come in between sin
and judgment, none of all these do exclude from favor, and mercy from
agracious God, who so often Romans 10.20. Psalm. 21.3.
prevents a sinner with the offers of atonement; when a poor penitent seems to
be as it were, at a loss in a kind of wilderness, then sounds the horn of
salvation for his return to God, who embraces him returning, returning (I
say) yea, though it be after a long Psalm. 56.8.
wandering out of the ways of righteousness; to which purpose is that we read
of in the Canticles, Cant: 6.13. Return, return, O Shulamite, return, return;
every sin is an aversion, or a turning from the Creator to the creature; but
every act of repentance is a Mal. 3.7.
returning of the sinner from the creature unto the Creator back again; so here
Quater dicit Revertere, says St. Bernard, He repeats this returning to the
Shulamite four times together; as if he had said, Return from the original sin
of thy Nature, return from the actual sins of thy life, return from thy sins of
custom, and return also from thy scarlet, and from thy crimson, and thine
enormous transgressions; Quis non stupeat charitatem Dei spreti, and
revocantis? as the same Father; O admirable love, every finger of Christ drops
myrrh, and healing in this passage, in this one single instance it shows it
self in all its dimensions, in the breadth, and length, and depth, and height
thereof, as St. Paul expresses it, Ephesians. 3.18. Who is not even stupefied
under the apprehension, and manifestation of so transcendent indulgence of the
Lord from heaven to a miserable, wretched, relapsed sinner, who being offered
love refuses, yea Jer. 23.17. Act. 13.41.
despises it, and yet such, and so great is the Lords (...), his free Tit. 3.4.
love to mankind, that though they go Psalm. 119.176. 1 Pet. 2.25.
astray like sheep from the fold, where they might be safe, wandering amidst
Mat. 10.16.
wolves, by which they are in danger to be torn; yet, he Pro. 1.24.
recals them back again unto himself in much love; and Jer. 4.1.
if they will, though after a long expectation, and patience, but return at
last to the 1 Pet. 2.25.
Shepherd and Bishop of their souls; lo, he is ready to meet them in kindness,
who meet him in righteousness, Isa 64.5. Yea, as Calvin observes upon the
carriage of the Father toward the repentant prodigal son returning, Redeuntem
eminus agnoscit, atque eb viis u^nis amplectitur, Luke 15.20. when his son was
yet a great way off, and had but h purposed as it were in his heart to arise,
and go back to his Father (for I understand this parable of one who had been
already formerly in communion with the Church) his father saw him, and had
compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him in all the postures
of love embracing, welcoming, entertaining of him, and rejoicing in his return
home: (...), as most sweetly Athanasius, qu. 78. tom. 2. page: 296.
Athanasius, to the same effect, No sin is irremissible, and unpardonable to
any soul, that in an holy manner repents, and brings forth fruit Mat. 3.8.
meet for repentance; not to him who blasphemeth simply, (...), as the same
Father has it, but, unto him who abides, and continues under that fin,
without remorse impenitently is forgiveness denied, who so finally persists
under such a state, he it is, who finneth unto death.

Well, I perceive it is time to end, and I doubt lest I weary your patience; and
yet I have one word more to Dent. 32.2.
drop for comfort to a regenerate soul, which is like to that wine made by
Christ at the marriage Feast at Cana of Gallilee, perhaps the Joh. 2.10.
good kept til last. And that word is his, which I wish imprinted even in
characters of gold, indelebly upon the hearts of every true Nathaniel, and
Isralite Joh. 1.47.
indeed: This is that I would say, this blasphemy of the Holy Ghost, (so
explained as ye have now heard it) this sin, which is thus said to be unto
death? this sin I say is not incident at all into any one, whosoever is elect,
and born of God, and so consequently to such an one, there is no danger of
final condemnation: Rom: 8.1. Because their sins though deadly in their own
nature, yet are not so in the event to them.

I confess that for diverse good ends, that the 1 Pet. 5.10.
God of all grace intends thereby, the choicest of Gods own People are
sometimes under great distresses, Psalm. 118.5.
shut up as it were (...), in a Psalm. 88.8.
straight place, out of which they see not how to come forth; and howsoever the
Lord will in the event, cause all to work together for their spiritual good;
Romans 8.28. 2 Chronicles. 32.31.
yet whilst the serenity of Gods countenance is clouded as to them, whether for
their 1 Pet. 1.7. zech. 13.9.
trial, or else for the * chastning of some particular Delinquency, or for the
* quickening of graces languishing, or other like end, which in his infinite
wisdom he aims at; I say, Job 5.17.
during that state, 1 Cor. 11.30 for this cause.
miserable are the perplexities wherewith they are surprised; Hos 5.15.
but especially if the Psalm. 6.3.
soul be also sore vexed under some present apprehension of wrath by reason of
some sin committed against knowledge, and conscience, then that wounded spirit
who can bear? says Solomon; Prove. 18.14. alas none, iniquities charged [there]
are too Psalm. 38.4.
heavy to be born; in such a case, all outward comforts are but as the Psalm.
58.9.
cracklings of thorns under a pot, without solid heat, or any lasting light: A
Crown of Gold, though dec'kt with all the orient rubies of the highest value,
cannot cure an aching head, nor a velvet slipper ease the torments of the gowt,
nor any thing that is Eccl. 9.1.
before them, or about them minister any joy, or refreshing to them; And no
marvel, because there are in this evil of a perplexed conscience, two things
eminent above all others, which make it intoll erable, a wound not to be born;
one is this, that whereas in all other afflictions man has to do with man, or
at the worst with devils, in this he has immediately to deal with God himself:
Job 25.4. Pro. 20.9.
* polluted man with an * all pure God, sinful man with an * holy God, Hab.
1.13.
offending man * with an angry God, Josh. 24.19.
who is in his wrath a consuming fire; Psalm. 7.11. and 76.7.
O the inexpressable agonies of a * desolate soul, Heb. 12.29.
afflicted for the absence of Gods smiles, tormented for the present sense of
his frowns for sin! When God himself writes bitter things against a soul, the
Psalm. 143.4.
venom of his arrows must needs drink up the very spirit within him. Lactant.
l. 6. c. 24.
Quid prodest non habere conscium; habenti conscientiam? says Job 13.26. Pro.
14.10.
Lactantius, there needs no other testimony, Romans 1.9.
where God himself is a. Job 6 4.
witness, and if the heart, that is the conscience, condemn a man, God is
greater than the heart, and knows all things, and will surely much more
condemn him, being Exodus 34.7.
guilty: 1 John: 3.20, 21. Now who (affected with the consideration of his
dreadful Majesty) can stand Psalm. 90.7, 8.
before God immediately, when he is angry, and Psalm. 76.7.
rebukes man for sin? What can that which is but finite do, in dealing with
him who is infinite? where is no proportion. Secondly, whereas in other evils,
a man is still a friend to himself, in this case, he becomes a scourge, a
magor-missabib, a fear round about, like Pashur, a terror to himself. Jer:
20.4. and whatsoever is in him, all conspires against him, understanding memory
all: guilt in the conscience is an importunate evil, and still Number 25.17. 2
Chro. 15.6.
vexes as a Midianite was vexed, even as a thing that is raw restlesly: nor
can we baffle, or put it off, as Faelix did Saint Paul, who touched him to the
quick, saying, Act. 24.25.
go thy way for this time, and when I have a convenient season, I will send for
thee; or if as those that offe red their Children to Jer. 32.35.
Molech in fire, were wont with Drums to drown the noise, and screeches of
their little ones, in the valley of Hinnom, we think to silence it, its all in
vain: Conscience under the Joh. 8.9.
conviction of sin, and unpacified, its an ill companion in company, it dasheth
all thy Pro. 14.13.
pleasures, Tit. 1.15.
defiles all thy devotions. embitters all thy comforts, but a worse when
alone, Wherefore a soul that is in such a case, (during the continuance of the
same) it sits like a Psalm. 102.6.
Pelican in the Wilderness, 2 Cor. 4.8.
desolate distressed, Psalm. 143.4.
perplexed.

But yet my dear Brethren, Heb. 10.35.
cast not away your confidence, but Heb. 10.38.
live as the just man does, that is, ought to do. By faith, one grain of
living, vigorous faith may remove a Mountain of sin into the Sea of
forgetfulness, which faith, says the great Apostle, is the substance of things
hoped for, the evidence of things not seen, Heb: 11.1. (...), the meaning is,
that faith does after a sort give being, and a subsistence in the soul to those
things, which being true in the promise of God, but yet not actually enjoyed,
only are expected, and hoped for: And in this sad case, dwell seriously upon
the meditation of the promises which have all their yea, and amen; their full
ratification in the blood of Christ, the blood of the Covenant. Now look what
is the promise? see (as seasonable to this thy present sad condition) Matt:
5.4. Blessed are they that mourn for they shall be comforted. Psalm: 85.8. God
the Lord he will speak Note here, that Trouble of Conscience is a good
preparative to peace of Conscience (when sanctified) and indeed the solid true
peace is brought out of former trouble Isa. 61.1. Matt. 11.28. See Dr. Sclater
Sermon: Sick soul salved.
peace unto his people, and to his Saints; provided they demean themselves as
Saints, viz: that after peace spoken to them repenting for their folly, they do
not again return to the same folly, see Hos: 2.14. Isa. 40.1.2. When God speaks
peace, his very speaking is performing: Has the Lord spoken, and shall not he
do it? even Jehu could acknowledge so much, Albertus Novicamp. in scopo Biblico,
Annot. de Fide. Gerar. tom. 3.5.75. tract. De Justif. per Fidem.
(being convinced of i^in a particular proof thereof, Heb. 10.29.
know now says he, there shall fall unto the earth, nothing of the Lord which
the Lord has spoken, I but thou will say, I feel no such thing as peace spoken
to my soul? suppose not in present sense, yet it is most firm, and sure in the
promise of God; now live by faith, by believing thou layest a foundation; (so
We read Zech. 9.12. that the prisoners of hope were wished to turn to thestrong
hold, and yet, at that time, there was har^ly ary strong hold, after the
Captivi^y, to turn to: to imply, that God was then the strongest aid, when
humane helps afforded the weakest, and most improbable succor, and then was
the most proper season for faith and hope to exercise their acts on warrantable
grounds.
some render, and expound the word (...)) upon which to build the certain
expectation of the promise, the more visible things are, and obvious, or
present to the sense, the weaker is the faith, for the excellency thereof is
when it rests upon the naked word, and authority of God the promiser; which was
exemplified in Job. Chap: 13.15 Though the Lord kill me (says he) yet will I
trust in him, and in Abraham know that Gods power was perfected in the truth,
though weakness of his servants faith, 2 Cor. 12.9. he stood not poring upon the
weakness, or unlikely hood of second causes to produce, or accomplish an issue,
when both him self and his Wife were, through natures debility, past all
expectation of a Son, but he still looked upon the stedfastnes of the promise,
for the truth, and word sake of the most faithful promiser, and so obtained
the thing promised. Rom: 4.19.20.21. Faith made the Son as it were actually
present to Abraham, as if he had enjoyed him before he was born, or begotten;
for which cause its added also, that its (...), an evidence, that is, as the
word exactly imports, a convincing demonstration in the soul of the certain
truth of what is promised; Bonadventur: Did: 23. qu: 5. l: 3. and Joh:
Altenstaig. in Lexic. Theolog. y: 61. in verbo Argumentum, and page: ib. 326 327.
its translated by b some, argumentum, the argument of things not seen, for
that it serves so convincingly, to enlighten the mind, and to give assent to
what is promised, as firmly as a true argument, by strength of reasoning,
occasions an assent to the conclusion proved by it: Moreover, in case of
doubting, which Satan raising storms and tempests in the soul, may occasion,
then God has provided, and given us an Anchor both sure and steadfast: Matt.
7.27.
Heb: 6.19. that however we may be tossed by temptation, yet our ship shall not
be broken by the Waves, or split against the Rocks.

So then have thou finned? Pro. 28.13.
confess and forsake it, and God is righteous to 1 John 1.9.
forgive it, can thou confess it? and have thou a full Act. 11.23.
purpose of heart to leave it, and to cleave unto the Lord? then be assured of
this, thou have not committed the sin; yea the very discovery within thy self
of thy sin, and the 2 Cor. 7.10.
sorrow of heart thou conceivest for it, upon this ground, that Psalm. 51.4.
God is offended by it, more than for any fear of punishment, hating sin for
sins sake, I say, this very discovery (corruption not being discovered by it
self, but by grace, as the Sun is not seen but by its own light) is a sign that
thou art not under the guilt of the sin against the Holy Ghost, for that sin
carries with it so deep an infatuation of * mind, and judgment, and withal so
gross stupefaction of conscience, that the heart Joh. 12.40. 2 Cor. 4, 4.
cannot repent, nor apprehend pardon. And to this purpose it is good for a soul
distrested to select such Texts of Scripture, Romans 2.5. Heb. 6.6.
as are most seasonable for its own present state, and with all to consider
those titles, or that style which God is pleased to give himself, in relation
to such a state of soul in his Children; thus he is called Romans 15.13. The God
of hope, now, the God of hope, (says the Apostle) fill you with all joy, and
peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope through the power of the Holy
Ghost, so also 2 Cor. 1.3 He is styled the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of mercies, and the God of all cemfort: confer 2 These: 2.16.17. It is a
Christians prudence to meditate likewise the tender regard he has to the
condition, and temper, Psalm. 103.14
k and frame of his Sons and Daughters under temptation, God hates nothing
that he has made, not a sparrow, Matt: 10.29. not an Ox: 1 Cor: 9.9. much
less man who is vertually all creatures: Mar: 16.15. see Tit: 3.4. read 1 Cor:
10.13. There bath no temptation taken you, but such as is common to man, [1
Moderate, and not above man's nature to undergo] But God is faithful, who will
not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, but will with the
temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it, and if we
believe not, yet he abides faithful he cannot deny himself. 2 Timothy: 2.13. and
again let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering, for he is
faithful that promised, and l that of John. 1 John: 2. 1, 2. never be out of
mind: My little Children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not: and
if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous: And he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but
also for the sins of the whole world: compare Mat: 9.13. 1 Timothy: 1.16. Heb.
10.23. Beloved Christians, there is a kind of wisdom and prudence in believing;
thus conceive it. It is when a man fits the consideration of the attributes,
and actions of God to the particular most necessary, and fit for faith to
respect, according to several occasions: would they humble themselves for
their sins? they then consider God as terrible, and dreadful in his Judgments?
would they raise up themselves with comfort? they consider him as a God that
keeps promise: would they stablish hope in expectation of things passing the
course of Nature? they consider his endless power, Romans 4.21. Ephesians. 3.20.
l able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or think: there is
a confused aprehension of the Diety (says a R^verend Dr. Sclater my Father in
his Comment on the Romans cap. 4. page 184. published by me, 1650.
Divine) for the most part liveles and ineffectuall; when men in gross only,
and indistinctly meditate the Divine nature, without reference to particulars,
concerning the present occasion: And another as preposterous, and unseasonable;
and no less uncomfortable; when men fit their faith with meditation of that,
that is most unseasonable, for their present state; God is merciful says the
Presumer, He is just says the desperate distressed; Both true, he is just and
merciful says the Psalmist. But should not faith in wisdom contemplate what
is fittest for the present necessity? this wisdom pray we for.

Dear Brethren, me thinks I would gladly (having traveled so much in this
question, for my own satisfaction, as well as yours) give Matt. 11.28.
ease to every weary soul, laboring under any perplexity, in this regard: But
be sure thou do, by all means, shun that grievous sin of despair, denying unto
God the truth of his promise, and mercy, those two sweet attributes, wherein he
does much Mic. 7.18.
delight to See Exodus 34.6.
glory; his Justice in the visitation of sinners reaches to the third, or
fourth Generation; But his mercy is extended unto Exodus 20.6.
thousands, and endures Psalm. 136.1, etc.
for ever; there is observeable an holy writ, a three fold super or [over]
first, our sins are [ Psalm. 38.4.
over] our heads, as an heavy, if not too heavy a burden; then, Gods Judgments
are [ Psalm. 10.5. Eccles. 5.8. Pro. 19.29.
over] those sins; But his mercies are [ Psalm. 145.9. and Psalm. 36.5.
over] all these: over our sins repented of to pardon them, over his Judgmets
to remove them; and over our Bodies, and Souls, through the blood of our Lord
Jesus, everlastingly to save Psalm. 98.2, 3.
them: Take heed, desperation is of that heinous nature, that scarsly any
particular sin more dishonors God, I am sure none more disquiets the soul; it
often arises from ignorance, or misprision of the promises of God; that,
notwithstanding Gods exemplary dealings with other of his dearest Saints
(whereof I gave some intimation before) delivering them, even above their hope,
out of how great perplexities, and (as to themselves they seemed) even
inextricable dangers and discomforts; Besides some personal experiences, which
St. 2 Cor. 1.10. 2 Timothy 4.18.
Paul was wont to stay, and to support himself by, under the expactation of
future mercies; I say, notwithstanding all this, men often mistake the promises
of God, sometimes streightning them to themselves, and making them more narrow
then indeed they are; p esumption makes them over-wide, but despair too narrow;
but especially when they rest too much and stick in the Duties required of
them, as though the work done did deserve of God, or as if they were all
exacted in the performance, after the rigor of the Law, which condemns every
Gal. 3.10.
interruption, or but Jam. 2.10.
circumstantiall breach, and defect; whereas indeed, they are Romans 6.14.
not under the law, but under grace, and the mitigation of the Gospel, through
Christ the Mediator, Romans 6.14.

In a word, stablish thy Hope by these 3. Considerations, which Albertus
Novicamp. ubi supra, tract. de spe.
Albertus Novic. has offered to us. 1. Veritate promissionis, by the 2 Cor.
1.18. Psalm. 93.3.
truth of the promise: Let God be true, and every man [comparatively] a liar,
To. 3.4. He remains faithful, 2 Timothy 2.13. His covenant cannot fail, for it is
everlasting, Jer. 37.40. And of this Govenant He is likewise mindful, Psalm.
111.5. Yea, when we, under our Deliquiums, and as it were, inwar swoonings of
spirit, are apt to think He has Psalm. 77.9.
forgotten to be gracious, and has in anger shut up his tender mercies; yet,
even then, he keeps us in his mind; and, as the sweet Singer of Israel
acquaints us from experience, He [remembreth] us, even in our low estate, for
his mercy endures for ever, Psalm. 136.23. Only take heed of Psalm. 78.41.
limiting the Lord to thine own Act. 1.7. 1 These. 5.1.
time, He waits to be gracious, but in his own season; therefore in this
regard, He that believes, says that Evangelicall Prophet, Isa. 28.16. shall
not make have: If God has long waited for us, shall not we wait upon God see
Psalm. 27.14. Mic. 7.7, 8. Jer. 14.22.
? for though he tarry long [namely, as to thine own apprehension] yet, when
his own season (which he only knows Acts 1.7. see Hab. 2.3.
when it is best) is come, then is He a very present help in trouble, Isa.
46.13. Psalm. 46.1. And when he does come indeed, he makes a large amends for
his stay by doubling his comforts, Isa. 54.7, 8. And if we receive the witness
of men, surely the witness of God is greater, Psalm. 19.7. 1 John. 5.9, 10.
Wherefore, be confident of his Truth; only ye have need of patience a while,
that after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise; For yet
a little, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10.36,
37. The occasion of fainting in this regard, is defect in faith: I had fainted,
says David, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the
land of the living, Psalm. 27.13.

The second thing to stablish Hope by is, potestate redditionis, by the Romans
4.21.
power of God actually exhibiting, and making good the promise; With God, says
Gabriel the Angel (whose name signifies the strength of the mighty God)
nothing shall be impossible, Luke 1.37. Indeed whatsoever imports matter of
impotency, and weakness, or what is repugnant, and contrary to the nature of
his omnipotency, this God cannot do, as to lie, to deny himself, both these
are impossible to God, Heb. 6.18. Tit. 1.2. and 2 Timothy 2.13. Look then what
God has promised, the same says Abraham from a rare experience, and proof of
his power, He is [able] also to perform, Romans 4.21. Be ye therefore
strengthened with all might, according to his glorious power, unto all
patience, and long-suffering, with joyfulnesse, Col. 1.11.

3ly. And lastly, Hope is corroborate, and receives strength, charitate
adoptionis, by the consideration of the divine love of Adoption. Behold, says
that very Disciple whom Christ John 13.23.
loved, and who had his very bosom, what manner of love the Father has
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God, 1 Job. 3.1. Romans
8.15. Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye have
received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba, father, compare Gal. 4.5,
6. And now, my dear brethren, since, from being by nature Children of wrath,
Ephesians. 2.3. Enemies to God, Romans 5.10. Captives of Satan, 2 Timothy 2.26. We are
under a state of divine love, we are in the hands of a dear Father, even as
Ephesians. 5.1.
dear children, and that He spares us as a Mal. 3.17. Psalm. 103.13.
father does the son that serves him, Mic. 7.18.
passing by, and Psalm. 51.1.
hiding his face from many transgressions, which of Psalm. 77.10. Gal. 6.1.
infirmity, or Psalm. 116.11.
passion we may sometimes be overtaken in; Give we thanks to his Father, which
has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light:
Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us into
the kingdom of his dear son: In whom we have redemption through his blood,
even the forgiveness of sins, Col. 1.12, 13, 14. Having then these 2 Cor. 7.1.
promises, dearly beloved, and sharing in such privileges as these are, I
cannot but say with that Orthodox Father, S. Austin, Erigat ergo, se humana
fragilitas, S. August. on Psalm. 148.
non desperet, non se collidat, non se vertat, non dicat, non ero, etc. Let
humane frailty stir up it self, and not be Psalm. 42.11.
cast down with despair, let it not break it self, or dash upon that
dangerous conclusion of [I shall not be] namely, in favor again with God:
What? never in favor? not a dearly beloved Son with a dearly loving Father?
Consider, what is it that God has promised thee? O thou mortal man, is it not
Joh 3.16.
life eternal? is it not that thou (believing) should be Joh. 17.24.
where Christ the Romans 8.29. Col. 1.15.18. and 1.6.
Firstborn himself is? O believe, believe, plus est quod jam fecit, quam
quod promisit, lo, says S. August. l. 13 de Trin. c. 16.
Austin, he has actually already done more (after a sort) than what he has
promised: Why, what has God done? He has Phil. 2 8.
dyed for thee: and what has he promised? that thou shall live with him:
Incredibilius est, quod mortuus est aeternus, quam ut in aeternum vivat
mortalis, as the same Father; It is more incredible, that He who is eternal
(though not as eternal) should become mortal, than that He who is in his
nature mortal, should become eternal, to wit, in a state of glory: Now the
first of these we believe, namely, that he who was God Acts 20.28.
shed his blood, and dyed; why, then believe that God, who is rich in mercy,
for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins,
has quickened us together with Christ (by grace ye are saved) and has raised
us up together, and made us (in promise, in hope, and expectation) sit together
in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.4, 5, 6.

But why am I thus tedious, and overlong? How can thou, under all these
soule-chearing expressions, be still dejected: consider God the Father, who
promises life unto thee, has styled himself The God of Consolation, Romans
15.5. Yea of (all) comfort, who comfort his Saints in all their
tribulations, 2 Cor. 1.4. And when they are cast down, 2 Cor. 7.6. He is styled
by David, The God of my mercy, Psalm. 59.10. God the Son likewise is called The
consolation of Israel, Luke 2.25. And God the Holy Ghost has his Title to be
the Comforter, abiding with Believers for ever, Joh. 14 17. and Joh. 15.26. the
word (...), rendered out of the Original, Comforter, signifies (says the
learned Grotius) one who pleads the cause of another, who is a guilty person,
as it were an Advocate; so that when a soul is under temptaion, or drouping
for sin, the spirit of God the Comforter erecteth, cheareth, exciteth, and
reviveth it by alleging, as it were, the Privileges of the promises, which in
the right understanding, and in the due application of them, ease the burden
of the Conscience laden with sin; the spirit being therefore styled The holy
spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1.14. because he clears, assures, and 2 Cor. 1.22.
Ephesians. 4.30.
seals up the Title, and Confirmation of them to the souls of the Elect,
co-witnessing with their spirits, that they are the sons of God, and so
discharged, Romans 8.16.33.

And indeed, to hold you no longer in these so prolix amplifications, the very
scope and aim of S. John in my Text, is to prevent, and to anticipate the
fear of discomfort that probably might surprise the children of God about what
he had spoken to uching the sin which was unto death, for which no prayers were
allowed for to implore the pardon of it; for whereas the very Saints themselves
found unrighteousness (at least in the remainders) within them, sanctification
in this life being only 1 Cor. 13.12. 2 Cor. 3.18. Phil. 3.13.
Inchoate, not Consummate, and the Apostle expressly granting, that all
unrighteousness was sin, lest they might (privy to themselves of sin
(suspect, out of a pious jealousy) that that sin in them might be this sin
unto Death, (chiefly when both in Judgment, and Conscience they knew it to be
sin) therefore in the 18. verse he affirms, that who so is borne of God sins
not, not simply, not at all; for in Chap. 1. verse. 8. including himself (though
an Apostle) as well as other Saints, he declares expressly, If we say that we
have no sin, what then? not, we are proud, and so have no humility in us: But
we deceive our selves, and lie, and so the truth is not in us; and to the same
purpose S. Cyprian makes his observation upon the conjoyning together of those
two Petitions in the Lords Prayer, Give us this Day our daily Bread, and
forgive us our Trespasses, that we might take notice of as much necessity that
we had to beg of God the pardon of our daily trespasses, as the
suppeditation, and supply of our daily Bread: But his meaning is, He that is
begotten, and borne of God, sins not unto death, that great and unpardonable
offense, and blasphemy of the Holy Ghost? They cannot fall, whosoever are
elected, and regenerate of the spirit of God, into that sin, which because, as
ye have heard already, it is not (through Gods formidable Judgment thereupon)
capable of repentance, no more is it of remission, or forgiveness: Now all
sins being pardoned to the Elect, it follows, that they are beyond the reach or
danger of this sin which is said to be (irreparably) unto death, and that not
temporal only, but eternal. O royal privilege! O mercy incomprehensible! A
regenerate soul sins not unto death? Surely Solomon could not show the
Queen of Sheba so much treasure in all the Mat. 6.29.
glory of his Kingdom, as is lapt up in these few words: and O that God would
open this Arc of mercy, wherein this Doctrine lies, and set it wide before
the eyes of poor afflicted Consciences, which like Noah's Dove fly up and down
upon the water of their afflictions, and can see nothing but only the gulf,
and deluge of their sins, wherein there is no place for them to Genesis 8.9.
rest their feet: I say, and pray, as devout Hooker, the God of Pity, and 2
Cor. 1.3. Lam. 3.32.
Compassion, give every Heb. 2.18. Gal. 6.1.
tempted soul faith, and strength, and courage, every day, and every hour, and
every moment, to embrace, and to lay hold upon this truth, Psalm. 19.10.
sweeter by far then honey, or the honey-combe, dropping and distilling, yea
diffusing comfort, even 1 Pet. 1.8.
joy unspeakable and full of glory.

Whosoever then finds in himself any sound note of election, Notes of
Regeneration.
and regeneration, that man may assure himself he has not committed, no nor 1 John 3.9.
can commit this deadly, and unpardonable sin: let me epitomize the larger
enumeration of such signs under the short abridgment of these few heads.

1. Peccati displicentia, Eze. 36.31. Romans 7.15.
dislike of sin, godly 2 Cor. 7.10,11.
sorrow for sin, striving against sin, though his falls have been foul even
against knowledge, he may be assured he is free from this sin. 2. A second may
be Veritatis Amor, Cordial 2 These. 2.11. Ps. 119.20.97. Job 23.13.
love of Evangelicall Truth, if that still be dear unto him, insomuch as he
would be content to buy it at any rate, but will sell it at no rate, Pro.
23.23. 3. A third is Faith, not only that which is called Fides quae, the
doctrine of faith staying in the History and general truth of the Gospel, to
which as many a Castaway has attained, so likewise many an Apopostate has
departed from it, 1 Timothy 1.19. 1 Timothy 4.1. But that which is Fides qua, the
faith of Gods Elect, Tit. 1.1. consisting not only in a bare naked knowledge,
but also in the acknowledging of the Truth, which is after godliness,
specially applying the promises of grace through Jesus Christ to himself in
particular, Gal. 2.20. This faith, though Est infirma fides, tamen, illa fides.
little in regard of the measure, yet being sound in regard of the Truth, it is
alike precious in all the Saints, 2 Pet. 1.1. nor will God quench the smoking
flax, Isa. 42.3. Matthew. 12.20. Though there may for a time appear more smoke
than fire, yet whilst there is fire, there is the spirit of all grace, but
chiefly of faith in the truth thereof, which is an infallible fruit of
Election, 2 These. 2.13. 4. The last that I shall now name is the love of the
Brethren, because they are Brethren, for the very profession sake of the truth
of the Gospel, not for any natural endowments, or moral habiliments, 2 John 1.
or for the mere emoluments, or ornaments of Fortune, all which are but
pompatica, and volatica, as one calls them, the trappings, and dresses, like
unto flatulent chafe, They take unto themselves wings, and fly away: But when
grace that shines in them is the motive of our love, that is an evidence
indeed of our being translated from a state of spiritual death, to the contrary
condition, and state of spiritual life, and salvation, 1 John 3.14. If these
things be in us, and abound, we shall never fall from election, or (whilst
they are in their vigrous and predominant exercise) from the assurance of the
same, 2 Pet. 1.10. Now, if we are assured of salvation, and that not only
Certitudine objecti, as the Schoolmen speak, as it rests in mente divina, in
the mind of God, certain in it self; but likewise Certitudine subjecti, as it
is in the use of the right means, manifested to our own breasts by Gods
spirit; we have then an evidence, that we are in state of present grace, and so
are borne of GOD, and by consequent sin not unto death.
etc. Howbeit, inasmuch as we know not whether it issue out of malice, at
least, though evidence be apparent of malice against our persons; yet if not,
for Grace-sake, fear to censure of this sin unto Death: It Is not ingenuous to
be like Porcupines darting quills of Matthew. 7.1. Luke 6.37.
censure on men's spiritual states, or but doubtful actions: the carriage of
our Savior toward the carping Pharisees, (who were still angling after some
advantage against him, seeking to catch something out of his mouth, that they
might accuse him, Luke 11.54.) I say, his carriage toward them in the
business of the woman accused for being taken in the act of Adultery, John
8.8. is very remarkable; whilst they continued asking of him what punishment
she deserved, they intending to have surrounded him with a Dilemma, that if he
had said she was to be stoned, he had been a medler in State matters, things
criminal, and capital; if not, then he had spoken against Acts 6.11.
Moses, and the Law, and by that have brought himself in danger; but our
Savior, to divert the importunity of so many intangling questions, v. 6, and
8. He stooped down, and with his finger wrote on the ground, as though he
heard them not, many are the conjectures at what that should be which he then
wrote: Saint Ambrose his conceit was. that He wrote that sentence, Matt: 7.3.
Why beholdest thou the moat that is in thy Brothers eye, but considerest not
the beam that is in thine own eye. Beda gnessed, that he wrote the sentence
which He spoke, he that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at
He: Haymo seems more witty, than judicious in his apprehension hereabout, He
thinks he wrote certain Characters in the pavement, which the accusers
beholding, might see as in a glass their own wickedness, and so blushing at it,
slunk away, in the conviction of their own Conscience: But whatever it was sure
we are (said once an eminent Divine of our Church) our Savior would have false
accusations written in dust, to be trodden under foor of those that pass by,
take we heed how we Romans 14.10.
judge rash judgment of another man's state, or conscience, presume not to sit in
Gods Consistory, every man stands, or falls, in point of his souls judgment to
the Supreme Jam: 4.12.
Lawgiver, 1 Cor. 4.5.
Judge therefore nothing, before the time, that God, who alone judges Joh. 7.24
1 Samuel: 16.7.
righteous Judgment, does discover all secrets, and actions, whether they be
good, or whether they be evil: In the mean time, let us observe in the T^xt,
that there is a sin not unto death, as well as that which is said to be unto
death, Spiritualia peccata graviora sunt, quam Carnalia: quia Spirituale
peccatum plus hahet de aversione, a Deo, and Carnalia peccata habent
vehementius impulsivum, viz. ipsam connatam (...) cupis^^ (...)
for which there is a warrant for us to pray, and upon our prayers (duly
qualified) a promise to be heard for the life of our Brother repenting, there
remains yet something farther observable, out of the body of the Text, which I
shall only intimate, and so conclude this discourse for the present.

Whereas the Apostle says, there is a sin, one unto death, and another not so,
we may note a difference, and distinction of sins, one is more heinous than
another, there are some stains: Cant: 4. and in Isa: 1.18. sins of a scarlet
dye, some sins against the Body: 1 Cor. 6.18. others against the soul, Prove:
3.36. some y moats, and some beams, some Matt. 23.24.

Among the latin is a critical distinction between pecc atum, crimen, scelus,
facinus, flagitium, deli^tum, vitium, vid. Albert: ^ov^camp^ p. 365. De
Justify:

Facere non facienda pec^atum est, facienda non facere delictum est, Hugo de S.
victore, Allegor: in Exodus: l 3. c: 6. and vitia flagiciis leviora sunt. Aul:
Gell: l. 1. c: 17. Noct: Attict: Delictum est contra praecept: affirmat:
Commiss^n, contra negativum. Nic: de orbellis, in 2 Sent: Did: 43. and
Lumbard: l: 2. Did: 42.1.


gnats, and some Camels, some spots, Jud. v: 12. and some monstrous clouts,
Isa: 64.6. There are sins of incogitancy, or of sudden surreption, as vain
sights that affect to some ill, or idle, and inde pendent thoughts, which have
no consistancy together, from such secret, undetected sins David prayed to be
cleansed: Psalm: 19.12. There are also sins of set purpose, when the heart of
the Sons of men is [fully se^] in them to do evil: Eccles: 8.11. There are
sins of ignorance, for which atonement might be made, and there are other
committed with an high hand more presumptuously, and severely to be punished
Numb: 15.30 Psalm: 19.12 13: There are sins of infirmity. Psalm. 77.10. and there
are some reigning: Rom: 6 12. Ephesians. 2.2, 3. some customary. Jer. 13.23. and
there is a sin, or blasphemy of malice, which is unpardonable: In sum, sins
may be said to arise in haynousnes 3. manner of ways. 1. Genere, in the kind
of the sin. 2. Gradu, in the degree of it. 3. Circumstantiis, in the
circumstances. In the kind so says Solomon, though theft be a sin, yet adultry
is more heinous, as appears by the penalty of both: Prove. 6 30.32. in the kind
of it, its greater: so vain swearing abominable, but false swearing is, in the
kind more damnable, In the degree Mat: 5.22. Rash anger a degree of murder,
reproachful railing higher, but actual embruing hands in blood, still much
more enormous: wanton looks dispose to adultry, unchaste gestures more, but the
act of uncleanes fowlest of all: In the circumstances, some vary the kind of
the sin, as thus, theft of common things from men a sin, but robbing God, Mal:
3.9 is a sacriledg, and reducible under the breach es of the first precept,
Pet: 3.9.
railing at men a sin, 1 Cor: 6.10. but railing at God, blasphemy. Matt:
12.31.32. There are also circumstances, that though they vary not the kind of
the sin, yet add much to the aggravation of it; three only we may insist on. 1.
The motive. 2. The manner. 3. The issue. To persecute of ignorance, as Paul
did: 1 Timothy: 1.13. is much, but of malice more, the motive makes it so; to sin
of passion, inordinate, discomfortable, Psalm. 116.11. but to sin wilfully more
dangerous: Heb: 10.26. For the manner, to sin in secret, Ephesians: 5.12. fearful,
but to declare sins Vid. Thom. 1 a, 2 ae, qu: 73. Art. 3.
openly as Sodom, Isa. 3.9. far more heinous; once to fail in duty to com^it
drunkenes, its sinful, but daily to add drunkenes to thrist, Deuteronomy: 29.19. and
to say, as those swinish Athe ists in the Prophet; Isa: 56.12. Prove: 23.35. To
morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant, this still heightens the
odious abomination: For the issues, thus conceive, Matt. 18.6, 7. Romans 14.21.
scandalous sins are greater, and those by whom many Omne animi vitium tanto
cospectius in se crimea habet, quanto major, qui peccat, habetur. Juven:
Rations a. vid: apud Thom: 1 a, 2 ae, qu: 73. Art. 10.
exemplary are defiled, Heb: 12.15. than others that stick in the person
singly, and by himself: I might be very copious under these several head^: But
I consider the great affairs now following.

And indeed, this is the constant Doctrine of our Churches, however the Hoc
quoque tritum est in hac faece Protestantium peccata esse paria; hac. trutina
non levius in Deum deliquerit ille caupo qui gallum gallinaceum, quam qui
hominem occiderit. Campianus Jesuit. Rat. 8.
Roman Catholics charge us with a kind of stoichism in this point, as if we
made all sins equal: The Hoc de pa^ilitate peccatorum soli Stoici ausi sunt
disputare contra omnem sensum generis humani. Hieron.
stoics, to whose Fate Tully in his Paradoxes seems to incline, had as the
Jovinians since them a fond opinion, that all fins were equal, none more
grievous than others, yea as greatly sins He, Qui gallum gallinacium, as Qui
Patrem interficit, who killed a Cock, as He who show his Father; A sentense
devised by them, to keep men in more aw, and to make them have care to shun
even the least sins, since al were of equal haynousnes among them; but indeed,
it is the high way ^o prophanes; and the Scripture is express against this
parility, (as Saint Hierome expresses it) and for the * inequality of sins,
Among the Greeks (...), and (...), differ; the one denoting every ordinary
offense, and aberration from the right mark: the other, that sin which is more
enormous and deeply fastened in a man, Sumitur pr gravi, and incondonabili
crimine, Grotius: so likewise (...), peccans, and peccator, or as St^phan:
peccatosus, qui peccati habitum comparaverit. Beza.
Joh: 19.11. our Savior says of Judas, who delivered him into the hands, and
power of Pilat, that h: had in the comparative, the [greater] sin; there are
bad: and there are worse; 1 Timothy: 5.8. He that provideth not for his own, is
[worse] than an Infidel, 2 Pet: 2.20: and Matt: 12.45: the latter end is worse
than their beginning: Ezekiel 16.47. Jerusalem was corrupted [more] ban Samaria in
all her ways; and this appears also by the diversi y that is in the degrees of
punishment, our Savior himself speaks of a more easy, and a more tolerable
state at the day of Judgment. Matt: 11.22.24. there is a greater, and there is
a less damnation. Matt: 23.14. there are many, and few stripes, Luke 12 47.48.
and though all sins deserve eternal death, yet are not all sinners equally
tormented. N^w God being a Gen: 18.25. 2 Timothy: 4.8.
righteous Judge, proportions the Rev. 18.7.
measure of punishments according to the measure, and degree of sinning; some
sins there are which the Lord out of hit Mic. 7.18.
longanimity, and patience, after a sort, passes by as not seeing them, Act:
17.30. (...), winking at them: But there are others so atrocious, as that they
cry aloud to Heaven for vengeance, of which nature was the blood of Abel,
Clamitat ad coelum vox sanguinis, and Sodomorum, vox oppressorum, merce de^enta
^abo^um.
Gen: 4.10. the grievous sin of Sodom, Genesis 18.20. so likewise oppression,
Exodus: 3.7 and 22, 23. and the defrauding laborers of their ^i^e. Jam. 5.4:
there is a fulness of iniquity, such as the Amerites arose unto Genesis 15 16. and
a measure to be filed up, Matt: 23 32. such was that state of the obstinate
Jews, on whom a proportion able fulness of wrath came to the uttermost. 1 These.
2.16.

But, however upon these testimonies, it be clear, that this Stoiscisme be
fasly charged upon our Churches; yet is the opinion (it serms) much amongst our
People, to whom all sins are equal; we are all sinners (say they) ^u^^ but I
trow not al Adulterers not alremorsle^, and ^mpenitent, sinners: and they shall
know, one day, that there is a difference of sins, when God shall injudgment
inflict heavier damnation.

Papists) that we say all are mortal, and none venial?

A sin unto death, and a sin not unto death: the odds is only in the manner of
explication: venial sins to them are all such which are so in their own nature,
as light matters out of incogitancy, and of surreption, or of humane infirmity,
as impertinent thoughts, idle words, wanton glances, etc. such as these are
pardonable in themselves, at most, are made expiable by some Remissio venialis
peccati nihil aliud est, quam solutio poenae temporalis pro eo debitae. Scotus
l. 4. Did. 21.
cemporary sufferings, even without Ad remissionem peccati venialis non
requiritur paenitentia proprie accepta remittitura. veniale per Satispassionem
in purgato rio. Biel, 4. sent. did. 16. qu. 5 Art: 2.
repentance properly taken either here, or in purgatory, mortal, in their
sense, are such only as are of the grossest kind, and which do vastare
conscientiam, wound and wast the conscience, as Murder, Treason, Sacrilege,
etc.

Now, Brethren, the Orthodox right meaning of the distinction is, in sum this:
sins are said to be mortal, or venial, either in their own natural merit,
and desert, or else in the event, and issue: If we look to the natural merit
of every sin, yea though it be but a Pro. 24 9.
thought of foolishnes, it is mortal, deserving the curse, Gal: 3.10. and
eternal death, Rom: 6.23. Yet in the event, and issue, some sins are venial,
that is, capable of pardon, yea, all and every sin incident into the elect, and
into the adopted Sons, and Daughters of God; murder, and adultry, sins mortal
by desert, yet venial, and actually 2 Samuel 12.13.
pardoned to David in the event, because his Person was accepted into favor
with God; Blasphemy, and persecution, sins mortal in their desert, yet both
these, in the event 1 Timothy 1.13.
pardoned unto Saint Paul, being a Act. 9.15.
chosen vessel of salvation unto God; so was Peter's perjury, and the denial of
his Master; yea, universally all sins, all Mat. 12.31.
manner of sins, of what kind soever, are pardonable to Gods elect by Christ,
yea actually al pardoned to them who are really, and indeed incorporate into
Christ Jesus, Rom: 8.2. And surely, (Beloved) Christ teaching us that we our
selves should forgive until Matt: 18 22
seventy times seven times, after a sort, gives us notice, (as a great By Andr:
Ser on Joh. 20.23.
Divine observes) that He will not stick with us for the like number of ours;
for God forbid we should imagine, 'that he taught us to be more merciful, than
he will be himself: that number says He, amounts to ten Jubilees of pardon,
for so many sins we may hope for pardon at his hands: If those be not enough,
we have example of one whose sins were more in number, than the hairs of his
head: Psalm. 40.12. to whom yet all were remitted.

And whereas it is affirmed, (and that most truly) 1 Cor. 1.25. by the Apostle,
that the weakness of God is stronger then men; if there were any sin greater,
than could be remitted, then the weakness of man (for of that comes sin) should
be stronger than God, which neither reason, nor religion will admit. And
indeed, what is it in the sins of the elect, and regenerate, that should make
them apprehend other, than a pardonablenes in it? In sin are considerable,
either the (...), or transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4. but all that
transgression is forgiven, Psalm: 32.1. or the pollution, 2 Cor: 7.1. and that
is covered, and 1 John 1. 7 Rev: 1: 5. and Rev: 7.14. zech: 13.1.
cleansed, or the guilt thereof, through the offense of God, and behold,
neither is that at all imputed to them, ver. 2.16. as the blood of the paschall
Lamb wherewith the two side-posts, and the upper door post of the House,
wherein it was to be eaten, Exodus: 12: 7. (in tipe of Christ the true Passover,
as he is styled: 1 Cor: 5.7.) was stricken, saved the owners from the stroke of
the destroying Angel; so does the blood of sprinkling 1 Pet: 1. 2 Heb. 12.24
of Jesus Christ, cleanse the Conscience from dead works, Heb: 9.14.

To conclude, if our sins be as Mat: 7.3.
moats in our eyes, and cause them to water. Lo, God has his handkercheif,
wherewith He wipes all tears from our eyes, Rev: 7.7: are they Isa: 64.6.
menstruous? he has his hysop, wherewith to wash, and to make us clean, Psalm:
51.7. If they be of Isa: 1.18.
a scarlet dye, yet He has his Mal: 3.2.
fullers soap to whiten the Conscience as white as snow, when our Savior in
the Garden sweat but Luk: 22.44
[like] unto blood, it was a great agony, it made such a sweat, as was
meritorious; yet this was but a preparative to his potion on the Cross, for
there He sweat not [like] unto blood, but Joh. 19.34.
blood and water, water to wash away the sins of our daily infirmities, and
blood to purge our sins in grain, and a deeper color then blood our sins
cannot bear: shall we sin (says the Holy Ghost) that Grace may abound? God
forbid: Romans 6.1. yet if sin do chance to abound, free grace has the
superlative of sin, and does superabound: abundat delictum, superabundat
gracia, Sin does abound, but grace has abounded above, it does superabound;
Romans 5.20. Abyssus abyssum invocat, says the Psalmist, one deep calls for
another, the depth of our sins, for the depth of Gods compassions which never
fail. And now, O that the Spirit of the Lord would give this Doctrine entrance
into the hearts of all his People, and that the Ephesians. 1.18. Act: 26.18.
eyes of their understanding were as bright as the Sun, that they might
thoroughly see, and know the riches of the glorious inheritance of the Saints in
light; who though they sometimes fall, yet shall they not, can they not fall
utterly away from God though the wicked one may tempt them, yet shall he not
touch them, tactu qualitativo, as Caietan expounds it, with a touch of final
hurt, so dangerously to annoy them, as wholly to alter their renewed hearts
unto a state of total depravation, or corrupt impenitency, they shall not, they
1 John 3.9.
cannot (under such a state of Regeneration) sin unto death: Behold Christ,
whose suit God never denied: Joh: 11: 42. He has prayed his Father to keep
them through his own name: Joh: 17.11. and his Father is greater then all, and
none is able to pluck them out of his Fathers hand, no nor out of his own hand,
Joh: 28, 29. He has kept them all in his Fathers name, and has not lost one
of all whom his Father had given to him, Joh: 17.12. and (which is more still)
what Christ by his merit wrought [for] them, the same by his Spirit he
virtually works [in] them, and enables them through his strength, Phil: 4.13.
in some measure, to keep themselves under the right use of the lawful means, 1 John 5.18. for to our own safety, our own sedulity is required; yes, (that I
may close up all with comfort, and leave some Joel 2.14.
blessing from Heaven to Gods Saints behind me, that my lips like the Spouse of
Christ may drop as the Cant 4.11.
Honey comb, wherein there is both mel, and cera, Honey to sweeten, and with all
wax to enlighten) all you, (my Dearly Beloved Countrymen, and Phil. 4.1.
longed for in the Lord) you who are born of God, you shall be all kept by Gods
1 Pet. 1.5.
own power through faith, and salvation, be all Psalm. 75.24.
guided by his Counsel, and at last be brought home to his Glory. Even so be
it, Amen, Amen.

(...).

Amen.

A word to the present Occasion, and so an end.
IT may now be expected, happily on some hands, that I should take upon me to
exhort these learned, reverend, and religious The R. Honorable John Wild, Lord
chief Baron of the Court of Excheq; and the R. H. Edward Atkins one of the
Justices of the Court of Common Pleas.
Judges, but truly I dare not make so bold; I can say it upon my own knowledge
of them, that they are such as who do defire to Acts 13.36.
serve God in their generation 3 John 5.:
faithfully, (within their station) and to do all Dout. 1.17.
impartial Justice even for 2 Samuel 23.3.
Justice sake; What the Scriptures (out of which I must have ordered my speech
unto them) direct for the Work, and Duty of such Eminent Magistrates, their
Practice is an exact Comment upon it: Wherefore, let us all (I am sure the men
of my profession have great reason so to do) bless God (by whose providence,
and Romans 13.1.
power they sit in Judgment) for them, end enlarge our 1 Timothy 2.2.
devotiont for the support and continuation of them: They will observe what is
said in my Text; that as there is a sin unto Death, so also a sin not unto
Death, and will themselves (as Exo. 22.28. Psalm. 82.6. Joh. 10.34, 35.
Gods with Men) temper Mercy with Justice, Hab. 3.2.

As to M. M. George Luttrell of Dunster Castle Esquire
High Sheriff, he, as he is descended of a Family of a good extraction, so he
is an honorer of Magistracy, as is conspicuous to all who view this goodly
Posse Comitatus now in his Retinew, many of quality; lovers (as himself, who
cannot but be a Leader therein) of the right Religion, of the purity of Gods
Ordinances, and of their Country: He will not but enoble himself by doing
acts worthy of his station, in advancing the glory of God, in his Person, in
his Family, and before all; that so striving as Boaz, to do Ruth 4.11.
worthily in Ephrata, he shall be famous in his Bethlehem.

As to the grand Jury, upon your fidelity and trust, almost the whole
transaction of this solemn, public meeting rests: Gentlemen, men of good
Acts 6.3.
report, and repute, men of Exo. 8.21.
truth, and fearing God will do like themselves, be tender of Gods honor, by
a strict enquiry after the Blasphemers of Gods name, his precious Ordinances,
Gospel, and worship, or whatsoever is contrary to the life, and power of
godliness, or to the peace, and prosperity of this Commonwealth: But if indeed
I might set a special Accent upon my intimations to them, it shall be with the
most sharpest perspicacity to make a disquisition, and discovery of those grand
Incendiaries of the Chrstian world, the brood of Jesuits, who like Serpents 2 Timothy 3.6.
creep into every angle, and under variety of shapes, into most Assemblies in
the Land, having Jesus in their Rev. 9.11.
Name, and lips, but Abaddon, and Apollyon in their hearts: In my conscience, I
am persuaded, they have been instrumentally (though in a 2 Pet 2.1. (...), hoc
est, fur^im, clam, and subdole subintroducemi speciem pietatrs, and nomen
ecclesiae proetendens fraudulenter and Gerh and Auretius ad locum.
clandestine, and imperceptible way) the raysers and fomenters of the greatest
part of all the rufull divisions, and distractions that have been among us: I
have heard some persons of quality say, That most of the English Seminaries
abroad are become empty, that perhaps, there may be the more Emissaries to
deceive at home, God of his goodness unmasque them, those secret 2 Cor. 11.14.
Satan's transformed like to Angels of light, and deliver 2 Timothy 3.13.
seduced souls.

As to the petty Jurers, Witnesses, and others employed in the present public
affairs, be advised, and 2 Chr. 19.6.
Take heed what ye do; 1 Timothy 1.10.
Perjury the God of Truth will not hold Exo. 20.2.
guiltless; remember, it is a degree, and a great step toward this sin unto
Death, to offend against knowledge, chiefly if it be of malicious wickedness
(as ye heard but now) distinguish between the Person and the Psalm. 9.4.
Cause, know, God will not be Gal. 6.7.
mocked, He is John 2.24, 25. and John 21.17. Ier. 23, 24. Psalm. 7.9.
omniscient, views your most secret purposes, aims, and Ps. 139.1, 2. Psalm.
11.4.
intentions; He is (...), as Agapetus once said to Justinian, and understanding
full of many eyes; labor then to be affected with the consideration thereof,
and be as the Sun and Moon in the Heavens, Psalm. 89.36, 37.
faithful witnesses, 1 Cor. 16.13.
quit your selves like Heb. 13.18.
honest men, and conscientious Christians.

To all the people of God in general I say, Psalm. 37.27. 1 Pet. 3.11.
Eschew evil, do good, which two make up a true Nathanael, and an Israelite
John 1.47
indeed; as yet, the Revel. 2.5.
Candlestick of the Church is among us, and Mat. 5.15, 16.
lights shining in the same, O John 5.35.
rejoice in those lights whilst they are among you; Commit not by your Mat.
21.43.
unfruitfulnesse, or unthankfulness, that the Kingdom of heaven be taken from
you: Isa. 30.21. 1 These. 5.20.
Cherish grace by those sanctified means by which the Lord at first conveyed
it into your hearts, own, and Phil. 2.29. 1 These. 5 12, 13.
honor those 1 Timothy 1.12.
allowed public instruments, who as the Lords 2 Cor. 5.20.
Ambassadors brought the 2 Cor. 4.7.
treasure of the 1 Timothy 1.11.
glorious Gospel unto you, though but in earthen Vessels, least God in judgment
send you a Amos 8 11.
Famine, if not of Bread and of water, yet of hearing the word of the Lord,
even that word of Jam. 1 18.
truth, which is able to Jam. 1.21.
save your souls: Take heed of sinning against Romans 1.32.
light, or against your own Romans 5.4. Phil. 1.9. (...).
experience of Gods goodness Romans 5.5. (...).
diffused in the Ordinances; shun David, Psalm. 19. prayed to be delivered from
presumtion (...) from p. ides, (...) zadah arrogano fuit,
spiritual pride, the inordinate overweening, and admiration of
selfe-excellencies, the Mother, and Nurse of most, or of all soule-distempers,
it is a sin now reigning above many, it makes the soul most unlike to God, and
most of all 1 Timothy 3.6.
like unto the Devil; yea, rather be ye 1 Pet. 5.5.
clothed with humility, and let that be (...) of (...) a knot (the word here
only used) tie humility to you, as curious women do knots on their garments for
ornament.
your Ornament, which is both the receptacle, and conserver of all true grace,
and that wherein the Spirit, and Pet. 5.10.
God of all grace takes up a cheerful and a chearing Isa. 57.15. (...). Mac.
Homil. 19.
Rest, keeping the soul and consciences from the sin unto death.

And so the very God of peace 1 These. 5.23.
sanctify you wholly: and I pray God your whole spirit, and soul, and body be
preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: Unto whom with
thee, O Father, and thine Eternal Spirit, be all praise, honor, and immortal
glory, both now and for ever. Amen.

Christian Reader, If any faults have escaped the Press (the Author being
absent when this pious learned Sermon was printing) thou art desired to correct
them with thy pen.

FINIS.

