AN Exposition with Notes, ON The whole Fourth CHAPTER TO THE ROMANS.

Wherein the grand Question of Justification by Faith alone without Works, is
controverted, stated, cleared, and fully resolved, to the satisfaction of any
judicious, conscientious Protestant.

Together with variety of other solid observations, interwoven throughout the
Work.

-- Vivit post funera virtus.

By WILLIAM SCLATER, Doctor in Divinity, sometimes Minister of Gods word at
Pitmister, in Summerset.

Now, Published by his Son WILLIAM SCLATER, Batchelar in Divinity, Minister at
Collompton in Devon.

Hab. 2.4. But the just shall live by his Faith.

Heb. 11.6. But without faith, it is unpossible to please God.

Licensed, Entered, and Printed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by J.L. for Christopher Meredith at the sign of the Crane in
Paul's Churchyard 1650.

To the Right Worshipful, JOHN BAMPFIELD of Poltimore, in the County of
Devon. Esquire, a most eximious, and exemplary Worthy of the West, a full
Paradise of Gods Blessings.
SIR,
HAving now, (by the space of full three weeks of years, and more) though not
without various interruptions, had a strong dispute with my thoughts, whether
under so prevailing a deluge of no less Dogmaticall, then practical Athiesme,
(that has unawares engulfed this latter age) I might safely adventure from my
private closet, as Noah did the Genesis 8.8.
Dove from the windows of his Arc, to let this Posthume volume (more ponderous
perchance in matter, then numerous in pages) fly abroad to make a discovery of
some asswaging of the waters: At length, I got the conquest over my dubious
resolutions, as not utterly despairing, but that, as with some gladsome
emblem, it may return with an olive branch of good tidings, and acceptance in
the Church of God: And surely, I knew not well, on what firmer ground to
bottom those hopes of mine, then on this, if it might but first set footing on
that tree, which grows upon your Mount; find access and allowance at your
Poltimore, a place by far more fertile in celestial graces, then ever Mount
Olivet abounded in Ecclus. 50.10.
fruitful trees, or branches.

And indeed, from whence, or whom, could I have found a more approved Patron of
a scholasticall discourse, (such as this is) then so Honored a Worthy as your
self; whose awful power can protect it, and whose scientificall wisdom can
aright judge of it: I apprehend it not totally improbable, that the Author of
this Book might be sometime known to you by face, at least upon report, or by
his writings; but if not by the last, you may then possibly by this one single
grape, guess at the fuller vintage of his other labors; the maturity of which
in the proper season, has yielded (absit verbo invidia,) the wholesome liquor
of soul-saving doctrine to Gods people: As to this particular Exposition, I
shall not speak Autorem commendet opus.
encomiastically a word, only, if the great expectation beforehand, as some
foyl to a diamond, abate not of the value; surely then, in that grand
controversy of justification by faith, as also of the (...), and authority of
the holy Scriptures; that Papal Idol of works, and traditions so much adored
by Bellarmine, (a learned Cardinal indeed, but a very sophistical and
prevaricating Champion) as Dagon of the Philistims before the Ark of God,
falls 1 Samuel 5.3.
flat to the ground, dishivered into dust and ashes: And as a meet preparatory
thereto, the Text it self is so artificially analyzed, the scope as if
discovered by a sun beam, cleared, the terms distinctly elucidated, and then
the Doctrinall observations so genuinely deduced thence, as if this single
Commentary were the only key to unlock the more deep, and abstruse mysteries of
the great Apostle, whose writings are in many things so 2 Pet. 3.16.
hard to be understood.

Give leave then, I beseech you, to adorn the frontispiece hereof with the
mention of your name, by the authority whereof it cannot but pass into the
hands, and as I hope also the hearts of the most judicious.

For if after that Apophthegme of Solomon, Prove. 27.8.
ointment, and perfume rejoice the heart, then certes the savor of your Cant.
1.3.
name, as a good ointment powered forth, more refreshes the age you live in,
then the costly Joh. 12.13.
spikenard of that penitent in the Gospel, did the house filled with the odor
thereof; yea, it being so eximiously beautified, and adorned with Psalm. 112.6.
righteousness, it seems mounted on the wings of honor, and carried into your
country with renown, as if it had borrowed the Psalm. 68.13.
wings of King David's Dove, in the Psalm, covered with silver, and her
feathers with yellow gold, embellished with the richest, fairest, and most
lasting metalls, as assuring posterity of an Psalm. 112.6.
everlasting remembrance: And indeed, it were injurious to doubt it; for as
Albertus novicamp. in scopo Biblico, page 124, ex Cic. 2. offic.
Albartus and Novicampianus acquaints us, Est compendiaria via ad gloriam, ut
qualis quisque haberi velit, talis sit; Integrity being the most compendious
way to glory, your Christian, and holy practice enstates you in it: having
always followed, as Franc. Guicciard. Histor. Flor. lib. 1 p. 32. vol. 8.
Guicciardine reports of Aloisius the Father of Charles the Eight of France,
magis res ipsas, quam rerum vmbras, more things themselves, then the shadows of
things; more the 2 Timothy 3.5.
power of godliness, then the form alone, without it; and that too, in an
irreprehensible sincerity (as Ignat. Epist. ad Trallian.
Ignatius a contemporary with the Apostle, commends the Tralliani) (...), not
to make use of, for ostension, or oftentation; but to enjoy as a stable, and an
1 Pet. 1.4.
immarcessible possession; your hearts and your hands, your affections and your
actions, being sweetly suited to divine laws (to use the expression of the
same Ignat. Epist. ad Philadelph.
Ancient, to his Philadelphians) (...), as strings fitted to a well-tuned harp,
melodiously warbling harmonious accords: insomuch, that I may say, though not
[to] you (whom were I a Chrysostom, or a Thucydides, of a golden mouth, or of
a silver lip, to represent even in a most magnificent style, the most virtuous
extractions, I should but show a mirror of what you [are] already, as not
scarcely needing to use instructions to what you [should] be better) yet [of]
you, I may in this paper monument, tell posterity in the same language, that
Seneca sua sor. 6.
Seneca sometimes spoke of that sage Cato, that he was, and so are you, solus
maximum vivendi Exemplum, as it were alone (within your station) the greatest
pattern, and example for men to live by: And that, whether in your Naturalls,
or in your Morals, or in your Theologicalls; in relation to all which, your
defecated and refined soul, does been habitare, dwellaright, and is well lodged
in a goodly receptacle; The portall shows what guests are in the parlour, the
case declares the Jewel.

But, it was not my purpose on this occasion, (as being too-conscious to my
self of my own weakness, for so high an attempt) to compose a Panegyric; only,
among the many of your observers, after my measure, as I [could,] though not
after my wishes, as I [ -- Superest animosa [voluntas] Ipsaque nescio quid men's
excellencius audet. Lucan. in Panegyr.ad Call. purn. Pisonem.
would] do; I was willing to let you know; however there may be more elegant
Orators, yet there is not, nor can be a more cordial honourer of your Person,
or Issue.

To dilate on those your several endowments severally, it would require for
each a distinct volume; and it would be harder to find a measure, or an end of
speaking of them, then a beginning; since, what M. T. Cic. orat pro lege Mamlia.
Cicero said of Cneius Pompeius, is much more verified in your worship: In vno
Cn. Pompeio [summa] esseomnia, in one single Pompeius his virtuous excellencies
were all in the Superlative; so that what in some others may be good, or pious
dispersedly, or but in some one special, as a Pelican in the wilderness [
Psalm. 102.6, 7.
alone] lo, in your person are collected 1 Cor. 1.5, 7.
all together; each virtue by a sacred concatenation linked, and, as it were,
intortelled one within the other, in an indissoluble chain, and laid up in your
heart, as in a magazine of Gods favors on you: That as S. Vade in Campaniam,
et disce Paulinum.
Austin, when he would recommend a conversation, to be followed by any
Christian his friend, he wished him to go into Campania; and learn of Paulinus:
so may I say, go to Poltimore, and there he shall see, for descent and
pedigree, through many generations, an ancient Family, supported in the Honor,
and reputation of Religion, and hospitality, in a present and hopeful
succession: There a Father, (...), the most discreetly indulgent, and provident
in the Nation, Reverend for Age, but more venerable for all manner of religious
devotion; Mat. 6.6.
secret in his closet, Zech. 12.12, 13.
private in his family, and (in a conscience of Gods Holy Ordinances) public
in the Heb. 10.25. Psalm. 116.14.
assembly; and (as if some blood of those noble Bereans ran along his veins) a
most diligent, and assiduous Act. 17.11. Ioh. 5.39.
searcher of the holy Scriptures; as St. Luke records of him, whose name was
Iustus, he was one that worshipped God, whose house Act. 18.7.
joined hard to the Synagogue; so that if devotion were elsewhere lost, it
might thence be repaired: There a master so bountiful, so munificent, that
that house has yielded a servant even very lately, of a bout an hundred years
old, and still has some at this day, of above twenty years standing, and
attendance: There a (...), a lover and Romans 16.23.
entertainer of Gods faithful 1 Timothy 5.17. 2 Timothy 4.2.
teaching Ministers, (chiefly his own) upon all good occasions; in whose
countenance and speech, evermore dwell such plentiful comforts to the men of
that function, that as it is storied of Titus the Emperor, hardly any depart
sad, but with encouragement, such, as adds fatness to the bones; yea, even a
Mr. Francis Bampfield.
son of his own loins: (as Isaiah the Prophet is said to be descended of Rabbi
Solomon, apud Lyram, and Hicrom. proleg. in Isai.
noble blood) of exquisite parts, is now a Mat. 9.38. and 20.1. (...), Tit. 1.8.
labourer in Gods Vineyard, under that calling: There a (...), a true Lover and
Honourer of Learning, and of learned good men; and (as a burning and shining B.
K.
lamp of our Church eftsoons complained) in this unprofitable generation of
ours, wherein men wonder at Scholars, Iuvenal.
ut pueri Iunonis avem, and Scholars wonder more at men of that temper; or
rather indeed, hang up their Psalm. 1 37.2.
harpes upon the willowes, lamenting the cross See Isai. 6, 10. 2 Cor. 4.4.
infatuation of the stupid times; yet learning never departs discontented
from your face; that as you have been long a stay, and a pillar to your
Country, in the place of Authority, and Magistracy; so, as Justin. Martyr.
Dialog. cum Tryphon. Iudaeo, p. 172. col. 40.
Justin Martyr wrote of Plato, and Pythagoras, in regard of Philosophy, (...),
they were as the very wall, column, and prop of the times; in like manner are
you (being Learned your self) unto men of that quality: And, (that I may select
a more choice Tulip or two, in this so well-furnished a garden of spiritual
flowers) there may we find for softness, and 2 King. 22.19
tenderness of heart a Josiah; for 1 Pet. 3.8.
courteous affability, and alacrious Number 12.3.
meekness, another Moses rediv'd, of whom Eccles. 45.1, 4.
Siracides writes, that he was beloved of God and men.

Again there, (in a reciprocation of duty) we may see, as in a piece of Arras
displayed, the several pictures of the Parents, in a corresponding posterity,
in whom their graces are diffused, in as great variety as the faces: And though
it be a maxim among the Pure personalia non propagantur.
Schoolmen, that purely personal excellencies, are not traduced by prop
gation; yet now I see, that may descend by imitation: -- Horat. Flac. carm.
lib. 4. od. 4.
nec imbellem feroces
Progenerant Aquilae columbam.
What should genuinely descend frow an Eagle, but an Eagle like it self? For
lo, there may we see the St. John Bampfield Baronet.
Son, (a most accomplished gentleman) molded at it were, into the like form
of piety, by a zealous patrization; the most awful observant Son, of a
religious Father in the Nation; whose virtuous 2. Epist. John. 1.4.
Lady (the devout Phoenix of the West) with her Ephesians. 6.4.
well-educated Children walking in the truth, becomes the 1 Cor. 11.7.
glory of her husband, and an ornament of her Sex: nor stays this here, but
the same sanctity is spread abroad into all, and every the branches of the same
Stock.

But, methinks, yet among all those graces, that as precious stones Rev. 21.19.
garnish your building, the richest Chrysolite, or Amethist, is your constant 2
Pet. 3.18.
proficiency, and Gal. 6.9.
unwearied Mat. 10.22.
perseverance in all; not suffering your devotion as Hezekiah's Sun, to go back
in its Isai. 38.8.
degrees; no not in these stagge ring, loose, and exulcerated times. It is your
honor, yea it shall be your glory, that you derive your light as those twelve
stars, (a type of the twelve Apostles, Rev. 12.1.) from the Fountain of light
the Mal. 4.2.
Sun of righteousness, the Lord Jesus Christ, in whose Psalm. 36.9.
light alone it is, that you can see the true and solid light; nor is your
motion in Christianity, like that of the Planets in their Epicycles now
ascending, then descending; sometimes stationary, anon retrograde; neither does
your devotion, like the river Maginus Geograph.
Jordan gliding in a sweat, and limpid stream, empty it self into the dead sea
of Heb. 3.12.
Apostasy; but rather, as the shining of the Cant. 6.10.
morning, which shines Prove. 4.18.
more and more unto the perfect day, it goes from Psalm. 84.7.
strength to strength; yea, and that even now, when your Eccles. 12.5.
Almond tree does flourish, your Canities quasi flos amygdali, veneranda
quidem, sed mortis nuncia. Anton. Corranus. ad loc.
white hairs discover the winter, and snowy time of your Age, yet still you
bring forth Psalm. 92.14, Rev. 2.19. and Gerard. Moringus.
fruit in old age; your i last works, like those of the Angel in Thyatira,
being more (if it may be) then the first; (...). Some say the metaphor is taken
from the silk worm which when it is about to spin the finest thread, is wont to
fast 2. or 3. days together and so stretches it self out at the fullest
length.
stretching your self out, as it were, and with your utmost endeavors,
pressing toward the mark of perfection, Phil. 3.13, 14. All which I mention
with a kind of tripudiant joy, and exultation of spirit, belonging so skillful
a Pilot; after the many storms of trialls, and temptations in a tempestuous
world, to give occasion to Israelites indeed, to praise him in the Laudari
potest gubern ator in portu.
Haven: and your sun Vt Phaebi lumen dulcius esse solet jane jam cadentis.
now about to set (though long may it be, before it set) to reflect upon us, at
least with so sweet a light, and so delectable an influence.

Go on, Noble Sir, thus to Tit. 2.10.
adorn the Gospel, and as a starr of the greater magnitude, to Phil. 2.15
beautify the Firmament of the Church; by your perseverance (the Rev. 2.10.
crowning grace) your precious soul (by far more shining and refulgent, then
the most orient Rubies) shall be fastened to the Mat. 7.24. and 1 Cor. 10.4.
rock of your salvation, the Lord Christ Jesus; and your memorial after you
shall be blessed. Prove. 10.7. Eccles. 45.1.


Nothing remains, but that I crave and impetrate pardon for this rude
prolixity, and presumption on your patience: It shall no way diminish, rather
agrandize your greatness, that you condescend to an acceptance of this mean
present; hereby, you shall arise in eminence, because by such a dignation, you
become greater then your self, in overcomming your self, and likest the
greatest, who took in as good part (when it came from a good Non de patrimonio,
sed de [animo] opus ejus examinans, etc. considerans non quantum, sed [ex]
quanto dedisset. S. Cyprian. de opere, and cleemos Sect. 14.
heart) the widows Mar. 12.42, 43. Romans 1.9.
mite, as the richest offering: May the God of Heaven (whom you serve with your
spirit) and that from your 2 Timothy 1.3.
Forefathers, with pure conscience fill you, and with you all yours, with Romans
15.13.
all joy, and peace of conscience in this life; and compass you all with a
diadem of bliss, and immortal glory, in the life to come; This is, and shall
be the fervent prayer of, Sir,

Your humble servant in the Lord Christ, to be commanded. William Sclater.
From my study in Collompton, April 3. 1650.
To all Christian, and judicious Readers; but with more specialty of respect to
all those of my loving, and constant Hearers, of the Town, and Parish of
Collompton, in the County of Devon, grace, mercy, and peace.
I Have nothing to acquaint the Reader with, concerning the Author of this
Book, (my reverend Father,) or the book it self save only that it was prepared
as it is, by him, before his decease, and intended for public perusal, in an
addition to the three first chapters long since, (as the earnest of his future
labors,) published by himself: I must needs use the now quotidian, and general
excuse, the badness of the times, that it came forth no sooner; I hope the
present profit by it to Gods Church and people, will compensate this long
delay; this rest assured of, that (saving the errata of the press) it is
printed from a true original, unadulterated copy; and if thou be one, who
have come with any appetite, to the reading of any of his other writings, this
particular will no whit abate, rather increase it; such as it is, the Lord
bless it to thy soul.

AND now, for you (my dear Brethren, and Hearers) I cannot but take up that of
St. Paul for his Israel; Romans, Chapter the tenth, verse the first: Brethren,
my hearts desire, and prayer to God for you all is, that you may be saved; and
I do assure you, as St. John did his well-beloved Gajus; Third Epist. Ioh. 1.2,
3.
Belo ved, I wish above all things, that you and your souls may prosper; nor
can there be any greater joy, then to see or hear that you all love, and walk
in the truth: I chose more specially, a recommendation of this Book unto you,
because you may be my witnesses of the harmony of my own judgment with my
Fathers, in my late Doctrines delivered to you, concerning faith, and good
life; they are mistaken who surmise me, differing from him in any solid truth,
and practice: If the Lord have, or may make me an instrument, to Iud. verse. 20.
build you up farther in your most holy faith; I shall bless the day wherein I
first entered, (by Gods special providence) on this pastoral charge, 1 Pet.
5.2.
feeding the flock of God which is among you, and taking the oversight
thereof, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready
mind; promising moreover (whiles God shall continue me with you, and with me
my Talent) as the 2 Cor. 12.15.
Apostle did his Corinthians, I will very gladly spend, and be spent for you,
in the service of your faith; only, Let me not experiment the following
imitation, namely, the more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved of you;
yea, I promise my self of you Heb. 6.9.
better things, and such as do accompany salvation; Heb. 13.17.
hoping also that whilst I thus watch for your souls, and 1 Timothy 5.17. 2 Timothy
4.2.
labor in the Word and Doctrine, you will not deny me the double honor
prescribed of Gal. 6.6.
maintenance, and 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13.
reverence: The admonition I shall add is this, That you continue (as upon your
souls) to prize, and wait upon the holy, and Heb. 10.25.
public ordinances of God, keep close to the Gal. 6.16.
Rule of Gods written word, his Romans 12.2. Job. 17.17.
revealed Will; Shun spiritual pride, inordinate opinion of private gifts, it
opens the gap to 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. Isai. 29.9, 10.
delusions, and the spirit of giddiness: Remember who said, there are Rev. 2.24.
depths of Satan, who more mischiefeth well-meaning souls, under the vizar of
an 2 Cor. 11.14.
Angel of light, then he does under the shape of an open Dragon; 1 Cor. 16.13.
stand fast in the settled received truth of Christ; slight not the universal
approved practice of Gods true Church; be not 2 Pet. 3.17, 18.
led away with the error Heb. 13.9.
of the wicked; have regard to the precepts, as well as to the promises of the
Gospel, and a chief respect to the peace of the Church. It is good 1 Thessalonians.
5.23.
that the heart be established with grace: And now, the very God of peace
sanctify you wholly, and I pray God your whole spirit, and soul, and body be
preserved blameless, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom I am,

Your affectionate Pastor to serve you. William Sclater.
Collompton. April 3. 1650.
Errata.
PAge 3. line 25. for assail, read avail; and l. 3. r. explanation, p. 8. l.
ult. after [hath cause of boasting] read thus; now with him that has noe such
works, but faith only in him, that justifies the ungodly, its otherwise, p 9.
l. 6. r. saving, p. 13. l. 8. r. these, p. 14. l. 19. for or, r. of, p. 15. l.
11. r. almost, p. 17. l. 2. r. allegations, p. 18. l. 34. r. perhibet. p. 20.
l. 14. r. tenet, p. 21. l. 11. r. an, and l. 14. for in, r. is, p. 23. l. 13.
r. owes thee, p. 26. l. ult. r. work, p. 27. l. 15. r. usually, and l. 18. r.
his lise, p. 28. l. 27. r. due to thee, p. 35. l. 1. r. oftener, p. 36. l. 29.
r. of him, p. 38. l. 10. r. by inherence, p. 42. l. 35. r. charity, p. 50. l.
3. r. they, and l. 5. for when, r. what, p. 51. l. 10. r. imputed, p. 56. l.
20. r. destined, p. 59. l. 6. for contractions, r. contradictions, and l. 10.
r. temporal; and l. 30. r. with, p. 67. l. 19. for had, r. tied, p. 68. l. 13.
r. lies, and l. 34. r. rain p. 69. l. 18. r. viaregni, and l. 22. for decree,
r. degree, p. 70. l. 1. r. Howsoever, and l. 12. r. contemptus; and l. 22. r.
significat; and l. 24. r. ille, p. 75. l. 9. r. into, p. 76. l. 4. for where,
r. whence, p 77. l. 20. r. considered, p. 78. l. 22. r. weakness, and l. 29.
for said, r. say I, p. 80. l. 30. r. propound, p. 84. l. ult, r. Two. p. 92. l.
32. for free, r. see, p. 95. in margin. r. Basil, in Hexamer, p. 102. l. 13. r.
whether as a condition, p. 106. l. 23. r, expediency, p. 110. l. ult. r.
amplectentem, p. 115. l. 14. r. subjoyned, p. 117. l. 17. r. this effect, p.
120. l. 10. r. infalibly, p. 121. l. 9. r. anathema, p. 125. l. 16. and 19. for
bis, r. eis, p. 136. l. 25. r. of inheritance, p. 137. l. ult. r. further, p.
141. l. 32. for it, r. is, p. 153. l. 9. r. out of men's blindness, p. 159. l.
29. for tempted, r. tempered, p. 160. l. 13. r. comfortable, p. 161. l. 2. for
the, r. and p. 167. l. 23. r. reputed, p. 170. l. 18. r. fructus, p. 171. l. 9.
r. though, and l. 26. r. sequel, p. 174. l. 13. r. propounded, p. 182. l. 19.
for loving, r. losing, p. 183. l. 1. r. scarce, and l. 18. r. conceive, p. 184.
l. 1. for mediate, r. meditate.

AN EXPOSITION, WITH Notes, on the fourth Chapter to the ROMANS.
CHAP. IIII.
VERSE, 1, 2. What shall we say then, that Abraham our Father, as pertaining to
the flesh has found? For if Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof
to glory, but not before God.


THE Apostles purpose in this Chapter, is, by farther proofs, to confirm his
principal conclusion, viz. That a man is justified by Faith, without the works
of the Law.

The chief Parts of the Chapter are three.

First, A Confirmation of the conclusion.

Secondly, A Laudatory declaration of Abraham's Faith.

Thirdly, An applying of Abraham's example to us, even as many as walk in the
steps of Abraham's faith.

The Reasons brought for confirmation, are. 1. From Abraham's example. 2. From
David's testimony. 3. From time, and use of circumcision. 4. From means of
conveyance of the inheritance to Abraham. 5. From ends of justification.


The passage to Abraham's example, is by most conceived thus. The Apostle is
imagined to prevent, what Jews might object, against the conclusion of
justification by faith, without works: If this be so, what got Abraham our
father, according to the flesh? as if they had said, it seems, there is no
prerogative of Abraham, by all that righteousness wherein he lived: And the
Apostle is supposed to grant their inference, and to subjoyn Reasons thereof.

But methinks, weighing the words, the connection may rather be conceived, to be
by way of inference, out of the doctrine of the former Chapter; as if it had
been said, if this be so, that boasting must be excluded, and that all that are
justified, must be justified by faith; What shall we say then, that Abraham our
father found, as concerning the flesh? etc. In no case.

Thus then, (but that I love not novelty,) I would read the text: What shall we
say then, that Abraham found by the flesh? And so, methinks the reasons more
fluently are applied to the Negative conclusion: The connection we see.

The conclusion principal is here proved, by the example of Abraham, If
Abraham obtained not righteousness by works, but by faith, then no man is, or
can be justified by works, but by faith: but, Abraham obtained not
righteousness by works, etc. Ergo, no man is justified by works. The
proposition is not expressed, but easily collected out of the text: The
assumption is, Verse 1. laid down in way of inference, delivered
interrogatively, where the interrogation implies a negative: The conclusion is,
Chap. 3. verse. 28.

The assumption is proved, by an argument from inconvenience: If Abraham were
justified by works, he had whereof to boast, but not with God; that is, he had
no cause to boast with God; Ergo, he was not justified by works.

Found] That is, obtained; as Genesis 26.12. Isaac sowed in the land, and found;
that is, received, or obtained in that year an hundred fold, Hos. 12.8. I have
found substance, that is gotten.

(...)] As pertaining to the flesh: This particle, some Ancients, as well as
later Expositors, both Popish, and Protestant, refer rather to the word
(Father,) then to the verb, (found:) And thus read, Abraham our father,
concerning the flesh: but, methinks the trajection is too harsh; and besides,
the conclusion shall want one principal term, that best serves to express the
things in hand; and therefore I rather refer it to the verb, and thus read;
Abraham found not by the flesh, or, as pertaining to the flesh.

According to the flesh] That is, says Ambrose, S. Ambrosius, ad loc.
by his Circumcision; fittingly to what we may suppose the Apostle to
preoccupate; and yet, in as much as ye count Circumcision is a work; he affirms
it as well of moral works, as of circumcision.

Say others, as Cajetan, by flesh; that is, Cajetan, ad loc.
by righteousness which stands in works, and are done by the flesh, that is, by
the body.

Others as Theodoret by his own strength, Theodoret ad loc. Illyric. in clavi
and Zanch. de tribus Elohim, lib. 3. cap. 1.
and good works done thereby. Generally I thus conceive it, that Abraham
obtained not righteousness, by any work Ceremonicall, Moral, or whatsoever can
be imagined, to assail to righteousness, except faith in Christ; so find I the
use of the word, in the same case, Phil. 3.3, 4, 5, 6, 9. Where, under this
name of flesh, comes circumcision, our own righteousness which is by the Law,
or whatsoever is, or may be opposed to that righteousness, which is by the
faith of Christ.

The whole explination amounts to this sum; Abraham obtained not
righteousness, by any his own works.

See we the confirmation: The argument is taken from an inconvenience, issuing
out of that supposition; If Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to
glory: But, he has not any thing whereof to glory, at least with God; Ergo, he
was not justified by works.

Let us see what our adversaries have to say, against this full argument of the
Apostle. For ground of their answer, they attempt an inversion of the Apostles
syllogism, and thus conceive him to reason: Sasbout, ad loc.
If Abraham were justified by works, then had he no glory, or boasting with
God; he might indeed by that means, procure the commendation of a man
excellently righteous; but with men only, not with God: but Abraham had cause
of glorying, and boasting with God; Ergo, was not justified by works.

This cross frame of the argument, Augustine in prefat. ad Psalm. 31. Ambros. ad
loc.
I could not without indignation read, were it not, that it has great Authors
to give it countenance; for Reverence to them, let us afford it trial.

First then, consider that the Apostle in this argument, has apparent respect
to that ground laid down, Romans 3.27. That is, that we are to be justified by
such a mean, as whereby boasting may be excluded; according to which ground he
here concludes, That Abraham was not justified by works, for if that were true,
then had he cause of boasting. Is it not now too gross blindness, so to
conceive the Apostle, as if he would give Abraham cause of boasting?

Secondly besides this, the proposition thus conceived, is apparently false:
For, if Abraham were justfied by works, then sure he had cause of boasting,
even before God; for, what greater cause of glorying even before God, then
this, That he has wrought works to his justification, and may therefore say,
he is not beholden to God, for his greatest blessing, justification, as having
purchased it by his own works of obedience, see Romans 3.27.

Thirdly add hereunto, that the assumption is apparently false; for Abraham, if
the Apostle could judge, had no cause of boasting with God; his justification
being as ours, merely of grace, through faith in Christ Jesus: leave we
therefore that dream, and see whether their other answers have more weight.

Say some Catholics, we must here understand observation of Legal
Ceremonies; as Circumcision, Sabbaths, New Mons, etc. Not works of the Law
Moral.

Answ. To this idle exception, see my Annotation in Romans 3. But bring we this
distinction into the Apostles argument, and see whether boasting be excluded:
If Abraham were justified by works ceremonial, then had he cause of boasting;
belike not so, if by works moral: and how I wonder do works Ceremonial, give
greater cause of boasting, then works Moral? is their dignity now greater,
then works of Moral obedience? Fidem vestram Papistae! Behold, to obey is
better then sacrifice, and to hearken, then the fat of rams, 1 Samuel 15.22. I
will have mercy, and not sacrifice, Hos. 6.6. Mat. 9.13. and sexcenta
hujusmodi; Bellarm. de Iustific. lib. 1. cap. 19.
blush at such idle evasions, which your own Bellarmine willingly disclayms,
and confutes by Fathers.

Besides this, according to this answer, boasting is only in some part taken
from Abraham; namely, in respect of his observance of Ceremonialls; for Moral
obedience is still left him, for matter of boasting; but boasting on any
pretense is excluded in Paul's intention; Ergo.

Hear Hierome; Ex operibus legis, Hierom ad Ctesiphont. Adv. Pelag. ultramed.
non justificabitur om nis Caro; quod ne de Lege Moysis tantum dictum putes,
and non de omnibus mandatis, quae uno legis nomine continentur, idem Apostolus
scribit, dicens consentio Legi Dei, etc. iterum scimus, quod Lex spiritualis
est, etc. We know says Paul, that the Law is spiritual, Romans 7.14. What Law I
wonder, if not that Moral?

Let us see yet, whether other playsters will salve the sore; Bellarm. qua
supra.
works of Abraham are of two sorts; some Praecedentia fidem, going before
faith; some Facta per fidem, done by faith: the Apostle understands works done
before faith and regeneration; not those done in and by faith; Let us bring
this into the argument: If Abraham were justified by works done without faith,
by the mere power of natural free will, then had he cause of boasting; not so,
if by works done in faith. Answ. And why not I marvail, when works done by
grace, (according to their opinion) are done, partly, by strength-naturall of
free will; so much then as free will helped in the doing, so much cause of
boasting Abraham had of himself; But Abraham had no cause of boasting, etc. 2.
What if it be apparent, that the Apostle speaks even of works done by Abraham,
now believing and regenerate; then methinks, these works must also be included,
in the Apostles intention: Certainly if we consider the testimony alleged out
of Genesis 15. in the next verse, to prove, that Abraham was not justified by
works, it will easily appear that Abraham was, long before this regenerate, and
believing, and had many works of faith; whereas, yet the testimony of
righteousness is given him, not for working, but for believing. It was a work
of faith that Abraham did, in following the Lords call out of his country,
Heb. 11.8. Other works of piety and love, see Genesis 12.8. and 13.8, 9. and 14
16, 20, etc. Yet not these works done in faith, but faith was imputed to
righteousness.

True says Bellarmine, Abraham was now regenerate, and had done many good
works of faith; and yet the Apostle, when he says he was justified by faith
and not by works, rejects not his works done in faith from power of justifing,
but those only which he (might) have done, not of faith: For even they who have
faith, work sometimes not of faith; as when they sin, or do works merely
Moral, without relation to God: In a word, the Apostle speaks conditionally,
and according to their opinion, which ascribed righteousness to their own
strength.

Answ. Now, what is to be wilfully blind, if this be not? was it ever heard
of, that a man should be justified by works, not which he (had) done, but which
he (might) have done: or, think we the Saints of God to whom he wrought, or the
Jews that perhaps disturbed them, were ever so shameless, as to ascribe justice
to works finfull, or merely Moral, such as heathens performed. Its apparent,
that the Apostle fits answer to Jewish objections, who urged works of law,
written for matter of justification: yea in likelihood, works done in grace,
for whereto else comes in the example of Abraham, so worthy a Saint of God?
Certes, if of works merely natural, there had been question, example of
Abimelech, or Socrates or Aristides, had been as pertinent to the purpose.

Lastly say others, the Apostle speaks not de justificatione Pii, but Impii;
not of that justification, whereby a man, of a righteous man is made more
righteous; but he speaks of justifiing a wicked man, which is done by faith:
Answ. Concerning this distinction, see Annotat. in Chap. 3.

But it is their opinion, that he speaks of the first justification only:
surely Sasbout confesses, that the testimony out of Genesis, treats only, De
augmento Iustitiae, and non de justificatione Impii: And that is apparent to
every confiderate Reader.

This mist of cavills thus dispelled, let us now resume the Apostles
conclusion, and lay it for a ground; that Abraham was not justified by any
works of any law, in any state by him performed.

Abraham, that mirrout of good works, as well as of faith; yet stripped of all
right, and claim to righteousness by any his obedience: and dare any of his
children challenge more at God hands, then Abraham, the pattern of
justification? Bring to the balance your voluntary poverty; building of
temples, pilgrimage, works of mercy; or, if there be any work that you think
more glorious, and see if they be not found lighter then vanity it self, to
those of Abraham: that one work of obedience, in offering his Son Isaac upon
the altar, which of the sons of men can parallel? I spare amplifications,
because they are extant in the Apostle, and particularized in Ambrose; De
Abrah. Patriarch lib. 1. Cap. 8.

VER. 3, 4, 5. For what says the Scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was
counted to him for righteousness: Now to him that works, is the reward not
reckoned of grace, but of debt: but to him that works not, but believes on
him that justfieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.


Whether the words be conceived as proof of the Minor, or of the principal
conclusion, it is not much material, the issue being all one: The argument
proving it, is taken from the manner, or means of Abraham's justification,
which was merely gracious; the Scripture affirms, that Abraham's believing, was
counted to him for righteousness, Genesis 15.6. Ergo, he had no cause of boasting;
because, that not to the worker, but to the believer only, faith is imputed
unto righteousness.

The consequence of this Enthymeme, has its proof from the place of unlikes;
That the force of the proof may be better conceived, let us view a little the
terms of the comparison: The persons compared are; he that works, and he that
works not but believes: The things wherein they are compared as unlike, is
the manner or means whereby these severally obtain righteousness: The worker
that is, he that has works to be justified by, he has righteousness reckoned
to him as wages; not granted out of favor, but paid as of debt: He that has
no works but believes, has righteousness counted to him, not of debt, but of
favor; as if he had said, that ye may see how Abraham's having faith counted
righteousness, left him no cause of boasting; observe this difference, betwixt
the worker, and believer, viz. He that has works to bring before God, has
righteousness ascribed unto him of debt, not of grace; because that by his
works, he has purchased righteousness as wages, and so by consequence has
cause of boasting: him that justifies the ungodly, its otherwise; this faith
is of grace imputed to righteousness; Abraham therefore being of this latter
sort, not a worker, but a believer, and by consequence, has faith of grace
counted to him for righteousness; surely had no cause of boasting, for this
matter of justification: This, having the better judgment of the learned, I
take to be the natural resolution of the text.

Let us now turn back to the words, and enquire their sense, and what
instructions they afford for our use.

In verse the third, are two things. 1. The Judge whom Paul appeals unto. 2.
The sentence of the judge.


For what says the Scripture] Holy Apostle, thou forgottest thy self, that
did appeal to Scripture to give sentence, in a matter of dobut: For we are
taught by men of unerring spirits; the Scripture is Mutus Index, a dumb judge,
not able to utter what may resolve us in matter of doubt. Now, how much better
were it that these men were dumb, then to use their tongues in manner so
blaspheously derogatory, to him that inspires the Scripture: For, be it that in
property of speech the Scripture is speechless, yet contains it not directions
sufficient to determine doubts? or needs it any more, then man's mind to
conceive, and his tongue to publish what it contains? Or, has the Church any
other authority about the Scripture, save only to declare what Gods Spirit
therein speaks? Must the sense needs be locked up in the Popes breast, and the
Scripture taught to mean only what he determines?

2. Is it so strange, and abhorrent from common language, that the Scripture
should be said to speak? In common assemblies what more usual? How says your
record? What says the Law?

3. How ever, I hope, Gods Spirit may be said in Scripto speak to his Church,
without any great (...), inasmuch as he does therein utter what his meaning is:
And writing, does the office of speech thus far, that it serves to express the
conception of our mind: As David said of his tongue, it was the pen of a ready
writer, Psalm. 45.1. So may we say of the pens, that the Lords holy scribes
used, they were the tongues of a ready speaker.

Sitacet Christus, quid sibi volunt haec Evangelia? quid sibi volunt voces
Apostolicae? quid cantica Psalmorum? quid eloquia Prophetarum? in his enim
omnibus Christus non tacet: S. Augustine. In Johan. tractat. 4.

The Scripture?] Fitly does Paul consult with Scripture, as the only Competent
Judge in-questions of his nature; without which, if we search for resolution in
matters of this quality, we run into a Labyrinth: The advice that Constantine
gave to the fathers in the Nicene Council, should have place with us; sumamus
ex dictis divini spiritus explicationes quaestionum; Mark his reason;
Evangelici enim, Thedoret. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 7.
and Apostolici li^ri, nec non Antiquorum Prophetarum oracula, plane instruunt
nos sensu Numinis: And truth is, howsoever in matters of Morality, there be to
be found some good directious in nature; yet in this, and like matters touching
reconciliation with God, and means of justification before him; how utterly not
only blind, but opposite to what truth teaches, is nature: yea, it may not be
denied that the Fathers them selves, have some of them too natural conceits in
this business; and, if my judgment and observation in their writings be any
thing, (as it is not much,) the attentive Reader shall find much of the popish
plot of justification, to be framed out of the errors and misprisions of some
Ancients; here therefore especially let it have place, that the Prophet
advises, to the Law, and to the Testimony, Isai. 8.20.

See we now the sentence of this Judge; What says the Scripture? This, Abraham
believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness.

In which sentence, we have two particulars observable.

First Abraham's act, with the object, he believed God.

Secondly, The fruit, or benefit thereof; It was counted to him for
righteousness.

Touching the first, Abraham's act, he believed God: Let us here a little
largely, enquire what is the nature of justifying faith; so much the rather,
The nature of justifying faith explained.
because the controversy is famous, betwixt us and our adversaries.

Concerning it, two questions shall be handled:

First, whether it be an [assent] to the promise; Or, an [Affiance] rather, and
trusting in the promise: Or, in plainer terms; whether this [to believe] in
this question, signify, to give Credence to God speaking; or else, to put
confidence in God.

The opinions both of them have great Authors, both Popish, and Protestant: For
our better understanding, it shall not be amiss to fetch the consideration
somewhat higher; even from the general notion of these two habits, as they are
conceived by Philosophers and others, according to reason.

Faith therefore or belief, has this general description: It is an habit of
the understanding, inclining us to a firm, and undoubtfull assent to something
as truth, for the authority and credit of the speaker, or witness. I call it
first an habit of the understanding, because, the proper object thereof is
truth, and the act thereof an assent to truth; or, a persuasion and
acknowledgment of the truth propounded: The difference stands, partly in the
measure of assenting, partly in the cause moving to assent: for as touching
absolute doubtfulness, when the mind hangs in aequilibrio, giving no assent
either way, its quite opposite to the nature of faith.

Now, the assent of the mind has three degrees:

The first is, when the mind has some, though weak, inclination, and has a
propension to assent to a thing propounded, perhaps moved by some slight sign,
or by apprehension of possible truth; some call this suspicion, more fitly
perhaps, conjecture.

The Second is, when the assent is more stable, and resolute; yet not without
fear, that the contrary may be true: this called opinion.

The Third and highest, is a perfect and peremptory acknowledgment, that the
thing propounded is of infallible and certain truth; of this last sort, is the
assent that faith yields.

Now, this certain and perfect assent is of four sorts, according to a fourfold
means swaying the mind: The first is, that which is caused by sense; as when
the mind acknowledges a thing for truth, because it has received perfect
intelligence from the sight, hearing, etc. or, other senses not hindered or
deceived: The second is, that which is caused out of the clear light and
evidence of the thing, without arguments of any kind to persuade it; as in
principles clear of themselves, and that need no demonstration or evidence, but
their own light to convince; as that, omne totum majus est sua part: The third
is, that which is caused by certain discourse, and demonstrative arguments,
which they call science: The last is, that which is procured by the authority
and credit of him, that propounds a thing to be received for truth; which
authority (being without exception,) breeds persuasion as firm, as any can be
raised by argument, sense, or if there be any other means more forcible with
the mind to persuade: And of this last sort is faith.

Now Fiducia, confidence or affiance, is that habit, or act of the will,
whereby we hopefully repose our selves upon the power, truth, and goodness of
the promiser, for receiving of some good thing promised.

It differs from belief. 1. In the proper seat; belief being in the
understanding, affiance in the will. 2. In the object which its carried unto,
which is bonum, not verum. 3. As the effect from the cause; this reposing of
our selves on, arising from a persuasion of the power, truth, goodness of him
we trust in: And of the general notion of these two qualities thus far.

Their difference we shall better yet see, if we consider the diverse phrases of
speech, wherein the Scripture expresses their actions, fittingly to that
usual distinction received from Austin, putting difference betwixt these two
acts of; S. Aug. Trict. in Ioh. 29. and Sermon. 61, de verb. Domini.
Credere deo, and Credere in deum: The first being the act of belief, properly
so called; the other expressing the act of that other habit which we call
fiduciam.

To apply this Praemissa to the purpose; the question is, of whether sort that
faith which we call justifying is; whether a giving credit to God promising us
remission of sins in Christ; or a relying on his mercy, and the merits of
Christ, for pardon of sins and life everlasting.

The several opinions shall be propounded and examined, that the truth may the
better appear.

Papists, well nigh all that I have seen, Resolve of the former, and thus
determine; Bellarm. de Iustif. lib. 1. cap, 5. and 9. See Kemnit. Exam. lib. 1.
cap. de Fide justific.
That Faith justifying is no such Affiance, or Confidence in Gods mercy, as
Protestants teach; but a general assent to all things contained in the Word of
God, and a persuasion of their Truth.

Of our own Divines, some not of lowest rank, judge, that it is merely an assent
to the truth of the Gospel, or Evangelicall promise made to us in Christ, And
they would thus be understood; not that it excludes belief of the rest of Gods
word, but that (as it justifies,) it respects only the Gospel: And further,
this assent they make of two sorts; one general, whereby we believe the Gospel
to be true; another special, whereby we believe it to be true to (us.)

A third sort there are, that make it merely an affiance or confidence in God,
and his Christ for pardon of sins, and salvation.

The last is of them, that make it partly an assent particular, partly
affiance; of these, let us enquire which comes nearest unto the truth.

As touching that of Papists, making it only a general assent to the truth of
the whole word of God, without any particularlizing either of the object, or of
the assent:

The reasons are forcible against it.

First, For that by this means, justification is extended to sundry reprobates,
yea, after a sort, to devils; for if this be the faith that justifyeth,
namely, whereby men assent to the truth of the word of God; Iam. 2.19.
then must all in whom such faith is, be partakers of justification: but only
the Romans 8.30.
predestinate are justified; reprobates and devils not so; Ergo.

Secondly, Our next reason is, from the effects of faith justifying; one
special whereof is, that it makes our service all Heb. 11.6.
acceptable to God, through Jesus Christ: Now, how a general assent to the
truth of Gods word, without a particular persuasion of his love to us in
Christ, should thus sweeten our services; I would have them explain, since none
pleases, 1 Ioh. 4.19.
but what issues from love of God; and that again flows from our persuasion of
Gods love to us in Christ.

Add unto this, those other gracious effects or faith justifying; as, that it
breeds peace of conscience, Romans 5.1. Patience, yea joy in afflictions, under
hope certain of glory; boldness of appearing before God in prayers, etc. yea in
the day of judgment: Can these be imagined to flow from general faith? These,
and many the like reasons, sufficiently overthrow that dream of general faith.

Let us examine these Reasons; the sum of them I will briefly propound.

The First lies thus; the faith described by the Apostle, Heb. 11. is not a
special persuasion of Gods special mercy, or an affiance therein; but only a
general assent, to the truth of the whole word of God. But the faith there
described is justifying faith: Ergo, Justifying faith is not a persuasion of
Gods special mercy, or a confidence therein but a general assent to the truth
of the whole word of God?

Answ. To the minor I thus answer; that its easily confessed, that the Apostle
in that whole Chapter, describes that faith that justifies: But, whether he
intend an exact definition of the nature of it, (as it justifies) or rather a
setting out, and commendation thereof, by the effects and properties, is the
question: And its apparent, that the Apostles purpose, is not so much to give
us an exact definition of the nature of it; as to exhort to continue therein,
by arguments drawn from the properties, and wonderful effects that were
wrought by it in the Saints that have gone before us, as appears there; and in
Hebr. 10. and 12.1.2. For, first, think we the Apostle so ill an Artist, as to
compose his definition of Terms amost all figurative as, ver. 1. if he desired
exactly to set down the nature of it to our understanding? Besides, that some
of the effects ascribed there to faith, are particular, and almost personally
belonging to the Saints there mentioned, and which we cannot but foolishly
expect to be wrought by our faith: Now had the Apostle there intended to
describe that faith that justifies, so as to show us the nature thereof, (as
it justifies) impertinently, had those works as miraculous, and of personal
obedience been there inserted.

To the Major, it is denied: Even the faith there described, is a special
persuasion of Gods special mercy, and an affiance therein: For what though
there be no mention made of any such specialty, either of the persuasion or of
the object, or of the affiance; cannot it therefore be such, because its there
described by effects and properties? The Apostle, 1. Cor. 13, describes unto us
at large true Christian charity, by Necessity, Effects, perpetual endurance:
shall we now say, that Charity is no benevolous, or wel-wishing affection
toward our neighbor; because there is no express mention made thereof, where
it is purposely described? Add unto this, That this special persuasion of
Gods love in Christ, and affiance in his mercy, is there necessarily included;
it being impossible, that any of these works of obedience could have been,
either so courageously undertaken, or so acceptably performed, had they not had
even such faith as we now enquire of.

Their second reason lies thus: The faith which Christ required, commended,
exhorted unto, approved with miracles, was only a general assent to the truth
of the word of God; as Matthew. 9. and 16. Luke 7. Ioh. 1. etc. But that faith
which Christ so required and commended, etc. was faith justifying; Ergo,
Justifying faith is only a general assent to the truth of the word of God;
or, as Bellarmine himself inferrs the conclusion, Kemnit. qua supra.
it has for the object something else besides Gods special Mercy. Answ. If
that be the conclusion, it was never denied by our Divines, but that the faith
that justifies, has for the object, not special mercy only, but the whole
word of God: If that therefore be the conclusion, the Adversary proves what is
not denied: For we grant (if they will needs have it) that its the same faith
which believes both the History in general, and which receives, and rests on
the special mercy of God for justification.

But the questions be, 1. Whether general faith alone suffice to
justification? 2. Whether the object of faith justifying (as it is justifying)
be the promises of the Gospel, as they concern us? The first of these we deny;
the second we avow, and prove, ut supra: there is none of us, that ever denied,
but that its the same faith, which assents to the truth of the word of God, in
general, and which justifies us in the sight of God: But if we speak of faith
(as its justifying) so we say, it respects particularly the promise of the
Gospel. I illustrate what I mean by this similitude: Its the same soul, whereby
a man lives, moves, exercises sense, and uses reason; but yet, if the
question be, What it is in the soul that forms a man to his particular nature:
We say, its the soul, not as it gives life, motion or sense; but as it uses
reason: Even so, etc. Now to the proofs of the adverse part, I answer that the
Major is untrue; The faith which Christ required, was not only, a general
assent to the truth of the word of God, concerning his person, power, offices
etc. but principally, it was particular assent, and affiance also in him, as
the Messiah promised: as by view of some of the principal obligations will
appear: For, think we the acknowledgment of this proposition in general; [That
Jesus Christ is the Son of God] is that, See Joh. 20. and 1 Ioh. 5.
that justifies and saves: Then how fail Devils of justification? yea, and
of eternal life, that sensibly acknowledge him to be Jesus, the Son of the
living God, Mark 2. Besides, what means our Savior so often to invite us unto
him; and propounding the condition of eternal life, to utter it in a phrase
importing affiance? as, Ioh. 6.40. yea, particular acknowledgment of him to be
a Savior unto us.

Lastly, Thus I reason, A Pari; other parts and conclusions of Scripture
propounded generally are to be believed, not only as they concern the general,
but particularly as having their truth in us: Why not then, these, that
propound remission of sins, righteousness and salvation, to be obtained by
Christ? For instance, when the Scripture teaches, that every one is accursed
that keeps not the Law; that the wages of sin is death. etc. Binds it not me
also to believe, that I also for (my) sins, am by nature subject to the curse?
that the proper wages for (my) sins, is death. When it propounds promises of
temporal blessings as it does to them that seeks Gods Kingdom, and his
righteousness: ought not I to acknowledge this promise to belong to (me,) and to
place confidence in God for the performance? Why then, when the promise of
remission of sins is made to believers, binds it no (me,) and every believer,
to assume that (my) sins are pardoned? when it teaches Christ to be the
Savior of the world, and Author of Righteousness to those that obey him;
should I not say, that Christ requiring general faith, intends also a
particular applying of this general to my self, for my comfort and salvation?
More I add not in this kind.

Two paradoxes only of Bellarmine, Bellarm. l. 1. de justific. cap. 8.
I will briefly propound and so leave them:

The first is, that faith is justifying, though it have no respect to Gods
special mercy.

The Second, That it is not justifying, if perhaps it have respect thereto.

The proofs have in them the quintessence of Iesuitical acumen: The Leprous
man's faith, Mark 1. was a justifying faith; and yet had no respect to special
mercy. Ergo, Faith not respecting special mercy is justifying. Answ. The
proposition needs proof; inasmuch as many had faith for obtaining Miracles,
that had none at all, touching the person of the Messiah, Luke 17. 2. How
proves he, that he had no special faith, concerning remission of sins by
Christ? What, because he doubts of his will, for his cure! As who say, there
may not be special faith, touching pardon of sins, even where there is doubt
of obtaining some remporall blessing: the one having a promise for Gods
children to rest on; the other not so, but with limitation to expediency.

But will you see how he proves, that faith is not justifying, if it have
respect to special mercy: The Pharisee having it, even because he had it, was
not justified? Ergo, Answ. And, was the Pharisees affiance in Gods special
mercy, the Reason, why he was not justified? Nay, rather the vain boasting of
his own righteousness; as appears by the drift of the parable expressed, Luke
18.9. Vacuus proinde rediit, Bernard. de Annuc. Ser. 3. ad calcem.
quia plenitudinem simulavit, as S. Bernard: and therefore failed he of
justification; not because he trusted on Gods special mercy to obtain it, but
for that he trusted in himself that he had it.

Some Ancients let us hear in this point, Bernard de Annuc. Sermon. 1.
says Bernard: Si credis pecoata tua non posse deleri, nisi ab eo cui soli
peccasti, and in quem peccatum non cadit, been facis: Sed add adhuc, ut and
hoc credas, quia per ipsum (Tibi) peccata donantur; hoc est, Testimonium, quod
perhibit in cord nostro spiritus sanctus, dicens; dimissa sunt tibi Poccata
Tua.

The Second opinion, touching the nature of says justifying, (as it is
justifying) is this, that justifying faith is an assent not so much to the
truth of the whole word of God, as to the promises of the Gospel, and that, as
having their truth in (us.) The difference betwixt this and the Popish opinion,
stands in two things.

First in the object, which they make the whole word of God; these only the
Doctrine of the Gospel.

Secondly, In the manner of assenting, which they make general, without any
particular applying to our selves these particulars: They consent in this, that
it is an act of the understanding, rather then of the will; persuasion rather
then considence; assent, rather then affiance: And for this they have these
Reasons.

First, For that the faith that justifies, is so often expressed in a phrase
importing assent, or giving credit, as in this Scripture; Abraham believed God;
that is, gave credit to God promising to be his reward, etc. Similia vide, Mark
1.15.

Their Second Reason is, because the object thereof, is usually made the
propositions of the Gospel, and that which they call Terminum complexum; or, as
Thomas speaks, something propounded; per modum enuntiabilis: or, to speak more
plainly, and agreeably to the phrase of Scripture; a testimony which God gives
in the word, and in the heart; See Romans 8.16 Gal. 2.20.

A Third Reason, Because it seems strange, that faith justifying should have
diverse seats, or subjects; The understanding as an assent; the will as an
affiance: From hence and the like reasons, it is concluded, that faith
justifying is an assent, rather then affiance.

Now, that it has not for the proper object, the whole word of God; but
rather, only the doctrine of the gospel, (as it is justifying) these Reasons
evince.

First, For that our Savior prescribing the act, limits out also the object,
and makes it the Gospel, rather then any other part of the Scripture, Mark 1.15.

Secondly, Kemn it. in Exam. part 1. de Fide justisic.
For that in other parts of the word of God; faith finds not what it may lay
hold on, for reconciliation, remission of sins, and justification but only in
the Gospel; that is, the word of reconciliation; there is Christ the Mediator
propounded, there remission of sins promised.

For the Third branch, that its a particular assent; particular I mean, not
only in respect of the Subject, but of the Object, Examples prove, Gal. 2.20.
Christ loved (me,) gave himself for (me:) The generals of the Gospel thus
particularized, are that which faith justifying (as it is justifying) respects;
by this faith Paul lived.

Secondly, In point of believing, there can else be no difference betwixt faith
of Reprobates and that of the Elect; betwixt faith of Devils, and of justified
men: For, its an idle tenant of theirs, that they make charity the form of
faith; a gift disparate from it not in act and office only, but in the very
subject and seat where it resides: More see to this purpose, Supra.

The Third opinion is of them, that make it only an affiance and resting on
God, and his Christ, as propounded in the gospel for justification, and
remission of sins. And for this opinion these Reasons are brought.

First, For that the phrase wherein usually it is expressed, imports rather
confidence and affiance, then assent or persuasion, as Ioh. 12. and alibi: But
find we it not, as often expressed in a phrase, that signifies assenting?

Secondly, Because, they cannot else find a difference betwixt faith
justifying, and that which may be in hypocrites and devils: What say they to
that particularity of assenting, Gal. 2.20. and appropriating the generals to
our selves; a thing as impossible for hypocrites or devils to perform, as that
other of affiance; and what to that, Ephesians. 3.12. that makes this confidence a
fruit of faith justifying.

The last tenant is of those, that make it partly an assent particular; partly
an affiance; and, for that opinion are these Reasons.

First, For that the phrases of speech wherein it is expressed, seem to import
both.

Secondly, They are both required as necessary to justification; not only as
dispositions, but after a sort as ingredients; not only as qualifications of
the person, but our means of justifications.

Thirdly, Because they concur in every person justified, as he is justified.

Now, Of these three last, which is the truth, I dare not peremptorily
determine: For my part, I profess my self to think with them, that make faith
justifying and assent, rather then affiance; especially for that place Ephesians.
3.12. Howbeit, I may not deny but that the affiance spoken of, in an
inseparable companion of that assent; perhaps also, as conferring something to
justification: yet this I am well assured of. First, Faith properly so called,
has its seat in the understanding. Secondly, According to Etymology, imports a
persuasion. Thirdly, In use of Scripture, most frequently signifies giving
credit, rather then putting confidence. Fourthly, And, if there be any truth in
that our Divines affirm, concerning the office of faith, [in applying Christ to
our selves,] most likely it should be an assent, rather then affiance; applying
or appropriating of Christ to us, being no more but this; an acknowledgment
that Christ is such to us, as the Scripture describes him, a Redeemer, a
Savior, a Mediator of reconcilement, and Author of righteouiness and
salvation; which acknowledgment is an act of the understanding, not of the
will. Fifthly Besides this, the opposites or defects of faith, are apparently in
the understanding, and import defect of assenting, as doubting. Sixthly, The
perfection and (...) (as I may term it) of this grace, is (...), fullness of
assent and persuasion; the grace it self for substance, therefore, is of the
same nature.

Let us view a little how the Apostle in this Chapter, expresses that faith of
Abraham, which to him was imputed to righteousness: In this verse its thus
enunciated, Abraham believed God; that is, gave credit and assent, to what the
Lord promised touching a seed; and verse. 22. He was fully assured, or
persuaded, that he which had promised, was able to perform: and this persuasion
was imputed to him for righteousness: All which laid together sway my judgment
to theirs, that teach faith justifying to be such an assent, as in the third
opinion is expressed, rather then affiance; and of the nature of faith
justifying, thus far. There remains yet one thing, before we proceed to the
fruit of Abraham's faith, expressed in the next member: And that is, to enquire
how fitly this testimony is alleged, to the purpose of justification; the
promise being in show only of a temporal blessing; namely, a numerous seed,
and no mention made of Christ the Mediator, whom faith justifing (as it is
such) respects. Answ. Answers here are diversely conceived; the likeliest I will
propound.

First Its thus answered, that Abraham's faith whereby he believed the promises,
both touching the reward, verse. 2. and touching the seed, cannot be imagined to
have been, without respect to Christ the Mediator; inasmuch as all the the
promises of God, are yea, and Amen in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.20. That is, have their
accomplishment and ratification in, and for Christ.

Secondly, That the seed mentioned in the promise, is rather to be understood
of the spiritual seed, then of the carnal posterity of Adam; and the head
thereof is Christ, as the Apostle interprets, Gal. 3.16.

The fruit of Abraham's faith follows: [It was counted to him for righteousness.]

The difference in the reading out of the Hebrew original, is little or
nothing: Hebrew thus; he imputed, or counted it for righteousness: out of the
septuagint, its rendered positively, it was counted for righteousness.

For the sense of the words, if it be enquired, What was it, that was counted
righteousness? Its answered, faith; as appears both by the text, Genesis 15.6. as
also, verse. 5.

Was counted unto him for righteousness] For better understanding the text, let
us consider the word; first severally and alone, according to the native
signification, and use of Scripture. 2. Conjunctly, according as thereof sundry
phrases are raised,

The word, (...), or, (...), it signifies usually two things: First, To repute
or esteem, and make reckoning of. Secondly to impute or ascribe: In the first
sense, Psalm. 8.4. What is man, that thou reputest, or esteemest him? Christ was
reckoned amongst the wicked; that is, esteemed as they, Isai. 53.12. In the
second sense, the use is also frequent; Philem. verse. 18. If he has wronged
thee, or owes the ought; impute, that is, ascribe it to me, and set it as it
were upon my score: the speech being borrowed from Merchants.

The phrases of speech, arising from conjunction of this word with others, are
diverse in Scripture.

In this Chapter, faith is said to be imputed to righteousness, or, reckoned
for righteousness; wages is said to be reckoned, or imputed; righteousness to
be imputed to a man; sins to be imputed, or not imputed to the committer.

The First phrase is, of all the rest, of most difficult explication:
Conjectures of others, that have any probability, I will propound: some thus;
Faith was (counted) for righteousness; that is, instead of righteousness; as if
it supplied the stead of the righteousness of the Law, in this point of
justification: and this exposition they would approve, by likeness of phrase in
other things, as they conceive it; As Romans 2.26. Uncircumcision is (counted)
for circumcision, that is, instead of circumcision, Romans 9.8. The Children of
the promise are (counted) for the seed, that is, instead of the seed: But, why
not thus rather? they are (counted) the seed: for so they are apparently, not
reckoned iustead of the seed, but counted or esteemed the leed; they being the
seed, with which the Covenant is made.

Others thus; Faith is (imputed) to righteousness; that is, ascribed unto them,
and taken notice of so far, as that he was for it (esteemed) righteous: We
shall best understand the meaning, by comparing the self-same phrase as it it
is extant Psalm. 106.31. Phineas his executing judgment, was (counted) to him
for righteousness, to all generations for evermore; that is, he for that fact,
or, by means thereof, had the (esteem) of a righteous man amongst men, unto all
posterity: So, Abraham's faith was (counted) to him for righteousness before
God; that is, he for believing; or, by means of faith, was esteemed or reckoned
righteous before God: This, as far as I conceive, is the proper meaning of the
phrase.

If that hypallage seem harsh, thus conceive it: His believing was reckoned
unto him to righteousness; that is, came into reckoning so far with God on his
behalf; or, for his benefit, that thereby he obtained righteousness.

Faith then is of that reckoning with God, as that to Abraham; yea to every man
endued thrrewith, he allows the esteem of a righteous man; understand faith as
its before described.

For the better understanding of this conclusion; let us see a little, how
faith obtains this blessing of righteousness at Gods hands; or, what is the
reason of the connection of righteousness with believing? Bellarm. de just if.
lib. 1. cap. 17.
Diverse are the explanations: Papists impute it, sometimes, to the merit and
worth of the very habit or act of faith; as if it deserved at Gods hands
justification, and had the force of a proper efficient cause meritoriously to
procure it: Against it are these Reasons.

First, Bernard Ser. 1. de Annunciat.
Hereof we may say, as Bernard of other good works; or, as he terms them,
merits, that its not such, as as that (for it) righteousness should be due to
the believer of right; or, as though God should do us wrong, except he gave to
us believing righteousness; for this, as all other good qualities, or actions,
is the gift of God; and therefore man is rather a debtor to God for it, then
God to man.

Secondly Besides this, how holds the difference assigned by the Apostle,
betwixt the worker, and the believer, in the manner of obtaining righteousness,
if righteousness belong to the believer as a reward of debt?

If righteousness belong to the believer, of debt, as a reward of believing,
then, vainly does the Apostle alledg this as a difference, betwixt the
believer, and the worker; that the one has righteousness paid as of debt, the
other given as of grace: but, the difference is sure authentical. Ergo. Their
arguments will be fitlyest answered, when we come to set down the opinions of
our own Divines.

Sometimes they thus conceive it that faith is the beginning of righteousness,
Bellarm. qua supra.
and the inchoate formal cause of righteousness; that is, part of that
righteousness, whereby we are made formally righteous: and that they would
prove out of this text; because to him that believes in him that justifyeth
the ungodly, his faith is counted to righteousness: But, they would deceive us
with a false gloss; for, that is not the meaning that faith is (counted) our
righteousness; but that its taken notice of so far as that to the believer
righteousness is imputed. A (mean) therefore it is of obtaining righteousness,
not righteousness it self; except by righteousness, they will understand that
of sanctification 1 Ioh. 3. Wherefore we acknowledge it to be a part: but, what
is that to the righteousness of justification, whereof the question is? 2.
After their own gloss, its righteousness only aestimative, not therefore
formally.

Sometimes again, they make righteousness depend on faith, as a preparation
thereto in part, necessary to dispose the subject to receive justification;
that is, as they term it, the infusion of charity and other graces, whereby we
are made formally righteous: Versipelles! Where may we find you? Is it the
form of righteousness, and yet but a preparation to righteousness?

Ob. The form inchoate, not complete.

Answ. But I demand; Is it before the other graces of God in time? Or, are they
togethes with it infused? If so, how then make you yet a preparation only to
righteousness; when as together with it, other gifts which make up
righteousness complete, are infused? Let us leave them, and come to
explications of our own Divines.

Some thus, Righteousness or justification, has its connection with faith, by
an order that God has been pleased to set down, in the Covenant of grace;
which is this, that whosoever shall believe in Christ, shall be justified and
saved. This condition now performed on our parts, justification is ours; and we
are as righteous in Gods esteem, as if we had all the righteousness of the Law
performed by our selves: Now, this is an evident and clear truth, that, in the
Evangelical Covenant, faith is the condition of justification: But first, if
faith justifies us, as a condition performed by us; fain I would know, how we
may maintain that doctrine of our Churches, concerning sole faith, and its
being the only thing in us, that avails to the attainment of justification:
for, if we view the tenor of the Covenant of grace, faith is not the only
condition required of us to justification, and remission of sins; for
repentance also is a condition required, in that covenant to the same end, Mar.
1.15. Repent, and believe the Gospel; Act. 2.38. Repent and be baptized, for
remission of sins; but, faith must so justify, that (in that work) no other
thing may share with it, no not repentance it self. Ergo, Besides this, if the
act of faith (qua actus) be that for which we are justified; how does the
Apostle describe our righteousness to be without works? verse. 6. How sets he
the worker and believer in direct opposition, in the articles of justification?
Perhaps, it will be said, that works of the law only are excluded, not this,
which is a worker of the Gospel? Answ. It should seem, that not only works of
the law, but universally all works are excluded; because, whatsoever may
occasion boasting in man, is exclnded Romans 3.27. Now, as great occasion of
boasting is left to man in the act of faith, as in any work of the law
whatsoever: Nay, may some mansay, for faith is the gift of God, and the
exercise of faith merely his work. Answ. The same may as truly be said of love,
patience, etc. These being also gifts infused of God, and their actions, even
every act of them, merely his works in us, even as merely as the act of faith.

It remains then, that we enquire, whether in the other explanations of our
Divines, more likelihood may be found.

Usully, its thus conceived to justify; namely as it is an instrument to
apprehend that righteousness for which we are justified, even the 1. Cor. 1.30.
righteousness of Christ; whether of this life, or death, or both, it is not
pertinent to this place to enquire; but in this respect, righteousness is
ascribed unto it.

And here we are asked, whether we find faith to have any such act, or office,
as to apprehend and receive Christ, and his righteousness. Answ. Amongst other
places that is pregnant, Romans 5.17. (...), id est, oblatam (...), fidei
(videlicet) manu. Beza.
Where believers are deseribed to be such as [receive] the abundance of grace,
and of the gift of righteousness; that [receive] to wit, by faith as by a hand;
the gift of righteousness; that is, the righteousness of Christ given unto us.
After this sentence, we see how faith alone justifies, namely, because faith
only has fitness to receive the gift of righteousness: This laid also for a
ground, boasting is excluded in every respect; which after all other
explanations, is left in some respect unto men.

Thus also is the comfort of conscience left provided for, when Gods children
shall be taught, out of the word of God, that the righteousness whereby they
are justified before God, is so absolute, and every way perfect, as is that of
Christ; and that it suffices them to justification, that they [receive] it,
whether by strong, or weak Faith; the virtue of Righteousness being still the
same, when it is received, in what measure soever it be received. As, the alms
given is of the same benefit, whether the hand that receives it be steady, or
shaking, so it be received.

The sum of all is this; since Faith is accepted to Justification, neither, in
respect of the [Worth] of it, to procure it; nor yet, as being the [Form] of
righteousness; nor, as a [Preparation;] nor, as a [Condition:] It remains, that
it justifies [Instrumentally] only; or, because, it [apprehends] that, [for]
which we are justified, namely, the merit, and Righteousness of Christ.

For Use of this point, let it be this: It affords Comfort to every weary soul,
groaning under the burden of sin, and pressed with the Terrors of the
Almighty, and affrighted with the Curse of the Law due to Transgressions: If
thou believe in the Lord Jesus, and have received this grace, by faith to
receive his righteousness offered in the Gospel, thy sins are forgiven, and
shall never be imputed to Condemnation; Thou stand as just, in Gods sight,
as if thou had, in thine own person, performed exactly the whole obedience,
that the Law requires. And, let no man say, it is true, if they could (firmly)
believe, as Abraham; but, their faith is so weak, and wavering, that even, for
it, Condemnation is due them.

Answ. For this, Consider, that it is not the strength of Faith that justifies;
not Faith, as an Act, wherein our Righteousness stands: but it is that, which
Faith apprehends, that justifies, even the obedience, and righteousness of
Christ: That apprehended truly, in what measure soever, covers all defects, not
only of Legal obedience, but even of Faith it self.

A second thing here observable, is this; That whereas to Abraham, that had
now, long time, been Regenerate, and in state of grace, had done many works of
Piety, and obedience; Yet Faith is still counted to Righteousness: it follows
well, that [whole] justification is absolved in Faith; and that Faith is not
only the beginning of Righteousness, but the very complement thereof.

And, Bellarm. qua supra.
it is to be observed against that error of Romanists, that, to evade the
direct testimonies of Scripture, against Justification by works, and for that
by Faith alone; have devised a distinction of Justification: It is, say they,
Council. Trident. Sess. 6.
of two sorts; The First, whereby a man of unjust is made just; and that stands
in two things. 1. Remission of sins. 2. Infusion of gracious habits, whereby
the heart of man is disposed, and inclined to actual justice: The Second is
that, whereby a man, of Righteous becomes more righteous, increasing the habits
infused, by exercise of them, in doing good works: The First of these is
ascribed to Faith; The Second, to good works.

Now, To omit, that, in this Doctrine, they confound things to be
distinguished, namely, Justification, and Sanctification: There is no ground
for this distinction of justification in Scriptures; nay, grounds many against
it.

de secunda justificatione, Sasbout confesses. Sasbout, ad locum.


Kemnit. in Exam.
in that time wherein he wrote, yea, at the day of Resurrection, to be wholly,
and merely absolved in Faith. And surely, if there were such virtue in the
exercise of Good works, as to make us more justified in the sight of God; Saint
Paul did fondly count so basely of them, as to call them (...), and (...), dung
and loss.

Add hereunto, that the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.4. speaking of the righteousness
wherein he lived, after his Conversion; yet plainly disclaims opinion of
justification thereby; he was privy to himself of no insincerity in his
calling, having since his calling, lived in all good conscience; yet, says he,
I am not hereby justified. What, shall we say, he speaks of his first
justification? as if it could possibly be thought, that the works not yet
extant, could be the means of that justification which he had before he had
works. More I add not.

We will now proceed to that which follows.

VERSE. 4. Now to him that works is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of
debt.


The applying of these verses to the Apostles purpose, see in the Analysis.

To him that worketh] That is, say some, that (presumes) of his works: others,
that (deserves) by his works: Thus rather, To him that has, or brings works to
God.

The wages, or reward] What is the wages here mentioned? Paraeus.
Some take the Apostle to reason out of a principle in Civil life, by similtude
applied to this purpose; but the Antithesis bears it not.

Wages] here understand Synecdechice, put for estimation of righteousness.

(...)] That is, say some is not imputed; but the Catachresis is too hard, and
abhorrent from all custom of speech. Cajetan.
Is notreckoned] that is, not paid says Cajetan.

What if we say the speech is borrowed from the custom of Common life? on this
manner; That the Lord should be imagined, after the manner of men, to keep his
book of accounts, wherein the records both the behaviors of men, and the wages
due unto them, according to the same. Its not much unlike that we fiud Mal.
3.16.

Let us, for the purpose, imagine the Lord, the great distributor of reward,
according to the double covenant of works, and grace, to have referred all men
to two ranks, viz. Workers and Believers; to resolve with himself, to crown
both with a sentence of righteousness, according as they bring to him, either
works such as the Law prescribes; or, faith in Christ. If a man have works, his
works are taken notice of and recorded; and withal, his reward is thus
registered, after the Covenant of the Law, Righteousness of Debt. If a man want
works but have faith; his faith is recorded, and to him also is ascribed or
imputed the same reward (though out of another cause) Righteousness by favor.
The thing we have in the word of God; and, perhaps it is Allegorically
expressed, by allusion to the customs of men. This, I am sure, is truth in the
Legal Covenant; If a man do the Commandments, he shall live in them; and the
doers of the Law shall be justified. This also is true in the Evangelicall
Covenant; He that believes shall be saved; and if a man believes in Christ, his
faith shall be reckoned of to justification. The reward is all one, that God
intends to both; they differ, 1. In the condition. 2. In the ground of payment.
Righteousness is ascribed to the Worker, of Debt; to the Believer, of Grace;
God should do the worker wrong, if he should not approve him as righteous, that
has fulfilled the Laws But its his mere grace, that to a believer he will
ascribe righteousness; since his righteousness is merely precaria, performed by
another, and by him nothing brought, but faith to receive it, and tender it
unto God, and that faith also merely the work of God.

If I fail in expressing my self, or explaining the Apostle; yet, let no man
blame my desire of both, but further my weakness with his help, that the
Apostle may be understood.



VERSE. 5. But to him that works not] We must beware that we mistake not the
Apo^^e, as if he promised righteousness to him that believes, and neglected
good works: Jam. 2.26.
For, the Apostle James has taught us that faith without works is dead; and if
a man say, he has faith, and have no works, can that faith save him? And, the
Apostle describing faith justifying, as it is in the justified man says, it
works by love Gal. 5.6. What is then the sense? To him that works not, that
is, has no such works to bring before God, as for them to claim righteousness
thereby: or, as Ambrose expounds, Ambros. ad loc.
Non operanti, id est, qui obnoxious est peccatis, quia non operatur quod mandat
Lex; To him that has no works, because he is a transgressour of the Law.

But believes in him] See here, say some, how faith justifying is described;
To be rather an affiance in the Justifier, then an assent to the Gospel? Answ.
Rather see here affiance meeting with assent, in the person of the believer;
they agree in the subject, differ for all that in their nature.

In him that justifies the ungodly] Does the Lord then justify the wicked?
Answ. Surely, though he be God that forgiveth iniquity and sin; yet will he in
no case clear the wicked: Exodus 34.7. and Prove. 17.15. He professes, that he
is as abominable that justifies the wicked, as he that condemns the righteous?
Answ. Hereto answers are diversely conceived, according as the terms admit
distinction: First thus; Wicked men are of two sorts; some, such as continue
impenitently in their sins; some, that by grace repent and believe in Christ:
Of the first sort its true. God justifies them not, that is, acquits them not,
while they so continue; and yet, wicked men repenting and believing in Christ,
that is, ceasing to be wicked, God clears and holds innocent; for to such he
forgives iniquity, transgression and sin, Paraeus ad loc.
Exodus 34.7. or thus, Justifying of a wicked man, is either against the orders
of Justice, without receiving sufficient satisfaction for the trespass; or
else, upon receipt of sufficient satisfaction. In the first sense, God
justifies not the wicked; in the second he mercifully justifies us, having
received satisfaction in the death of his Son.

Las^ly, Justification has diverse significations: sometimes it signifies to
make just; sometimes, to declare just, or to absolve: In this last sense God
justifies not the ungodly, that is, absolves him not, whiles he so continues;
but yet he makes an ungodly man righteous: Of the first kind of justification
understand Moses, of the second Paul.

His faith is counted for righteousness] See explication, ad verse. 3.



Not to be long in the manifestation of it; First, the Apostles argument has
else no force in the case of Abraham except their opposition be such as is
mentioned. 2. Besides this, view it in the contrary principles, from which the
two kinds of justification proceed: The Worker is justified of debt; the
believer, of grace; that look what opposition there is betwixt favor and debt;
the same is betwixt justification by Works, and justification by Faith; Like
see, Romans 11.6.

Now, were it not a point of acute Sophistry, to teach us how to deny the
Apostles argument, and to tell him the consequence is not good, because they
are able to assign a medium? Witty, I confess, but with such wit, as S. James
tells us to be Jam. 3.15.
devilish. Such as it is let us hear it, forsooth, they point us to this medium
of participation; It is partly by Faith, partly by Works: I say not any man is
so impudent, as in plain terms to contradict the Apostle, but surely this in
the issue shall be found their answer, howsoever with distinctions they color
the matter. Let us hear them; Justification by Faith, and justification by
Works, indeed are opposite, if ye understand in both the same justification;
but there is a first justification, and a second; the one is by Faith, the
other by Works. Again, works are of two sorts; works of Nature, works of Grace:
betwixt justification by works of Nature, and that by Faith, there is indeed an
opposition; not so in that by works of Grace: For these distinctions, and the
vanity of them, see supra ad ver. 2. and Annotat. ad cap. 3.

This once is evident out of this place, that the Apostle imputes the
justification of Abraham now regenerate unto his Faith; and betwixt the
justification that Abraham had being now in grace, and that of works places
the opposition. Besides this, what means the Apostle to befool the Galatians,
for expecting the perfection of this benefit by the Law, which was begun by the
Gospel, Gal. 3.3. Would he not thereby teach us, that whole justification is
perfected in Faith? And for works of grace, though (as has been said) they
agree with faith well in the heart of a Christian; yet justification, even by
these works, is opposite to that of Faith, Phil. 3.9. More I add not; only I
advise them that labor to mingle Moses and Christ, Faith and Works, in this
point of justification, to remember what Paul has pronounced, Gal. 5.4. with a
solemn protestation; That as many as look for justification by works, whether
in whole or in part, are fallen from grace, and Christ shall nothing profit
them.

This opposition also is to be remembered against all such, as teach us to
expect justification by faith, as it is a work: the opposition is none, that I
can conceive, betwixt the justification by the work of faith, and the work of
love.

The next thing here offered to our notice, is a distinction of rewards; and it
lies thus; There is a reward paid, as Debt; there is another given of Favor.

And it is of some use in that grand question betwixt us and our Adversaries,
touching the merit of good works; which from no ground they ofter infer, then
from this, Because they shall be rewarded. To this the answer is, Not every
work that has a reward, is by and by meritorious; except the reward be paid as
debt to the work: Now the reward that is given to our obedience, is given of
favor, not paid of debt: and that we prove thus: First, because the same that
is called the reward of obedience, is said withal to be (...), a free gift of
God: A reward, and yet a free gift? How, if paid of Debt, not given of grace?
besides, says Bernard, Man's merits, or good works, are of no such quality or
worth, as that eternal life should be due to us for them of right; or as if
the Lord should do us wrong, except he gave it us. Nam ut taceam, Bern. Sermon.
1. ce Annunc.
quod merita omnia Dei dona sunt; and ita homo magis propter ipsa Deo debtor
est, quam Deus homini; quid sunt merita omnia ad tantam gloriam? as S. Bernard.
His reasons are these; Man is debtor to God for his good works, because they
are his gifts; not God to man. 2. The reward exceeds by many degrees the worth
of the work; Therefore is not a reward of debt, but of favor. If they shall
reply, and say; God should wrong us, except he thus rewarded us: I answer, Not
us, but himself; the debt not growing from the worth of our works, but from the
grace and truth of the Promiser: Debtor factus est Deus, non aliquid a nobis
accipiendo, sed quod ei placuit promittendo, S. August. De verb. Apost. Sermon.
16.

To him that works not but believeth] The sense, see supra. So then, God has
not left sinful man,

A point worthy of our attentive consideration, for the magnifying of Gods
mercy, and furtherance of our comfort. It was grace enough in God, that he was
pleased to create us in so excellent a condition, only through desire to
communicate himself unto us; and for it, he might justly claim obedience to any
his commandments, especially proportioned to our abilities, even without any
promise of farther recompense: but lo, that nothing should be wanting to our
encouragement, when he propounds a law to be obeyed, he also covenants with
him, to crown his obedience with immortality; This do, and thou shall live.
Lev. 18.15. Romans 10.5. But, see man's great unthankfulness to God, and
unmercifulness to himself; not contented with the happiness presently enjoyed,
nor with the hope of immortality promised; he affects not to be (like) God as
he was, but to be (equal) unto him in knowledge, Genesis 3.5. He throws off the
yoke of obedience, and thereby deprives himself justly of all the happiness he
had, or could hope for; plunges himself into misery endless, easeless, and
remediless; except God in mercy provide an escape. Now, behold the unsearchable
riches of the mercy, and love of God toward man; loath that he should perish,
he enters another course for his recovery; sends his own Son out of his bosom,
in the similitude of sinful flesh, by obedience unto death to satisfy
justice, that there might yet be a way for his mercy to overflow in the
salvation of his chosen; and in him enters a new league with man, for restoring
righteousness, and salvation, under a condition so reasonable, as none more
could be devised; believe only in him that justifies the ungodly, thy sins are
pardoned; righteousness restored, salvation recovered.

Lord what is man (says David,) considering a blessing far inferior, that thou
so reckonest on him? or the son of man, that thou so visitest him, Psalm. 8.4.
Our hearts must needs be dull, and dead, if these things work not in us, more
then acknowledgment, even admiration, of Gods endless mercy: Well, this was
Gods mercy toward us.

them, inasmuch as its weak through the flesh; can willingly say Amen, to that
thinksgiving of the Apostle; Thanks be to God, for his unspeakable gift, 2 Cor.
9.15.

That our hearts may be yet more inflamed to this duty; consider we, I beseech
you the preferment and property God has given man, in this mercy, even above
Angels, creatures by natural condition, more excellent then he: Heb. 2.16.
Angels sinned, God sent them no Mediator; they fell, by not obeying; God has
made them no promise of rising, by believing: Man sinned, God sent his Son to
propitiate; man fell by disobedience has promise of restoring by believing:
Let them perish everlastingly with hellish Angels, that acknowledge not this
mercy; or, that renouncing the righteousness of faith, seek to establish their
own in works of the Law.

Moses be so strict, that none but exact justice will serve to justification?
One greater then Moses is here, that tells us faith is available to
righteousness.

And to the end the conscience of sins, after faith received, might not
overthrow hope of righteousness, mark the description of him, to whom faith is
carried, as to her proper object: He is such an one, as justifies the ungodly;
and from whom sinners, great sinners believing, (in believing) may expect
justification.

For, God justifies the ungodly] How? may some men say: by infusing
righteousness, says Bellarmine: by imputing righteousness, say some of our
Divines: by remitting sins, faith Cajetane; and of our own Interpreters, not a
few. Let us see whether has more truth.

The two former have their agreements, and their difference: they agree in
this; First, That to justify in this place, signifies to make righteous: They
differ in the manner, how we are made righteous in this sense, that the Apostle
seems to mean; whether by infusion, or by imputation: Papists, especially
Bellarmine will have it to be done, only by infusing the habits of
righteousness; as faith, charity, etc. whereby we are made formally, and by
inheritance righteous.

Now, in handling this question, we must remember that its not denied of us,
that God does make us just, by infusing righteousness; For, we confess, God by
his spirit does sanctify us throughout, and infuse the habits of inherent
righteousness, as they call it, whereby we are fitted to exercise moral
justice, 1 Ioh. 3. Neither deny we, but that in the time when he justifies us,
by imputation, as some speak; he also sanctifies us, and works a begun
conformity to the law.

But this is that we enquire of, whether this infused righteousness be that,
whereby we are made just; so, as according to the course and sentence of the
law, we stand just at the day of Gods justice. This they affirm; we all, with
one consent, deny, and that upon these grounds. First, For that Apostle, 1 Cor.
4.4. that had his share herein, as far as most; yet professes he had not, nor
expected justification thereby: What is his meaning, that he did not thereby
stand just before God according to the sentence of the law? In form thus; Paul's
righteousness inherent made not him stand just before God according to the
tenor of the law. Ergo, No man is made so just by inherent righteousness, as
to stand just thereby before God, according to the law. Psalm. 143.2. David,
excellently endued with this righteousness, yet deprecates trial by judgment,
acording to the law, upon this reason, In Gods sight no man shall be justified.
The arguments are two. First, If David fear the trial of Gods judgment by the
law, that had so great a measure of righteousness; then, is not that the
righteousness whereby we stand just before God, according to the law; for a man
having that righteousness, which the law requires, needs not fear trial by
exactest justice: but, David deprecates judgment: Ergo. 2. View his reason; No
living man shall be justified in thy sight; to wit, if thou deal with him in
judgment, according to the law: Theodoret, paraphrasing the text expounds.
Novienim fieri non posse, ut aliquis sine paena a tuo tribunali discedat; si
enim hominum vitae regulam legum a te latarum appones, nemo secundum has
vixisse videbitur: And Augustine, quantumlibet rectus mihi videar, producis tu
de thessauro tuo regulam, coaptas me ad eam, et pravus invenior.

To these testimonies so direct, what answers give they? Perhaps they will say,
they speak of actual justice, not of habitual; and therefore are
impertinently alleged to the purpose in hand. Answ. Not to examine that
distinction, we shall see, they conclude as well against habitual, as against
actual righteousness: For is our actual righteousness such, as may not endure
the censure of the law; then certainly, it more then seems, the habits whence
they proceed, are not so perfect, as after the law they should be: For, what
should let the perfect habit of faith, to bring forth a perfect act of faith?
etc. since therefore the acts are imperfect, so are the habits also.

But, other answers they have many, and variable; First, that the Prophet
speaks only of justice, which a man has of himself, not of God; Bellarm. in
Psalm. 143. and lib. 4. cap. 20.) de justific.
and that he denies a man to be justified thereby. But, howsoever, or
whenever David had his righteousness, if it were justice, such as in the law
is required, why deprecates he judgment? He needs not fear Gods Tribuniall,
that has the justice of the law, to present unto God; For its written, The man
that does them, shall live in them, Romans 10, 5.

Their second Answer is this; That David deprecates judgment, because of his
venial sins; and they, forsooth, though they deserve punishment, in exact
justice, yet hinder not justification?

Answ. Well then, belike; these lighter sins though a man have, He may be
justified according to the Law. What is then become of that sentence of the
Law, cursing all men to the pit of Hell, that continue not in all things
(little, or great) written in the Book of the Law, to do them? Gal. 3.10.

2. And, are these the sins only, for which David feared judgment? then hear:
either venial sins hinder justification; or else David does ill give this as a
reason, why he was so loath to have the Lord enter into judgment with him;
because no flesh should be justified in Gods sight. In a word, draw out the
Prophets speech something largely, after this Exposition; The sense will be
this: Oh Lord, I beseech thee, spare calling me to reckoning for my venial
sins; For, in respect of them, since no man is free from them, no flesh shall be
justified in thy sight.

Their third answer; No flesh shall be justified; because, our Righteousness,
though it be true, and pure in it self; yet, compared to the infinite
righteousness of Gods Nature, it seems no righteousness: as, the light of a
candle, though it be light, yet compared to that of the sun, is no light: and
this exposition has the Authority of some Fathers annexed?

Answ. With this distinction of righteousness I find no fault. It has the
testimony of Fathers, and the warrant of Scripture, Job 4.18. But, is this the
reason, why David so much feared to come to judgment, because he wanted
righteousness comparable to the Essential righteousness of God? Who can think
it? it suffices to any man, at the day of judgment, to bring unto God the
righteousness, which the Law prescribes; neither need he fear punishment,
because he wants righteousness comparable to that, Lev. 18.5. Romans 10.5.
which God has, as God: and thus Theod. Aug. and others interpret; that his
desire to be free from judgment was, because he answered not to the (rule) of
righteousness: Now, is Gods Essential righteousness The Rule, after which in
judgment, our righteousness must be squared? Dic sodes? I think, rather the
Law of God. Saint Hierome, in his time, alleged this Scripture against
Pelagius, to prove, that no man ever was, or could be so Holy, as to live
without sin; what answer receives he? says Hierome, S. Hieron. epist. ad
Ctesiph.
Hoc testimonium sub nomine pietatis nova argumentatione deludunt; aiunt enim,
ad comparationem Dei, nullum esse Perfectum: Perfectly righteous they might be,
according to that required in the Law: not so in comparison to the Essential
righteousness of God. Hear Hieroms answer; quasi hoc scriptura dixerit, as who
say, this Scripture affirmed so much; No, says Hierom, but when it says,
[None shall be justified in thy sight] hoc intelligi vult, quod etiam qui
hominibus sancti videntur, Dei scientiae, atque notitiae nequaquam Sancti sunt:
Homo enim videt in facie Deus autem in cord: That is, This is the meaning,
That even they that seem to men Holy, to Gods knowledge are not so; For, man
looks on the face, God on the heart.

One reason more I propound, against their conclusion, and so proceed.

The Righteousness whereby a man stands just before God, according to the Law,
must be for the matter, Right; for the measure, Pure; for continuance, Firm:
The terms are Bernards: It must be Recta, according to Rule; Pura, Bernard de
verb. Esa. ser. 4.
free from stain; Firma, without wavering, or interruption: He seems, in fit
terms to express the Apostle, citing that testimony of Moses, Gal. 3.10. and
certainly, if our Righteousness fail in any of these, by sentence of the Law,
we are under the Curse.

The assumption let us hear out of Bernard; Nostra (si qua est) humilis
justitia, recta forsitan est, sed non pura; nisi forte meliores nos esse
credimus, quam patres nostros; qui non minus veraciter, quam humiliter aiebant;
omnis justitia nostrae tanquam pannus menstruatae mulieris: quomodo enim pura
justitia, ubi adhuc non potest culpa deesse? Ours. 1. no better then our
Fathers. 2. Not free from fault: therefore, not pure, or perfect.

And, I wonder much, how Papists, sticking so close to their distinction, of
first, and second justification, can maintain the perfection of inherent
righteousness? For, is there a second justification, whereby we are made more
righteous? it is apparent therefore, that inherent righteousness is never
perfected in this life: Perfectio viae, and Patriae.
It is idle, when they distinguish perfection, into that of the Way; and the
other, of the Country: For, if by it we are justified, in via, according to
the Law; we must by it also, be perfected, in via; inasmuch as no
righteousness, but perfect, is approved by the Law.

I conclude therefore, That the righteousness whereby we stand just, according
to the Law, is not inherent righteousness.

Lastly, If the righteousness, whereby we are thus just, stand in the habits of
faith, hope, charity, patience meekness, etc. How is it, that the Lord when he
justifies an ungodly man believing, is said to count his faith to
righteousness, verse. 3, 4.? perhaps, because that is our righteousness, Ex
part; Apage! Then, when Paul concludes Abraham not to have been justified by
works, because he was justified by faith, his meaning is this: Abraham was
justified by faith, in some part; ergo, by works in no part: How easy were it
to deny his consequence. Thus, though in part of Faith, yet he must be in part
also of Works; and so the Argument follows not.

And again, The state of the question, so largely disputed in this Epistle,
betwixt faith and works, must be this: Whether we be justified in part of
Faith? But these are absurd.

2. If therefore faith be counted our righteousness, because it is so, In part;
Why, (I wonder) Faith, more then Chariey, or Hope? etc. Why says the Apostle
so often? Faith is counted to Righteousness; never so, of Charity? perhaps,
Denominatio fit ex part potiori? Apage! I dare say, by their notes, 1 Cor. 13.
they will never abase Charity so far, as to give Faith the pre-eminence, in
this point of justification.

Perhaps now it will be exspected, that I should answer their objections, in
this point; but that has been already in a great part done, ad cap. 3. and
besides, the grounds now laid, afford answer sufficient.

Proceed we therefore to the next explication: God justifies the ungodly,] that
is, makes him righteous, by imputing righteousness: and if the question be,
What righteousness? The Righteousness of Christ; whether of his life, or death;
it is not so pertinent here to enquire: For, we are now only to dispute,
whether imputation be the means, whereby we are made just in the sight of God:
and this also will fitliest be handled in the next verse; thither therefore I
refer it. Only, it shall not be amiss to see, upon what reason our Divines
thus interpret the word of justifying, by making righteous; That acception of
the word in Scripture, being so rare, that scarce in any other place it is
found: Their reason is this, because the word, when it is taken, to acquit, can
in no wise fit this place; because the Lord professes so often, He will not
justify the wicked, in this sense so as to acquit him, or hold him righteous
whiles he continues wicked: It should seem therefore, that when Paul says, he
justifies the ungodly; his meaning is, He makes him righteous that he may
acquit him: But what if that sentence of Moses be understood, with the
exception of the Gospel? Except he repent, and believe the Gospel: Surely,
though the Lord profess, He will not clear the the wicked, Exodus 34.7.
that are impenitently such; yet we know he testifies in the same place, that
he will forgive transgression, iniquity, and sin, to the penitent, and
believing.

The last thus: God justifies the ungodly, Cajetan.
by remitting his sins; or, in that, that he forgiveth him his sins: But, Is
this true? does God forgive the sins of the ungodly?

Answ. Though not to an ungodly man, continuing in his ungod liness; yet to an
ungodly man, that cease to be ungodly, Isa. 1.18, etc. as they all do that
believe in Christ, for faith purifieth the heart, not only from the guilt, but
also from the power and practice of ungodliness, Act. 15.9. Object. But, so
doing, God iustifies not the ungodly, but the righteous. Answ. Distingue
tempora concordabunt Scripturae: No man says, that in the instant of
justification, a man is in that sense ungodly; but yet, inasmuch as before
faith he was ungodly; its no absurd speech, to say, That in remitting the sins
of a believer, he forgives the sins of the ungodly: or thus He justifies him
that is ungodly by Nature, though when he justifies him, he be altered by
Grace. Matthew the Apostle is called Matthew the Publican, Matthew. 10.3. not for
that he was so then; but because he had been a Publican. Why not then the
believer ungodly, especially when as there are relics of ungodliness
sticking, even after justisication?

God, who in his wrath is a Hebr. 12.29.
consuming fire against unbelieving, ungodly ones; is yet so exceeding ready to
forgive even the ungodly believing in him? so that we may say, as David, every
one to his own soul, faith once received; Psalm. 43.5.
Why art thou so cast down, O my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within
me? Trust in God, and thou shall find him full of mercy and compassion,
exceeding ready to forgive the sins, that he has enabled thee to repent. Have
thou sinned in seculo says Bernard? Bernard. in die Pet. and Pauli, Sermon. 30.
Not more then Paul. In religion and state of grace? Not more then Peter: and
yet they obtained mercy: and as Paul speaks, It is for ever a 2. Tim. 1.16.
Beza. Piscator.
pattern of Gods pardoning mercy to all such, as shall hereafter believe in him
to everlasting life. Neither impieties in seculo, nor infirmities in grace, are
imputed to such as believe in him: for, behold, he justifies the ungodly
believing in him; that though all sins be damnable in their own nature, yet may
it be said in a sense, The only damning sin is infidelity; insomuch as if
infidelity were not, no sin should be imputed to condemnation.

But thus far of the first argument against justification by Works, drawn from
the example of Abraham. The rest of this Verse has been already explained, ad
verse. 3.

VERSE. 6, 7, 8. 6. Even as David also describes the blessedness of the man,
unto whom God imputes righteousness without works:
7. Saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered,
8. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin.

TO the example of Abraham, taken from Moses, is adjoined the testimony of
David amongst the Prophets: And Theodorets reason of the choice is not to be
contemned; for Abraham lived before the Law; and now he shows that David, who
lived under the Law, gave Testimony to Faith.

The rendering differs: Beza. Piscator.
David describes the blessedness of that man: others had rather thus, David
says, Blessedness to be that man's, unto whom, etc. In the issue is no great
odds. The sum of the argument is this;

If David say, That blessedness is that man's, to whom the Lord imputes
righteousness without works, Then is no man justified by works: But David
says, Blessedness is that man's, to whom the Lord imputes righteousness
without works; Ergo, No man is justified by works. The minor has its proof,
ver. 6, 7, 8. borrowed from Psalm 32.

But may some say, How follows the Proposition, that if a man be blessed that
has righteousness without works imputed to him, then no man is justified by
works?

Answ. Thus, as I conceive prescribing to no man. If blessedness be only that
man's that has righteousness without works imputed; then justification cannot
be by works; Inasmuch as blessedness is his only that is justified,
justification being a part of blessedness,

If any Justiciary shall object, That the exclusive particle (only) is not
extant in the Apostle; and that, though he be blessed that has righteousness
imputed without works; yet may he be blessed also that has righteousness
purchased by works: Let this suffice him for answer; That there is one only
way of all men's justification; for else, how follows Paul's argument? Abraham
was not justified by Works, but by Faith; Ergo, No other man. After this
conceit, a man might mannerly deny the Apostles consequence, and tell him, that
though Abraham were justified by Faith, yet another man may be justified by
Works.

Now to make way to the particulars observable in this sixth verse. It may be
said, that the words are no where extant in David, and how then says the
Apostle that David says, The man is blessed to whom righteousness without
works is imputed? David indeed says, that he is blessed that has not his sins
imputed; no where, that righteousness without works is imputed. Answ. Though
the words be no where extant in David, yet the sense is; and though he speak
not in express words, yet he speaks it in effect, inasmuch as by just and
necessary consequence it may be deduced: for he that says, A man is blessed
that has not his sins imputed, says in effect, that he is blessed, that has
righteousness without works imputed.

Iam. 4.5. Says the Scripture in vain? the spirit that dwells in us, lusts
it after envy? Now, where find we those words in all the Scripture? By
deduction we have them, Number. 11.29. in express terms, we no where find them;
yet, says James, the Scripture says so, Luke 1.73, 74. God swear to Abraham
that we should be delivered out of the hands of our enemies, that we might
serve him without fear; where find we such an oath extant for words? In no
Scripture; yet, when God swear he would bless him, Genesis 22.18. and that in his
seed all nations should be blessed: He swear in effect we should be delivered
from our enemies, and serve him without fear; inasmuch as this blessedness
stands, in being delivered from our enemies; and its no small part thereof, to
serve God in holiness.

The Observation is of special use, for maintaining the fullness of the
Scripture, and for helping us in sundry controversies: Say Papists and
Anabaptists, where have we it taught, that infants should be baptized, in all
the Scripture? Answ. Not in express terms, but by just consequence we have it:
From the general, Mat. 28.19. From p^rity, Genesis 17.12. From principles. Act.
2.39. Where find we that Christ's Righteousness, is imputed to us for
justification? says Bellarmine. Answ. Bellarm. de justific. l. 2. and lib. 1
cap. 16.
In express terms we find it not, but virtually, and by just consequence we
have it, 2 Cor. 5.21. In the equivalent we have it, Romans 5.17 18, 19. The
adversaries, says Bellarmine are wont to boast much of the express word of
God, and to reduce all their opinions to this one head. But in the case of
justification by faith only, that help fails them: For, they were never yet
able to show in the Scripture, that particle [only.] where they entreat of
justifiing faith. Answ. But we are taught, that if we have it by consequence
from the Scripture, we have it in the Scripture. The Scripture propounding but
two means only of justification; Faith, and Works; and denying all justifying
virtue to works, affords it us not the conclusion, by consequence? We are
justified by faith [only;] see Romans 3.18. Again, have we it not in the
equivalent? Gal. 2.16. Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the
Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ; as much as if he had said, by faith
[only.]

In a word, where we have the general, we have the particulars; where
principles, and causes, the effects; where one equal, there also the other: By
the like reason, where a phrase, or thing equivalent, the phrase and thing to
which it is equivalent, etc. And whatsoever may otherwise, by just and
necessary consequence, be deduced from the Scripture, that is all the sentence,
and contents of Scripture: They say as well what they imply, as what they
express: quae colliguntur ex Scripturis sacris, perinde habenda sunt, ac si in
illis scripta essent; Gregor. Nazianzen. lib. 5. Theolog. See Ruizius, Reg. 74.
and see to this purpose likewise Tertullian in his Treaty, despectaculis.

The particulars of the sentence come now to be scanned: David says,
Blessedness is that man's, to whom the Lord imputes righteousness, without
works: Wherein observe we two things.

First The subject, or, Person, to whom David appropriates blessedness; The man
to whom the Lord imputes righteousness.

Secondly, His description.



First he is blessed.

Secondly, Only blessed.

Needs either of them proof? His sins are remitted, verse. 8. His curse removed
Gal. 3.13. His conscience pacified, Romans 5.1. His person accepted, Heb. 11. His
heart sanctified, Act. 5. His actions pleasing God. Heb. 11.6. His crosses
sanctified; His hopes certain, Romans 5.5. Death he fears not, Heb. 2.
Persecutions he laughs at, Romans 5. Satan he triumphs over; hell is quenched;
God reconciled; judgment with joy expected; Angels serve him; Devils envy him;
Heaven is prepared for him.

Give me now, he that can, this man's peer for blessedness, amongst all the
Monarchs of the world: Oh miserable blessedness, that men fancy to themselves,
without justification! One swims in sensual pleasures, and thinks himself
blessed, that he has wherewith to glut his sensual appetite; says Tully, a
speech better beseeming beasts, then men; another has his castle of wealth,
and no misfortune he thinks can approach him; but, wretched man, what profits
it to win the whole world, and lose thine own soul? what ransom will thou give
for the sins of thy soul? A third feeds upon the breath of the people, and
thinks himself a God because the people so applaud him; but miserable man that
thou art, the basest vermin can consume thee: The last more generous, place
their felicity in the action of virtue; but, will thou hear who said, without
faith, its not possible to please God? and the most glorious actions of a man
not justified, are but glittering sins. In a word, go over all the
blessedness, that the world fancyeth to it self out of Christ; Thou shall be
forced to say of every particular; This also is vanity and vexation of spirit:
was ever any man more happily miserable in this kind, then he in the top of
the golden empire? yet see him in the midst of his pomp, and glory, shaken
with the fingers writing on the wall, Dan. 5. Such, and more miserable is the
state of all those, again whom the handwriting of ordinances stands still in
force, unreconciled to them in the cross of Christ.

Be awakened therefore, all ye that are drunken with the vanities of the world;
Why lay ye out silver and gold for things that cannot profit? yea, that cannot
but hurt, whiles they feed corruption, and aggravate condemnation: labor for
righteousness, remission of sins, for justification; for, to every one
unjustified I may say as Christ, woe be unto him, it had been better for him
that he had never been born, or born a dog, or a toad, or if there be any other
creature more loathsome, or detestable in the eyes of man; The wrath of God,
says our Savior, abides on him, John 3.3.6 Gods curse, even all the curses
written in the book of the Law, he lies open unto; no peace has he in his
life, Isa. 57.20. in death, horror, or astonishment; after death, damnation
never to be ended.

And, let Gods children partakers of his high favor, herewith comfort
themselves, in all those outward afflictions, that press them; The were but
Godless Epicures, that placed felicity in vacuity of grief, and that could
discern no other happiness of a man, but when sensual pleasures afforded him:
If we believe the Author of happiness, there is more blessedness, even in
Christian sorrow, then in all such heathenish pleasures; Heb. 12.6.
yea, afflictions are so far from impairing the happy state of a justified
man, that they rather confirm and increase it; while they kill the corruption
that is in them; and so assure them, that the sins are remitted, which are
thus mortified. And, shall any Christian now think, he is therefore miserable,
whiles he feels smart of sorrows, when he knows his sins are remitted? The
heathen could say, that vice only made miserable, and that a wise man lost not
his happiness, no not in equuleo. Christianity much more teaches the sinner,
whose sins stand still in force against him, to be only wretched; and the
justified man, in the greatest outward afflictions, to be blessed, therefore,
because justified: And, I would but know of such weaklings, that think
themselves miserable, because afflicted: Whether they think the happier, the
glutton with his Belly-chear or the Lazar pinched with hunger? David every day
afflicted, or those gallants, that spend their days in mirth, and in a moment
go down to hell? Augustine would soon resolve, Hic ure, hic seca, (says he) ut
in aeternum parcas: For me thus I resolve, Let me have my sins pardoned, my
person accepted with God, for outward pressures, I say, as David, lo here I am,
Let the Lord do with me what seems good in his eyes, 2 Samuel 15.26. See we now
the description of the man thus Blessed: He is such an one, as to whom the Lord
imputes righteousness, without works.

In the words, three things. 1. He has righteousness. 2. The quality of his
righteousness, without works. 3. The manner how he is partaker of it, by
Imputation.

For the first, that in justification, we are made partakers of righteousness,
verse. 11. Circumcision was to Abraham a seal of the righteousness of faith,
which he had being uncircumcised: Paul desires to be found in Christ, having
the righteousness, which is by faith of Christ, Phil. 3.9. and perhaps, it is
true that Bellarmine has, that justification has the name, a termino ad quem,
because, that thereby we are made partakers of righteousness, 2 Cor. 5.21. We
are said to be made The righteousness of God in Christ, and Rom 5. To be made
righteous. This then, let stand for a ground, That in justification,
Righteousness is imparted to us.

But secondly, it is enquired, What righteousness this is? of Righteousness, in
this question of justification, we find two kinds. One called our own
righteousness; or, the righteousness which is by the Law. The other, the
righteousness of God, sometimes called the righteousness of faith, or, the
righteousness, which is by the faith of Jesus, See Romans 10.3. Phil. 3.9. our
own Righteousness, or, the righteousness of the Law, is the perfect obedience
of the Law performed by ourselves: The righteousness of God, is the
righteousness which God in Christ performed, fulfilling the Law for us; called
the Righteousness of Faith, because, we are by faith made partakers of it. See,
Illyric. and Zanch. ad Phil. 3.


If any shall demand, what the difference between these two is? I answer, They
differ not at all in the matter, or substance of righteousness; for the
righteousness, which by Christ we are made partakers of, is that very
righteousness, which the Law prescribes, namely, perfect obedience to the Law:
but they differ efficiente; our righteousness, that we in our persons perform
to the law.

And, that it is no other righteousness, then what the law prescribes for
substance, whereof in justification we are made partakers, that one place, Romans
9.32. is clear; where, the Apostle giving a reason, why the Jews that followed
the law of righteousness, attained not the law of righteousness, that is, as
most interpret, the righteousness which the law prescribes; The reason was,
because they sought it not by faith, but by the works of the law; as if he had
said, Had they sought it, by believing, as they did, by working; they had
attained the righteousness which the law prescribes to justification: The
righteousness of the law, then, we obtain by faith, to justification; It is
therefore the righteousness which in justification we are made partakers of.

How then is it said, to be righteousness, without works? I answer, In respect
of us, without works; In respect of Christ the performer not so.

Come we now to the means, how it is imputed unto us; and that is, by
Imputation.

Imputation, Imputation of righteousness What it is.
in this case, we may thus describe; To be an act of God ascribing to us the
righteousness of Christ, and counting it ours no less, then if we had in our
own persons performed it: Touching it, it is enquired, whether there be any
such act of God in our justification: Papists generally deny it, and make the
righteousness of Christ to avail to justification, only as a cause procuring
to us remission of sins, and the gifts of the holy Ghost: That which our
Divines hitherto have consented in, is this; That the righteousness of Christ
is not only the cause for which the Lord remits sins, etc. but the very thing,
whereby we are made righteous in the sight of God. Their reasons are these.

1. Because we are said to be made righteous by the obedience of Christ, Romans
5.19. shall we say, as by a procuring cause? nay rather formally; For so are we
made sinners, by the transgression of Adam: And, the purpose of the Apostle, in
that comparison betwixt Adam, and Christ, seems to be this; To show, that it is
no absurd thing, that we should be made righteous, by the righteousness of
Christ; seeing we were made sinners, by Adams disobedience. Inst. But, Adams
disobedience was not ours by imputation? but we rather were actours therein, by
an implicit act, sinning in Adam? To say nothing, that the whole stream of
Interpreters judge otherwise; Let it be granted, that we were actours in Adams
sin, being in his loins; Why not also actours in Christ's obedience, being one
mystically with him, by bond of the spirit?

2. It is no more absurd that we should be righteous by imputation of Christ's
Righteousness; then that Christ should be a sinner, by imputation of our sins;
but Christ was a sinner, by imputation of our sins. Inst. Not a sinner, but a
sacrifice for sin? Answ. The exposition is ancient; but 1. The Antithesis
bears it not and, 2. How could God punish him in that extremity, had he not
taken upon him our sins.

3. For to Papists, methinks, of all men, Imputation should be no such
ridiculous matter; since they are of opinion, the overplus of some Saints
righteousness may be applied to others, by indulgence, to make up the defects
of their obedience: How, I wonder, except by imputation?

4. Quid quod? Their Bellarmine plainly confesses, Bellarm. de Amiss. great.
and stat. peccat. lib. 4. c. 10. Bernard. ser. 1. de Dom. 1. post octavas
Epiphaniae.
that Adams sin is imputed to all his posterity, so, as if they had all
committed the same, and alleges to this purpose the testimonies of Augustine,
and Bernard. Nostra est (inquit Bernardus) Adami culpa, quia etsi in alio, nos
tamen peccavimus; and nobis, justo Dei judicio, imputabatur, licet occulto: And
why so absurd, since Adams sin is, in this manner, ours, Christ's righteousness
should also in like sort, become Ours; that, as the same Bernard speaks; aliena
lavet aqua, quos culpa inquinaverat aliena. And so wash, as the other had
defiled.

Against it, these reasons are brought: First, that it has no testimony,
either in Scriptures, or Fathers, to avow it? Answ. What none? neither
expressed, nor employed? we have above showed, that the Scripture testifies as
well what it implies, as what it expresses: how say we now to this Scripture
in hand? God imputes righteousness without works; whose? our own? that stands
in works, Phil. 3.9. Another therefore; and whose else, I wonder, except
Christ's, who alone is mentioned to be the procurer of our righteousness. Hear
S. Bernard, Domine, Bern. ser. in Cant. 61.
memorabor justitiae tuae solius; Ipsa est enim and mea: nempe, factus es mihi
Tujustitia a Deo; nunquid mihi verendum, ne non una ambobus sufficiat? non est
pallium breve, quod (secundum Prophetam) non possit operire duos; Justitia tua
justitia in aeternum: quid longius aeternitate? and te pariter, and me operiet
largiter larga, and aeterna justitia.

Object. 2. No necessity of such imputation of Christ's righteousness? Answ.
Yes, That we may be found, at that great day, having such perfection of
righteousness, as for which we may be accepted, and pronounced righteous, See
Phil. 3.9. Inst. But, our inherent righteousness is perfect / for faith, hope,
charity, etc. are perfect? Answ. Hear Bernard, Are we better, then our Fathers?
They said with as much truth, as humility, All our righteousnesses are like the
clothes of a menstruous woman, Isa. 64.6. and again, Quomodo pura justitia, ubi
non potest culpa deesse? Augustine, August. epist. 29. ad Hieron.
Charitas in aliis major, in aliis minor, in aliis nulla; plenissima vero quae
jam non potest augeri, quamdiu hic homo vivit, in nemine est: quamdiu autem
augeri potest, profecto illud quod minus est. quam debet, Bern. in Cant. ser.
174.
ex vitio est. And again, Charitatis (effectualis) initium quidem,
profectumque, vitam quoque praesentem experiri, divina posse gratia non
negamus; sed plane consummationem defendimus futurae felicitati. And if any
shall ask, why it is commanded, when it cannot be fulfilled: Bernard answers,
Judicavit utilius ex hoc ipso, suae illos insufficiontiae admoneri, and ut
scirent sane, ad quem justitiae finem niti pro viribus oporteret.

Object. 3. By this means we shall be denominated just, of a Justice without
us; as if a man should be wise by wisdom of another? Answ. Though that in
Physics and moral Philosophy be absurd, yet in Divinity it is no absurdity.

Object. 4. Then shall we be as just as Christ? Ans. That follows not: for
Christ, besides the Justice he had by obedience to the Law, had also Divine
justice as second Person of the Trinity. 2. Yea even in Legal Justice a
pre-eminence there is left unto Christ; because he had it by his (own)
performance, we have it only by imputation. And what great absurdity is it to
say, (save only that the comparison is somewhat odious) that we have not less
Legal justice then Christ had? whiles it is acknowledged, we have it not (as)
Christ had it, by our (own) performance; but by imputation, and (as I may say)
aestimative because it is (given) us to be ours.

Object. 5. Justification stands in restoring what in Adam we lost; Now in Adam
we lost not imputed righteousness? Ergo. Answ To let pass that description of
Justification: Ad minorem. We lost righteousness, though not the impatation
thereof; qua Justice, though not qua imputata; and he does ill confound the
thing with the manner of applying: and hear a like reason; Justification stands
in restoring what we lost in Adam: now in Adam we lost not remission of sins:
Ergo.

Hear Bernard: Si unus pro omnibus mortuus est, ergo, Bernard. Epist ad
Innocent. 190.
omnes mortui funt; ut, videlicet, satisfactio unius omnibus imputetur, sicut
omnium peccata Vnus ille portavit: -- and mox, Justum me dixerim, sed illius
justisia; quaenam ipsa? Finis Legis Christus adjustitiam omni credenti.
Denique, qui factus est nobis (inquit) iustitia a Deo Patre, quae ergo mihi
iustitia facta est, mea non est? Si mea traducta culpa, cur non mea indulta
iustitia? and sane mihi tutior donata quam innata etc. Bellarmine himself thus,
Dicitur Christus iustitia nostra, quoniam satis fecit Patri pro nobis, and eam
satisfactionem ita nobis donat, and communicate, cum nos iustificat, ut nostra
satisfactio and iustitia dici possit: Nam etiamsi per iustitiam nobis
inhaerentem vere insti nominemur; and simus; tamen non per eam satisfacimus Deo
proculpis nostris, and poena aeterna etc. Et hoc modo non esset absurdum si
quis diceret, nobis imputari Christi iustitiam, and merita; cum nobis donentur
and applicentur, ac si nos ipsi Deo satisfecissemus, etc.

VERSE, 7, 8. There follows in these verses proof of the Minor in the former
syllogism. David appropriates blessedness to the man, that has righteousness
imputed without works: for he appropriates it to him, whose sins are remitted.
Cajetane. Paraeus. Piscator.
How follows the argument? Some thus conceive it; The Apostle (say they) thus
collects the argument from David; because in this speech of David, there is no
mention made of any of our works; but only of Gods actions, in remitting,
covering, not imputing sin: some gather it from equipollence of the phrases;
for it is all one not to impute sin, and to impute righteousness; because that
he that by not imputation of sin, is made non peccator, is thereby made iustus;
there being no medium, betwixt a non-sinner, and a righteous man; betwixt
absence of all sin, and having of righteousness. Against that opinion I mean
not to dispute; yet I would have the Reader remember, that betwixt imputation
of Christ's righteousness, and remitting of sins, a difference there must needs
be, such I mean as is betwixt the cause and the effect; the thing destinied to
the end, and the end it self: for remission of sins presupposes imputation of
righteousness, and he that has his sins remitted, has first Christ's
righteousness imputed, that he may have sins forgiven.

May I have leave to interpose my sentence. What if the consecution stand thus?
The justified man, by David's opinion, has (qua talis) remission of sins;
therefore he has imputation of righteousness without works: forasmuch as where
sins are remitted, there can be no justice but imputative; every transgression
of the Law depriving of that justice, which stands in works; forasmuch as the
Law to righteousness requires observance of every particular duty therein
prescribed, abstinence from every particular sin therein forbidden; since
therefore, Whosoever is justified, has sins remitted; it follows, that his
blessedness arises from imputation of righteousness without works. Judicent
Docti.

The coherence we see. Let us now view the sense of the words; What difference,
may some say, betwixt remitting, covering, and not imputing sin? Answ.
Cajetane thus conceives a difference; In sin we are to consider three things;
1. The offense and displeasure of God. 2. The turpitude it leaves either in the
action or person. 3. The punishment. Now sin is in respect of the offense,
remitted; in respect of the turpitude, covered; in respect of the punishment,
not imputed: such like niceties many I could recite out of interpreters. But it
may be it is true that Ambrose has, Remittere and tegere, and non imputare,
Ambrose ad loc.
una ratio and unus est sensus: and again, Vnius significationis surt verba,
quia and cum tegit, remittit, and cum remittit non imputat. And the heap of
words serves only to amplify the grace of God in this blessing: yet Cajetane
errs not much in his explanation.

The things here to be treated are. First, Rimission of sins wherein it
consists.
What this remission of sins is, which David so much magnifies, as that he
pronounces him blessed that is partaker of it. To this Papists make this
answer: True remission of sins, is not only the removal of Gods displeasure,
and the absolving of us from the guilt, and punishment of them, but an utter
abolishment of them, in respect of being: Consil. Trident seff. 5. Bellarm. de
sacrament baptism. lib. 1. cap. 3. and de justific. lib. 2. cap. 7. and 9.
Bellarm. in Psalm. 32.
In Baptismate tollitur totum id quod veram, and propriam rationem peccati
habet: As Bellarmine, speaking of the communicating of this blessing in
Baptism, likewise defines; Baptismo reipsa tolli omnia peccata, it a ut non
solum non imputetur, sed nec sit quod imputari posset ad culpam. And generally,
thus hold they of remission of sins, that it is the abolishment of them, in
respect of being.

And, what is it to have sins covered? Dicuntur peccata tegi hoc loco, non quod
sint, and non videantur; sed quod abolita sint, and eorum loco justitia
successerit.

What the not imputing? peccatum non imputari, non significat, peccatum manner,
sed non puniri; sed significat, nihil esse in homine justificato, quod in
peccatum reputari possit.

That we may the better see the my stery of their iniquity, in this point; let
us a little enquire how many things are to be considered in actual sins: For,
as touching concupiscence, we will touch it only by the way.

In every actual sin we must consider, 1. The act it self, with the anomie
thereof, wherein the nature of sin consists, 1 Ioh. 3.4.2. The effects, and
consequents flowing therefrom; as 1. the offense and displeasure of God; 2. as
Cajetan calls it the turpitude thereof; Thom. 1a. 2ae. quaest. 109. Art. 7.
which according to Thomas, and others, we will imagine to contain three things.

First, Maculam, the blemishing of the soul, or person of a sinner; and the
deprivall of that beauty, and comeliness of it, wherewith by grace it is
adorned.

Secondly, The corruption, or, destroying of that natural good, that stands in
the subjection of man to God.

Thirdly, The increase of prones to the same sin.

A Third consequent, is the guilt, that lies upon the person of the sinner,
and his liableness to punishment.

Fourthly, The fourth let be the punishment it self.

Let us now apply their conclusion to some controversies betwixt us, and them:
Sins, they say, when they are remitted, are utterly abolished, and extinct;
yea, so done away, that there remains nothing of them, that can be reputed sin:
then I hope we may assume of every sin pardoned, that it is wholly abolished.
What think we then of original sin, in infants after Baptism? Is it pardoned,
or no? Yes, for Baptism so takes away sin, that it leaves nothing, that has
the true and proper nature of sin. Well then, how comes it to pass, that many
of them dye, before ever they had ability to commit actual sins? Have they
nothing left, that has the nature of sin, and yet taste they of death, the
wages of sin? Romans 6.23. Far be it, that the Judge of all the world should not
do right, in punishing an innocent, that has nothing left in him that has the
true, and proper nature of sin.

Again, had David true remission of his adultery, and murder, yea, or no? Yes,
no doubt; for Nathan tells him, the Lord has put away his sin, 2 Samuel 12.13.
Well yet, David must be punished, though his sin be put away as a Clowd, and
there remains no foot-print of it, nothing that could be reputed sin: Help us
to reconcile these, or else blush at your contractions.

Lastly, Methinks the sin being wholly abolished, the whole reatus accrewing to
the person thereby, should be withal extinct; for, what is it, that binds us
over to punishment of any sort, temperall, or eternal? sin only, I trow; yet,
according to their judgment, in remission of many sins, there remains reatus
poenae Temporalis; as they give instance in David's case. Well, one thing I
perceive, remission of sins is any thing, but what it is; that is, a release,
and discharge of the sinner from punishment.

Let us now come to set down, what our judgment is, concerning remission of
sins: We thus conceive it, out of Cyprian, to be in property of speech,
Cyprian. de Orat. Dom.
nothing but Venia delicti, the pardon of sins; and that, in common
apprehension, is the discharge of the offender from the punishment of his sin;
and that which pardon or remission has, in property of speech, respect unto,
is the punishment of sin. The first phrase in David's speech, has this meaning;
Their sins are forgiven, or, pardoned; that is, not taken notice of to be
punished.

What is the covering of sin? the same that pardon is, in effect, says
Ambrose; save only, that the phrase is metaphorical: unfold it, it is this; as
things that are covered, are not seen, so sins when God will pardon them, are
not seen of him; that is not seen with regard, or which such notice, as that he
should punish them: (Are) they then, and not seen of him, to whose eyes all
things are naked, and Heb. 4.13.
uncovered: or, is there any covering so thick, or impenitrable, as that the
eyes of God cannot pierce through it, to discern what lies under? Answ. None
that so hides, as that he cannot see, or know, that they are done. Isai. 29.15.
But yet, they are so covered with the righteousness of Christ to believers that
God willingly overseeth them, and takes no notice of them to punish: the times
of this ignorance God winked at, says the Apostle, Act. 17.30. Number. 23.21. He
has not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither has he seen trangression in Israel;
See Psalm. 130.3. Bernard, Bern. de septem misericorde Sermon. 2.3.
Ego peccabam, and tu dissimulabas; expectans expectavit me dominus, and non
intendit mihi, sed oculos suos avertit a peccatis meis quasi nolens advertere
quantum delinquerem, etc. Si texit peccata Deus, noluit advertere; si noluit
advertere, noluit animadvertere; si noluit animadvertere, noluit punire, noluit
agnoscere maluit ignoscere. Tecta peccata quare dixit? vid August. ad Psalm. 31.
ut non viderentur; quid enim erat dei videre peccata, nisi punire peccata? ut
noveris quia hoc est dei videre peccata, quod punire peccata: quid ei dicitur?
averte faciem tuam a peccatis meis, Psalm. 51. etc.

See we now, What it is, not to have sins imputed? The same I think that
Stephen prays for, Act. 7.60. that they be not laid to our charge, nor come
into reckoning against us before God to be punished. 2 Samuel 19.19. Says Shimei
to David Let not my Lord impute iniquity unto me neither do thou remember that
which thy servant did perversely etc. that the King should take it to his heart:
What begs Shimei here, but that his offense be not punished? But, (are) they
still, where they are not imputed. Answ. Actual sins, as acts after
committing, have no being, save only in Gods, and our own remembrance: Actus
transit, says Thomas, the sinful action is transient, and vanishing; that
only which results from the action remains, As, 1. The offense of God. 2. The
guilt of the person. 3. The recording thereof in Gods book of remembrance, and
setting it on his reckoning, against the day of accounts. 4. The punishment. 5.
Add, if you will, the maculam. Now, when they are not imputed; the offense,
guilt, remembrance and punishment are taken away: remains there any thing of
them? Nothing at all, no not the macula.

Where then is the odds betwixt us? Answ. 1. Herein: that they will have
remission of sins, to be that act of God, whereby our vicious inclinations are
abolished: we not so; but take it rather to be that other act of Gods Spirit in
our hearts, which the Scripture call sanctification, 1 Cor. 6.11. 2. That they
affirm all sins remitted, even by remitting to be utterly abolished: We say,
for corruption natural, and our inclinations to evil, they still remain in
part in us, after they be forgiven and have the true and proper reason of sin;
so that the guilt and punishment thereof, etc. is only removed, the thing it
self remaining still in us: Manet pccatum, sed jam non dominatur, etc. Bern. in
Psalm. Qui habitat, Sermon. 10.
evulsum quodammodo, nondum tamen expulsum; dejectum sed non prorsus ejectum,
says Bernard, of men regenerate.

A second question here usually discussed, is, Whether whole justification
stands in remission of sins? I shall not need to show how fitly this place
affords the question; it is shown plentifully by others. In this question my
purpose is not to deal at all against Papists; but to handle it as it is now
controverted among our own Divines.

The answer thereto, by those that think justification in this question, to
signify nothing but acquitall and discharge from sin, must needs be this; That
it stands only in remission of sins: for, what is it to acquit from sin but
to remit sins? And this seems strange to me, that men urging that signification
of the word to be proper to this question, can seek for any other thing to make
up the entirety of Justification. Is it nothing to be justified, but to be
acquit from sin? then sure to be justified, implies no more but to have sins
remitted; Either therefore we must grant, that to justify, in this question,
signifies somewhat more, or else that whole justification stands in remission
of sins. And let that be the first argument; Justification, in Scripture,
signifies only a quittal; Ergo. To this answer must be made, if any be to
purpose, that to justify has some other signification; so some labor to
show, That it signifies sometimes to make just, as Romans 4.5. sometimes to
account, or pronounce just, or to give testimony of righteousness, Luke 7.29.
sometimes, to give reward of righteousness, 1. Kings 8.32, etc. Whether these
satisfy or no, I had rather others judge, then I determine.

Their second reason is from this place, but diversely collected; some thus.
David gives no where a full description of justification? Ergo, Whole
justification is absolved in remission of sins. Answ. It cannot be showed, that
either David or Paul intended here to describe, much less perfectly to define,
justification: For, what though the Apostle does purposely dispute of the
(means) of justificatior; must he needs therefore allege this testimony of
David, to express the (nature) of it? He proves by this testimony, that
justification is not by works, because the justified man has sins forgiven in
his justification: and so the argument follows well, though justification be
not here perfectly defined; see supra, in Exposition. nay consider that by this
means his argument is as nothing: for, if remission of sins be whole
justification, will it follow thence, that we are justified without works?
Excipiat quispiam: Let justification stand in remission of sins, that may yet
be procured by works. Others thus gather it; To pronounce Blessed, to impute
righteousness, to remit sins are all one with the Apostle: Ergo, Justification
stands only in remission of sins. Answ. The Antecedent is untrue.

Their third argument is that testimony, Acts 13.39. and 2. Cor. 5.21. Paul, in
the first place tells us, That by remission of sins, he means justification
from those things, by which by Moses Law, we could not be justified, etc. And
in the other, he shows we are reconciled, by not having sins imputed. Answ. To
the first, the adverse part would answer, that there is showed, Justification
stands in remission of sins, ex part, that being our part of justification;
but an other part there is and that is making us righteous, with the
righteousness of the Law, which we have by imputation from Christ. To the
second, the answer would be made, that our reconciliation stands partly in not
imputing sin; and it is usual to declare the whole by some part; as whole
redemption by remission of sins Ephesians. 1. yet may we not say, that redemption
stands only in remission of sins. Their chief reason is this; for that
justification is ascribed only to the blood of Christ; now, that blood of
Christ procured us nothing but remission of sins. Answ. It is answered, that
the blood of Christ, is there put synecdochice, for the whole obedience of
Christ.

The other opinion is this, That justification has two parts: 1. Our discharge
from our sins. 2. Our furnishing with the righteousness of the Law. Their
reasons are these: First, for that we are said to be made righteous by the
actual obedience of Christ Romans 5.19. as well as in other places to have
remission of sins by his blood. Ob. By obedience may be understood his
obedience in suffering. 2. That the Law since the fall, requires to
justification not only satisfaction for breaches, by punishment; but also that
the obedience therein prescribed be performed; else still the curse lies on us.
Answ. It is answered, 1. That we are not under the Law but under grace. 2. That
by remission of sins, we have the righteousness of the Law; for all sins, as
well of omission, as of commission, are cleared in the blood of Christ. 3.
Because God in his word has prescribed no other way to life, but perfect
obedience to the Law? It is answered, that in the Gospel another way is
prescribed Believe, and thou shall be saved, Acts 16. Mar. 16.4. Dan. 9.24. The
Messiah is promised not only to expiate sin, but also to bring everlasting
righteousness. Answ. What if that may be understood of that we perform in the
study of Sanctification?

Well, whatever become of that controversy, this conclusion we have evidently
hence, That in Justification we have perfect remission of sin; See Acts 13.39.
Papists themselves herein consent with us, as we have seen before.

And will it not hence follow that therefore we are delivered from the whole
guilt and punishment of our sins? Here now they-begin to mince it, for
stablishing their doctrine of satisfaction to be made to Gods justice; Sasbout,
ad loc. Bellarm. ad Psalm. 31.
and our release is, they say, only from guilt of eternal punishment. The
question has been largely discuffed, ad cap. 3.

Here only I would have them reconcile their two opinions. First, that when
sins are remitted, they are utterly extinct, and abolished, so that there is
nothing left, that can be reputed sin. Secondly, that there remains unto him
that has his sins thus remitted, part of the guilt to be expiated by his own
satisfaction. Hear a subtle shift; Remission of sins is either total, or
partial: Total, when it is remitted quoad omnem poenam; Partial, when it is
remitted only quoad culpam, and poenam aeternam. Now, where the remission is
total, there is no reservation of any punishment; where partial, only in
respect of eternal punishment there remains still reatus poenae temporalis.
Contra. But I demand, whereon is that guilt founded? Me thinks it must needs be
on something that has veram and propriam rationem peccati; Bellarm. de
Justific. l. 2. c. 7. and ad Psalm. 31.
but according to their opinion, Remission so takes our sins, ut ne vestigium
quidem ullum maneat; it dispels them as the sun does clouds, so that nothing of
them remains, washes them away, so as we become whiter then snow. Well yet, as
clean as we are made from fault, and sin; yet some of the guilt may lie on our
persons; and the just God may inflict upon his innocent and purest servants,
punishments temporal; yea, the same for smart, which the devils and damned in
hell endure. Out upon Popery, it is Bilinguis, (...)! And of this second
argument against Justification by Work, thus far.

VERSE. 9, 10, 11, 12. 9. Comes this blessedness then upon the Circumcision
only or upon the uncircumcision also? for we say, that faith was reckoned to
Abraham for righteousness.
10. How was it then reckoned? When he was in circumcision, or in
uncircumcision? not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision.
11. And he received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of
the faith which he had yet being uncircumcised: that he might be the father of
all them that believe though they be not circumcised; that righteousness might
be imputed to them also.
12. And the father of Circumcision to them who are not of the Circumcision
only but also walk in the steps of that faith of our father Abraham, which he
had being yet uncircumcised.

THe scope and dependence of this passage is diversely conceived: Some think the
Apostle here propounds a new argument, for justification by Faith, against
justification by Works; and these also diversely collect it. Some thus; Abraham
was justified before he was circumcised; Ergo, He was not justified by
circumcision; nor by consequent, by any works of the Law: The ground of which
argument is this; because if circumcision were cause of his justification, then
must he needs have been circumcised before he was justified: for the effect
cannot be without, or before the cause. Others thus; Paraeus ad loc.
If Abraham were justified by faith, then must all men, whether circumcised or
uncircumcised be so justified; But Abraham was justified by faith: Ergo. The
consequence of the proposition they imagine to have this proof; because Abraham
is father of both people, and they both his sons; wherefore by good
consequent they think it follows; that as be was justified, so others must be
since there is one reason of the father and children; of the pattern, and the
imitatours; of the head of the covenant, and of those that in him are admitted
into the covenant.

chap. 3. and here again resumed, and more purposely proved, because he had
immediately before made mention of Abraham's justification: and their guess is
not without ground, that think the Apostle now frames answer to that second
quaere of Jews. Romans 301. What profit of Circumcision? which to this place he
has purposely deferred, because from Abraham's case it receives fittest answer.
Neither let it seem strange, that the Apostle should thus digress from his
principal conclusion; since we know, it is frequent with him in his passage, as
well to clear doubt, as to confirm his purpose. And for the scope thus far: See
Romans 3.

Now, the passage to this Conclusion, is by way of Prolepsis: Came this
blessedness then? etc. Wherein we have 1. The doubt. 2. The reason of it. 3.
The solution. The doubt is, whether this blessedness, that is, justification,
belongs to the circumcision, that is, to the Jews only; or to the
uncircumcision also; that is, to the Gentiles yet uncircumcised? Metonymia
adjuncti frequens, as Romans 2.28. the supply of the Verb; whether it be
(falls), as Theophylact; or (comes) as our English: or (is) as others; we
have no cause to enquire of; the sense being apparently such as we have shown.

The reason of the doubt: For we say that faith was imputed to Abraham for
righteousness,] as if he had said, This is in confesso, that Abraham's faith was
reckoned to him to righteousness: Now the question here is, Whether, since it is
apparent Abraham was circumcised, this blessedness of justification, or having
faith imputed to righteousness, belong to circumcision only, or also to the
uncircumcised? The solution follows, carried artificially, as this whole
passage is, in a Rhetorical Dialogisme: How was it then imputed? etc. as if he
had said, If this be the doubt, see in what state Abraham was when he received
this testimony of righteousness; and you shall find it was long before he was
circumcised: For, this imputation of faith to righteousness, whereof we treat,
was whiles he yet had no child, as appears Genesis 15.2. and the ordinance of
circumcision began after this, toward a fourteen years: For, after the promise
made by God, and the testimony of righteousness given to Abraham, took he Hagar
to wife, and of her had Ishmael, being 86 years old, Genesis 16.16. and many years
after, was given him in charge the ordinance of circumcision; and the execution
thereof fell into the year 99 of Abraham, and of Ishmael the 13. Genesis 17.24,
25, so that by the history it is clear, he was justified long before he was
circumcised: and this, as the Apostle seems to intimate, wanted not his
mystery; the Lord thereby testifying, that justification is not had to
circumcision, but that the uncircumcised believing, may also be sharers with
Abraham in that blessing.



Now, the things here observable are these. First That very circumstances of
Scripture stories, afford often, substantial conclusions. A weighty
conclusion, that justification belongs to Gentiles; and that which was long
controversed in the days of the Apostle, See Act. 15. Gal. 5. And it is
determined by a circumstance in the story: Abraham was justified in time of
uncircumcision; therefore justification belongs not to the circumcised only. A
like case we have determined, by like evidence Gal. 3.17. out of circumstances
of story conferred; the blessing must needs be ours by promise, and not by the
Law. How is it proved? because the Covenant was made with Abraham, in Christ
430 years, before the giving of the law in Sinai, in Heb. 7.12, 13 14. The
Apostle proves this conclusion; that perfection was not by the leviticall
Priesthood. What is his arguments? because another Priest was to arise,
according to David's prophecy, not after the order of Aaron; even Christ, a
Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedek: And, because it might be said,
that that other Priest, though another, yet might be of Aarons order; nay,
says the Apostle, that appears false, by this circumstance; for, our Lord
Christ, of whom David speaks, was of another tribe, even of the tribe of Judah
unto which tribe, Moses spoke nothing concerning Priesthood. I might be
infinite in this kind, but a taste suffices.

And it teaches us, in our study, and search of Scripture, not to let pass the
smallest circumstance, since under it, lie hid Doctrine so substantial: For
wisdom we should search, says Solomon, as men do for silver, Prove. 2.4.
turning up every clod, and almost grain of dust, wherein the least portion of
pure metal may seem to lie hid. In sacris liter is nihil est, quod non
ingentem thesaurum contineat modo scrutatorem habeat: Ruizius, reg. 118. e
Chrysostomo; singuli sermones, syllabae, apices, and puncta in divinis
Scripturis, plena sunt sensibus; Hieron. ad Ephesians. 3.

Howbeit, that we mistake not; we must not forget, that even the Scripture has
its (...): and therefore, it is not safe always, to reason from order of
narration; except by other circumstances, it be evident, that the narration be
to the order of times,

A Second collection of some Interpreters hence, is this: That the grace of
justification, is not tied to Sacraments; because it may be had without them:
And that was it, (as they think) the Lord would teach us by the time of
Abraham's circumcision, and justification: that look as the Lord, furnishing the
earth with herbs, and fruits, before he made stars, by their heat, or
influence, to give them vigor, or rain to yield them moisture, would teach
us, that they are but Arbitrary Jnstruments, which he uses, ad Placitum; So
the the Lord giving Abraham Testimony of righteousness, before his circumcision,
would thereby teach us, that his grace may be had, without the Sacraments: The
question has been already treated, ad cap: 2. Let us yet, resume it, that at
least Our Judgment may be more manifest.

Necessity of Baptism (whereof the question chiefly is) may be two ways
conceived. First, Calvin justifi. lib. 4. cap. 19. Sermon. 26.
Whether the receiving thereof, be a necessary duty, pressing the conscience by
the law of God? Whereto we answer, with joint consent; it is necessary, and so
necessary, that the wilful contempt, yea neglect of it, where it may be had,
lays guilt of sin upon the conscience of the negligent, or contempuous refuser.

Secondly, It may be thus apprehended; whether it be necessary, as a mean of
salvation? In this also we consent; that it is necessary, as a mean of
salvation: Because, 1. The observation thereof is a work of obedience, and so
part of that vita Regni, 2. Because in the right use, it serves to confirm
faith, and to nourish all graces, that do accompany salvation.

What is then the question betwixt us, and Papists? It stands chiefly about the
decree, or manner of necessity; namely, whether it be absolutely necessary, Vt
perijsse protinus existimetur, cui ejus obtinendi ademta fucrit facultas?
Bellarm de Bapt. lib. 1. cap. 4.
As Calvin explains it. This measure of necessity of Baptism we deny; Papists
affirm: The question is says Bellarmine, whether Baptism be necessary, as a
mean of salvation, so that if any be not Baptized, he perishes? etiamsi forte
obignorantiam excusetur a praevaricatione praecepti: that they affirm: and, if
any demand, what time it came to this height of necessity, They answer;
Baptismus Christicaepit esse necessarius, necessitate medii, and praecepti, a
die pentecostes.

As touching what we are to hold, in this question; I had rather utter in
Bernards terms, then in my own; considering what adversaries we are are to deal
with: He therefore thus delivers his judgment, Bernard. Epist. 77.
That, whosoever in men of years if any man, since the publishing of that
remedy for sin, refuses to be Baptized, he adds to the general contagion of
nature, the crime of pride, and so carries with him, a double cause of just
damnation; if he so dye: yet, if before death he repent, and have a will and
desire to be Baptized, and cannot, being prevented by death; so be it, he want
not fides recta, spes pia, charitas sincera, propitius sit mihi deus, quia
huic, Ambrose de obitu valentiniani imperator.
ob solam quauam, si defuerit, nequaquam desperare possum omnino salutem, nec
vacuam credere fidem nec confundere spem, nec excidere charitatem, tantum si
aquam non contempus, sed sola prohibeat impossibilitas: His reasons are, First,
from authorities of Ambrose, and Augustine. Ambrose doubts not of the salvation
of Valentinian, for his faith only, though he dyed unbaptized; because he had a
purpose, S. Augustine. de Bapt. lib. 4. cap. 22.
and desire to be baptized: Hear himself speak; I hear, says Ambrose, you are
grieved, because he received not the Sacrament of Baptism: Hear his reply:
Dicite mihi, quid aliud nobis est, nisi voluntas, nisi petitio? Atqui etiam
dudum hoc voti habuit, ut cum in Italiam venisset, initiaretur and proxime
baptizari se a me velle significabit, etc. Non habeat ergo gratiam, quam
desideravit? Non habet, quam poposeit? Certe quia poposcit, accepit; and mox:
quem eram regeneraturus amisi; sed illi gratiam, quam speraverat, non amisit:
To Ambrose Saint Bernard adds: S. Augustine determining, that not only
suffering for Christ, but faith also, and conversion of the heart does supply
the stead of Baptism, when not contempt of religion, but point of necessity
excludes the Sacrament of Baptism.

2. His next reason is collected, out of Mark. 16.16. Our Savior in
likelihood, when he said, he that believes and his baptized, shall be saved;
even for this, so cautelously did not repeat; he that is not baptized, but
only he that believes not, shall be damned; intimating no doubt, solam
interdum sufficere fidem ad salutem, and sine ipsa sufficere nihil.

3. His third Reason that which gives Martyrdom its value, and causes it to
supply the stead of Baptism, shall it be thought so weak, that what it gives
to another thing, it cannot alone by it self obtain; we cannot think it.

Now faith gives Martyrdom this power, that without any doubt, it is reputed
Baptism; For, what is Martyrdom without it, nisi poena? It therefore alone
may, out of case of contempt, suffice to salvation.

4. Suppose the Lord see as great Faith in the heart of a man dying in Peace as
in his that suffers martyrdom? Surely, God needs not outward evidences for
discerning of faith; and there may be in a man dying in peace, a readiness to
suffer death, for the maintenance of faith, suppose now this man to desire
Baptism, but prevented by death, to die without it; damnabit fidelem suum
Deus? damnabit (inquam) hominem prose etiam paratum mori? God forbid, his
peremptory conclusion is this: Pro certo cum non aliunde martyrium, nisi ex
Fidei merito illam obtinuerit praerogativam, ut fingulariter vice Baptismi
secure suscipiatur; Non video cur non ipsa aeque, and sine Martyrio apud eum
tantundem possit, cum and sine Martyrii probamento proculdubio innotescit.

5. In sins, The will is, in esteem, the Fact; Matthew. 5.28. Why not also in
good duties? nisi forte putetur in malo, quam in bono efficacior inveniri
voluntas apud Deum, qui Charitas est, and promptior esse ad ulciscendum, quam
ad remunerandum misericors, and miserator Dominus.

Add to this the consent of Bellarmine, That martyrdom, Bellarm. de Bapt. l. 1.
c. 6.
and true conversion of the heart, in case of necessity, supplies the stead of
Baptism: And, follows is not thence, that the Baptism of Water is not of so
absolute necessity to salvation, that he that dies without it perishes
everlastingly?

A man would now think the odds is not great betwixt us, and Papists, touching
this point of necessity of Baptism; They teaching, as we, that out of case of
contempt, faith and conversion avail to salvation without the Sacrament: But,
will you hear a Merciles distinction? It is true, they say, of grown men,
inasmuch as they have faith, and conversion to supply the stead of Baptism; but
yet, for infants, it is their peremptory conclusion; though they be born of
believing parents, are not capable of personal contempt, yet perish they, in
their original sin, for want of Baptism, if they die unbaptised; For, they
have nothing to supply the stead of baptism? Answ. 1. Let them show us, where
the Lord has made the condition of infants, in this respect, worse then that
of grown men? 2. Let them prove, that in grown men, faith and conversion,
therefore exempts them from condemnation, because they supply the stead of
Baptism. 3. What hinders to say, that the faith of the parents is available to
salvation of infants, without baptism, as well as with it? In case they be
baptized, they confess with Bernard, that through grace it is granted them, to
have benefit, by others faith, as they were damnified, by another fault; yea,
faith Bernard, there is no doubt, but that the stain contracted by others, may
and ought to be purged also by the faith of others: does the faith of a grown
man supply the stead of baptism, out of case of contempt, and shall not the
faith of infants do as much for them? No; For it is said, Except a man be born
again of water, and the holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God?
But, I demand, is this understood of Baptism, generally belonging to all men?
or, must it be limited to infants only? If of all, then methinks of grown men
also: If of infants only. 1. What meant Christ to propound it to Nicodemus?
was it his purpose to teach him, that inasmuch as he was not baptized in his
infancy, he could not not enter into the kingdom of God? then sure, I shall
not wonder, if Nicodemus conceited a necessity, for an old man desiring to come
to Heaven, to return back into his mothers womb, and be born again. 2. Will
they say, it must have this gloss by limitation; If a man want baptism by
contempt, and not otherwise? Why then should it stand in force against infants,
in their own persons not capable of contemning, and whose parents hasten to it
with desire, but are prevented by necessity? alas! poor infants, that you free
from contempt in your selves, and your parents, must to Hell for bare want of
baptism; and elders, in the same want have access to Heaven, so they be free
from contempt: Can we imagine bare want to be more prejudiall to infants, then
to grown men.

Now, what if it shall appear to us, that the place cannot, in that strict
manner, be understood of baptism, but of regeneration? The point I will labor
to clear against Papists only, comparing it thus expounded, with other of their
grounds.

For ground this I will lay; That the sentence of our Savior had truth at that
time, when he had conference with Nicodemus, yea long before ever since the
fall of Adam: 1. For that our Savior blames Nicodemus, for his ignorance in
this point, the necessity of that which he calls the new birth, v. 10. Art thou
a master of Israel and know not these things? Now sure, if it must be
understood of baptism, the ignorance of that ordinance could have been no such
blemish to Nicodemus, the ordinance being so new, and of him, till that day,
unheard of. 2. Besides this, the purpose of our Savior more then seems to be
this, to exhort Nicodemus to present laboring for that, whose necessity
Christ teaches to be so absolute: Now, shall we say, that at this time baptism
was of so absolute necessity? hear Bernard, He was informed of one that
taught, how that ever since this sentence was pronounced by our Savior, none
could in any wise be saved, without actual receiving the visible Sacrament, or
martyrdom in stead thereof: Now sure, says Bernard, Bernard. Epist. 77.
De Temporis praefixione durum nimis, austerumque videtur, ut videlicet verbum
absconditum palam jam noceat, and ante judex feriat, quam minetur: His
arguments in short are these. 1. It is improbable it should so be, because many
should by this means be damned, that never had knowledge of any such precept:
For this of baptism is not, as some other things are, that are known by nature,
factitium enim quodammodo est, and non natural mandatum; but that is
impossible, Romans 10. John 15. Ergo. 2. Circumcision as yet stood in force, and
had its virtue, as Baptism. 3. And from the days of John Baptist, the kingdom
of heaven suffered violence. 4. Fit injuria antiquo illi Dei aeque mandato, si
novo adhuc furtive superveniente, non tamen subveniente, illud ita subito
evanuisse putetur, ut prodesse deinceps non valeret. 5. And Bellarmine
confesses that Baptism became not thus necessary, as a mean, until ^he day of
Pentecost: The inference is this; that which Christ teaches Nicodemus to be
thus necessary, was necessary at that time, when he had conference with
Nicodemus; Baptism was not then so necessary, Therefore that that Christ speaks
of is not Baptism: And do we think Christ taught Nicodemus, that after the time
of Pentecost, Baptism should become thus necessary? The sense then must be
this: Nicodemus, look that thou procure Baptism, betwixt this and the next
Pentecost after my death; if then thou want it, there is no hope for thee to
enter into the kingdom of Heaven: From those circumstances of the text, besides
others elsewhere pointed at, it is clear, I think, that the place is not to be
understood of Baptism of water, but of that which they call the Baptism of the
Spirit, that is, of Regeneration: And see, whether the reason annexed prove not
as much Regeneration necessary; for, whatever we have by the first birth, is
fleshly, and corrupt: Now, shall we say, that corruption is removed only by
Baptism? or, at least, not without it? Faith purifieth the heart Acts 15.9. and
sometimes, says Augustine, S. August. de Bapt. contr. Donat. l. 4. c. 24.
before Baptism, the spirit is obtained, as he gives instance in Cornelius,
Act. 10.

I have dwelt, perhaps, too long in this question; yet it repents me not,
considering how I see many, carried away with authority of some ancients,
incline to this merciless error of Papists, shutting up all infants that die
unbaptized, under condemnation, except (perhaps) some extraordinary work of
Gods power exempt them from hell: We were wont to teach, not that Baptism gives
title to the Covenant; but the Covenant to Baptism: so we reason against
Anabaptists; the Promises are theirs Acts 2.39. the spirit theirs, Acts 10.
Mark 10. Gods kingdom theirs; therefore Baptism must not be denied them: how
turn we the argument now? on this manner; They must be baptized, that they may
come nto the Covenant, and that they may have title to the promises of God, and
kingdom of heaven. And how stand these arguments in force, against baptism of
Turkish, and other Pagan infants? Nay, if in Baptism there be this virtue, to
give the baptized title to Gods kingdom, if want of it so perilous; merciless
were we, if we forced it not upon such children. What should we imagine the
cause of this change of judgment? One, or both of these? 1. The authority of
ancients. 2. An inconvenience they desire to prevent in the people: For the
first of these; Let ancients (on Gods name,) have their reverence; but yet,
shall we be so sworn to their words, that we shall suffer them to lead us with
them into their errors? Love Augustine, and give him reverence; yet let truth
be preferred in esteem before him: as to the second, The peril of our peoples
neglecting this holy ordinance upon persuasion, that it is not of so absolute
necessity: 1. Where learn we in Divinity to expel poison with poison? one
error with another? 2. Besides that, arguments there are sufficient, to press
on their conscience, the use of this ordinance; if it were but that it stands
in force, by Gods commandment; and, as Bernard speaks. V^ra and plena Fides
universa praecepta amplectitur. And, this is one, yea a chief one of Gods
commandments. Quomodo denique Fidelis, qui Dei contemnit Sacramentum? Contemtu
violatum iri Domini foedus affirmo, says Mr. Calvin. Calvin in stit. lib. 4.
cap. 16. Ser. 26.
Are not these arguments sufficient, to support the reverence of the Sacrament;
unless we wind in Infants in the peril of remediless damnation, not for their
own, but for their parents contempt. 3. Nay see, whether as great mischiefs
follow not upon this conclusion; as, profaning these mysteries by unconsecrated
hands of Lay People: For, where grew the ancient audaciousness of midwives
Baptizing? save only from this error; that without Baptism, the infant dies
condemned? 4. Yea consider, I beseech you, into what a gulf of comfortless
grief, poor Parents are by this means plunged: when once they cannot be
persuaded, but their children are gone to hell: who shall blame them, now, if
they weep for their children, I say not, as Rachel, because they are not; but
as Heathens, and men without hope, because they are for ever, shut up under
condemnation?

To close up this point, touching necessity of Baptism, there are these
opinions;

First, That it is none at all, but mere superfluity; such miscreants abhor.

Secondly, That it is so absolute, that bare want excludes from heaven; such
cruelty detest.

Thirdly, That it is necessary, where it may by any means, be had regularly; so
as the contempt is damnable in those, that omit it; yet not so prejudicial to
the infant, as to plunge it into hell: This the sentence of Scripture; herein
rest.

Now, let us go to that which follows; And he received the sign of
circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of faith, etc.] The point here
proved, is this, as we have heard; that to believing both Jews and Gentiles,
the blessing of justification belongs: proved from the first branch because
Abraham had righteousness, being yet uncircumcised.

Now that to Jews only it belongs, is next concluded: and to this the passage
is by a new Prolepsis; the objection whereof, as it seems, has these two
branches: If Abraham were justified in time of uncircumcision, to what purpose
was he circumcised? The use of circumcision seems needless; yea, and if because
he had it in uncircumcision, therefore Gentiles are sharers in it; follows it
not, that the circumcised Jews have no part in that blessing? Answ. Neither of
these follow; for though he had righteousness, being uncircumcised; yet he
took the sign of circumcision, an evidence, that to the circumcision it
belongs also: and he took it to be a seal of the righteousness of faith;
therefore not unnecessarily; for it is not vain, that faith should receive
confirmation: and if any shall further demand a reason of both these, why he
had righteousness before circumcision; and why, having righteousness, he was
after circumcised? It was for this; That he might be the father of both people
believing: This the Context.

In the words, let these particulars be observed. 1. Abraham's fact. 2. The
object; what he received, the sign of circumcision. 3. The end of it; a seal of
righteousness. 4. The applying of the whole to the purpose in hand, by
assigning the end of Gods dispensation in Abraham; that he might be the Father.

Abraham's act, considering together with the state of his person, amounts this
instruction: That no measure of grace received, exempts any from use of
Sacraments: or thus, That men enjoying the grace signified by the Sacraments,
are yet bound to the use of Sacraments. The collection is direct, and natural;
Abraham was justified, before he was circumcised, yet received he the sign of
circumcision: Who then shall think himself free from use of them? Cornelius had
received the Spirit of God, Act. 10. Does that prove, he needed not be
baptized? It makes him capable of baptism, says Peter; yet give water that
they may be baptized. What needs much proof? Its a point of righteousness,
says our Savior to John Baptist, Mat. 3.15. Vera, Bern. epist. 77.
and plena fides universa praecepta complectitur, says Bernard; and fidem
convincitur non habere perfectam, si negligit sacramentum.

Add to this, consideration of thine own necessity; for dare thou assume to
thy self perfect persuasion of thy justification, so that at no time, thou
feel wavering? sure that arrogance, (for it is no less) sorts not with the
practice of faith: And Abraham, though he be commended for his (...), at some
time; yet, at others, bewrayed distrust: But say, it is perfect for the present
may it not be shaken? to preserve that persuasion, to prevent doubtings, thou
have need of Sacraments.

Lastly, Can thou assume to thy self perfection of sanctification? for shame
leave that pride to Catharists: count it a part of thy perfection to acknowledge
imperfections, and with Paul to strive for it: What need more words? The use is
enjoined to all, necessary for the most perfect; therefore upon no pretense to
be neglected.

Who dare then stand up to defend the profaneness of those fanaticall spirits,
that scoff at these ordinances; more meet (they say) for carnal Jews, then
for spiritual Christians: Forsooth, they have the spirit immediately, to work
what Sacraments serve to signify, or exhibit; and what needs the Element,
where the grace is received? They had best tax God of indiscretion, that of
his mercy has ordained them to be helps, for our weekness; and fitting himself
to our state in the flesh, in sensibilibus intelligibilia praebet, Chrysostom.
Homil. ad Pop. 60. and 83. in Matthew.
as Chrysostom; in things sensible reaches unto us things intelligible: They
boast of the spirit; they have a spirit indeed, but not of God; but of
fornication, as the Prophet speaks, or of delusion, that has caused them thus
to err. No man, says Paul, speaking by the Spirit of God, defieth Jesus, 1
Cor. 12.3. Moman, said I, taught by the Spirit of God, contemns the
ordinances of Christ established in the word.

But, what need Sacraments, when the thing they signify is obtained? Let Paul
answer thee from the case of Abraham; he was justified before he was
circumcised; yet received the sign of circumcision, to be a seal of the
righteousness of faith, which he had being uncircumcised.

No less absurd is that saying of them, that in heat of affection, inveighing
against dumb Ministers, stick not to affirm their actions are mere nullities;
Baptism no Baptism, that is administered by a non-Preacher: Well then, why
receive they not a new Baptism, since the old is a blank? They answer, they
have the inward Baptism, and therefore need not the Sacrament: Be well
advised; if thou had the measure of Abraham, or of the blessed Virgin in
regeneration, thou art not exempted from use of any Sacrament.

From Abraham's act, proceed we to the object: What received Abraham? The sign
of circumcision: genitivus speciei; frequent in Scripture, and common language;
the gift of tongues, the gift of healing, 1 Cor. 12. That is, tongues, and
healing, which are gifts; the sign of circumcision; that is, circumcision which
is a sign.

The natvre of a Sacrament opened. Bellarm. de Sacrament. lib. 1. cap. 17.
A brief description of the nature of Sacraments.

Sacraments are signs ordained of God to seal up unto us the righteousness of
faith: Your collection is naught, say Papists: For, you conclude a general
from a particular: It follows not, that if circumcision were so and so to
Abraham, that therefore all Sacraments are such, and to all men such? But, it
is well answered, that what belongs in common, to all the species may well
enough be attributed to the general: For, that which all the species have in
common, Parcus ad loc.
they have from their general: proceed we therefore, to the explication.

Touching the name of Sacraments, it is idle to contend; though in so many
letters, and syllables, we have it not in Scripture, yet the thing we have:
and, why should we be so abhorrent from the word so significant, and of so long
continuance in the Church of God?

The first thing, in the nature of a Sacrament, is this: August. de Doctr.
Christ. lib. 2. cap. 1.
That it is a sign: Now, a sign, says Augustine, is that, which besides the
species it offers to the senses, causes some other thing to come to our mind;
as, when we see smoke, we say, there is fire; when we see the rain bow, we
think of the covenant God made with all flesh.

Signs are of two sorts: Natural, Voluntary; Augustine calls them data:
others, (...). Natural signs are such, which naturally, without the will or
appointment of any of themselves, cause us to think of what they signify: as
smoke, of fire: Voluntary signs are such, as signify what they do signify,
by the will and appointment of those that make them signs; as the rainbow, of
the Covenant; which it signifies, not Naturally, but by the will of God: and of
this latter sort are Sacraments.

Again, of these Voluntary, or made signs; some are analogica, that carry a
resemblance of things they signify; some not so, but merely by appointment,
and constat of the imposers, signify what they signify: as, Ivy bush, wine.

Sacraments are in the first kind: whereupon, says Augustine, if Sacraments
had not some similitude, and likeness of the things, August. epist. 23. ad
Bonifacium.
whereof they are Sacraments, they could, at no hand, be Sacraments: Therefore,
in all Sacraments, God has made choice of such signs, as have a fitness
natural, though indeterminate, to represent what they are ordained to
signify; though actually they do not signify it, till Gods ordinance have
thereto determined them: for example, washing in water has a fitness to
signify spiritual cleansing by Christ's blood; actually, it signifies it,
only by appointment of God, etc.

Moreover, Popish Schoolmen, in this question of Sacraments have devised other
distinctions of Signs, which it shall not be amiss to propund: Scotus ad sent.
l. 4. did. 1.
First thus: Signs are either Rememorative, which, by their signification,
call to remembrance something past; or, Demonstrative, as it were pointing at
something present; Aquinas part. 3. qu. 6. art. 3. Bellarm. de Sacram. l. 2. c.
9.
or Prognosticall, foreshewing something to come: Sacraments of the new
Testament are al these; Memorials of Christ's Passion; demonstrating the effect
of the Sacrament: Foreshewing eternal glory: Although though this we must
observe, says Bellarmine, Bellarm. de effect. Sacrament. lib. 1. c. 8.
that that which Sacraments of the new Law chiefly, and essentially signify,
is only justifying Grace: According to him therefore, our Sacraments are
chiefly, yea essentially only, demonstrative. Yet, they further distinguish:
of signs, Scotus, ubi supra.
some are speculative only; they are such, as are ordained to no other end,
but to signify: some are withal practical which are ordained to effect, and
work that which they signify: and of this latter sort they will have our
Sacraments to be.

Thus far of the general nature of Sacraments: Proceed we now toward
enquiry of the difference, that we may see, what it is, that distinguishes
Sacramental signs, from others.

Signs then are, all of them, amongst those things, quae dicuntur ad aliquid:
Every sign is a sign of something; and by being a sign, leads us to consider
of that, whereto it stands in relation: What is it then, that Sacramental
signs do signify?

For better understanding; we are to consider in every Sacramental sign, Two
things, as Parts, after a sort of it, as it is such a sign: First, a
Substance, or Matter. 2. Actions about that matter: as, in Circumcision, the
matter was the Foreskinne; The Action thereabouts, The cutting off the
Foreskinne: In Baptism, the Matter is water; the Sacramental action, the
dipping or sprinkling of the child, etc. If the question now be, what
Sacraments in common signify? Answ. The Matter, or Substantial element
signifies the person of Christ, or something therein: The actions of the
Minister, the actions of God the Father, and his Spirit, communicating Christ,
and his benefits unto us: The Sacramental actions of the people, their
receiving Christ, and his benefits.

The Author of them comes next to be treated of, as part of the difference,
whereby they are distinguished from other signs of man's imposition: The
Author of them, is God only. 1. Because, He only can determine signs, to
such actual signification. 2. And can alone by them assure us of the grace
they signify.

Last is, the Use, or End of Sacraments; which is intimated in the next words;
seals of the righteousness of faith: Let us explain the words, and then examine
the doubts.

The office of a seal stands in four things. 1. Concealment. 2. Distinction. 3.
Impression. 4. Confirmation According to which several uses of seals, the
explanation is here diversely conceived: Some think the Apostles metaphor has
respect to the first office, Concealment; and they thus expound it;
Circumcision sealed up righteousness, that is concealed, Sasbout ex origin.
and closed it up for a Time, namely, Till by Christ's coming in the flesh, it
should be revealed. That dotage needs no confutation.

Another sort take it well nigh, Stapleton, in Antidoto. Cajetan, ad loc.
as Anabaptists; and they will have it so called, only because it is a mark of
the righteousness of faith, by which men might know, that they had obtained the
righteousness of faith; but that office of Sacraments (if there be any such) is
sufficiently expressed in the former Title when it is called a sign.

Whether, in the third respect they are called Seals; because they leave a
stamp, and impression of the righteousness of faith: that absurdity I wonder
some of them fell not up(...); considering, that they teach, they confer grace,
by the work done: but, the place it self sufficiently confutes it; because
Abraham had this righteousness, before, either he received; or God ordained the
sign of circumcision.

It remains then, that in the last respect, they are called seals; because,
they are ordained for greater confirmation, and assurance given to us of
righteousness, promised in the Covenant of grace: So Theophylact, as Sasbout
conceives him; a seal, whereby God sealed up righteousness to Abraham, and
testified it to be most true, and certain; as we are wont to set seal to that,
which we would testify to be sure, and firm.

Now, if any demand, what they seal up, or confirm unto us the answer is; It is
the righteousness of faith; that is, remission of sins, and that esteem of
righteousness, which the Lord allows to all truly believing: If this be not all
they assure us of, yet it is the principal other ends being all subordinate to
this; other uses less principal, and dependent thereon. Now see we what it is
that adversaries except against our description of Sacraments, hence collected:
Forsooth, they tell us, that we reason absurdly, from one species, to the whole
kind, affirmatively; thereto has been already answered.

They limit this use of circumcision to Abraham only; and though to (him) it
was a seal, in this sense, yet not therefore to others: But, I demand, Bellarm.
de Sacram. lib. 1. cap. 17. Genesis 17.7, 10.
was the Covenant made with Abraham only, or with his seed also: or, was
circumcision a sign of the Covenant to Abraham only, or else, to his seed also.
If the Covenant belonged to (all;) if circumcision was to (all,) a sign of
their being in the Covenant; why not to (all) also, a seal of righteousness?
Forsooth, say our adversaries, one end of Abraham's circumcision was peculiar to
Abraham, as that he should be the father of all believers; therefore this also
of being a seal of the righteousness of faith? Answ. And I wonder, why we may
not conclude, by the like reason, that to Abraham only, it was a sign of the
Covenant? because this end they mention had place in Abraham only: But, let us
more nearly view the Reasons: It was Abraham's privilege only, to be the father
of all believers, both circumcised, and uncircumcised: Ergo, His privilege
only, to have circumcision a seal of righteousness: How prove they their
consequence? Forsooth, Paul joins both together, and therefore they are of like
privilege? Answ. Why may we not say, (ut supra) that the necessity of the sign
of circumcision, was also Abraham's privilege, because it also is joined to the
rest? But, for more full satisfaction; view we the scope of the text, which is
this; To show that justification belongs to believers of both people: The proof
is from a sign; Abraham had righteousness in uncircumcision; Ergo,
Righteousness belongs to the uncircumcised; For, this was that the Lord
mystically intended to signify, in justifying Abraham before circumcision; and
in commending circumcision to him justified: But, to what end mentions he that
end of circumcision, sealing up the righteousness of faith? Answ. To answer
that which he saw might be objected, on this manner: If Abraham were justified
before circumcision, what profit received he by that Sacrament? Answ. It
(sealed) unto him the righteousness of faith: And, shall we say now, it was
Abraham's privilege to be confirmed, in persuasion of righteousness? belike
then, his posterity either needed no such confirmation, and so Abraham's
privilege shall be, to be the only weakling in faith, that needs means of
confirmation; or else, his seed shall lack that help, that Abraham had for
establishment, though the Covenant were equally made with them. It is too
tedious, to follow them, in all their diversions; here therefore, an end of his
enquiry, touching the general nature, and use of Sacraments.

What is it now, that our adversaries want, in our description, that serves to
express the general nature of Sacraments? that pulcherima definitio of a
Sacrament extant in the catechism of Trent Council, and ours, besides the
homonymie of the word righteousness, they can assign no difference, but in a
term only: Sacramentum (say they) est res sensibus subiecta, Bellarm. de
Sacram. lib. 1. cap. 11.
quae, ex dei institutione, sanctitatis, and justitiae, tum significandae, tum
efficiendae vim habet: Sacramentum (say we) est res sensibus subjecta, quae ex
dei institutione, justitiae tum significandae, tum obsignandae vim habet:
sealing of righteousness they like not, though the Apostle has pointed us
thereto; It should be effecting, or working of righteousness, and then all were
well: See we therefore a little, whether this be of the nature of Sacraments,
and amongst the uses to which they are assigned, to effect, or work
righteousness.

Where we have to things to consider. First, What grace they are appointed to
work? they answer, justifying grace; which (after them) stands in the habit of
faith, hope, charity. Secondly, How they work it? Not as principal efficients;
for, that is peculiar to God: but as instruments, as the Master of sentences
expresses it: Lumbard. l. 4.
Homo non quaerit salutem a Sacramentis, quasi (ab) eis, sed (per) ea, a Deo:
Haec enim praepositio (A) Scotus ad lib, 4. did. 1.
denotat Causam agentem; (per) vero notat causam instrumentalem.

Well, let us yield them to be organa; whether Moral or Physical? It pleases
not Bellarmine, Bellarm de effect. Sacram. lib. 2. cap. 11.
that they should be causes Moral, though he confess a stream of their own
Writers run current that way: But they must be Physical instruments, that is
such as properly and by inherent virtue, work, or cause justification: And if
any ask what that virtue is that God has put in them to effect this grace? He
answers, It is nothing but Gods moving or using of them to that purpose: For by
this, that God uses the Sacramental action to produce grace, he does elevate
it above the nature, and makes it reach to an effect supernatural.

Now, I might be long in showing the contrary judgment of his own side; some
making them means, or instruments of grace, per modum continentiae, because
they contain the grace they signify; some by concomitance only, etc. I will
propound the sentence of Scotus only, whom ye shall find thus to resolve;
There is not (says he) in Sacraments, aliqua Causalitas activa proprie dicta
respectu gratiae; but they are said to be causes of grace improperly inasmuch
as the receiving thereof is an immediate disposition to grace: and mox; For
thus has God disposed and set down the order, and hereof he has certified the
Church; that to him that in due manner receives the Sacrament, he will give the
effect thereby signified. This, I trow, is far from Bellarmines conceit. But
let us further examine his conclusion: In all ordinary Physical instruments,
which God uses to effect his purposes by, there is (besides Gods use of them)
a virtue, and power, and fitness given them to produce what he uses them unto;
as meat, to nourish; clothes, to warm; Sun, to cherish the earth etc. and shall
Sacraments be ordinary Physical instruments and yet lack this inherent virtue?
What Philosophy, yea or Divinity, so teaches?

Besides this, Sacraments all suppose those habits, wherein they make
justifying grace to consist, Acts 8. Matthew. 28.
to be in him that receives them, they must have faith or, at least; (...),
before Sacraments may be applied unto them: and shall we think they are
elevated by this use and motion they speak of, to work what is already wrought?

Lastly, if they wrought thus Physically, as it were potions; methinks, then,
every one to whom they are applied, must needs receive their effect
unavoidably; and so Simon Magus must receive the grace of the Sacrament, as
well as Simon Peter; which if it be absurd, as absurd it is, to make them
Physical instruments, or Active causes of this grace, which they call
justifying.

To conclude this whole question; May it not be granted that Sacraments are
instruments or means of grace?

Answ. No doubt, yes; but instruments moral only; that is, such as whose
virtue sticks not in them; but only because where they are duly used, God is
present by covenant to work grace supernatural. So Scotus, ut supra: so some
of our Divines.

Yet more nearly; 1. Consider what grace they are ordained to work, as means.
2. How they concur to the working of it. The grace they work is; 1.
Confirmation in persuasion of justification. 2. Care and increase of
sanctification, etc. How work they it? Answ. Occasionally only; quatenus they
represent Gods actions, Christ's person and benefits, our duty etc. by which
representations Gods spirit works in our hearts in these or the like
discourses: God has in the Gospel promised remission of sins to all those that
believe in Christ; and for further assurance has been pleased to ordain
Sacraments as it were his seals set to his covenant; wherein I see represented
the death of Christ, that procured pardon of sins; and in the Ministers action
delivering the Sacrament to me, Gods act in delivering Christ and his benefits
to me is resembled. Now, his promise is, that if I bring faith to the use of
the Sacraments, the things they signify are mine. How then assumes conscience;
I believe what God in the Gospel promises what in Sacraments he seals unto me:
and thence follows as a conclusion, my faith confirmed, etc.

Now, what say our Adversaries to this manner of Sacraments efficacy? Forsooth
if in this manner only they have their efficacy, there shall then be no
difference betwixt Sacraments of the Old Law, and those of the New Testament?
Answ. What, none at all? Bellarm. de effect. Sacram. lib. 2. c. 8.
They confess elsewhere that we agree with them, in the differences thus far:
1. The signs are others. 2. The number less. 3. The facility more. 4.
Clearness of signification greater. 5. Manner of signifying different. 6.
Endurance of new longer.

Object. Yea, but in the point of efficacy, there is left no difference: For
thus theirs were effectual, by stirring up faith by their significations, and
by the devotion of the receiver which they call. The work of the Worker.

Genesis 17.7. Romans 4.11. Deuteronomy. 30.6.
A feal of the righteousness of faith? An occasional mean of sanctification?
The same was Circumcision to Abraham, and to all his posterity; in the ordinary
measure of efficacy there might be some odds; in efficacy and manner of it,
none at all that can be assigned. For, 1. In their Sacraments they had
Communion with Christ; They ate the same spiritual meat, 1. Cor. 10.3, 4.
drank the same spiritual drink, that we do, though under other signs or
elements.

Object. Rhenenses ad loc. Bellarm. de effect. Sacram. lib. 2. c. 17. August.
de utilit. Poenit. cap. 1.2.
Nay, rather (say Papists) the same amongst themselves, not the same with us?
Answ. Then let us hear Augustine: Eundem (inquit) cibum spiritualem
manducaverunt: quid est (eundem)? nisi quia eum, quem etiam nos? and mox,
Eundem non invenio quomodo intelligam, nisi eum quem manducamus and nos. Inst.
What Paul there speaks of were not Sacraments. Answ. How then fit they Paul's
intention? which is apparently this, to take from this people vain confidence
in Sacraments, 2. What means Paul to say of their passage through the sea, etc.
it was a baptizing of them? Cyprian. Epist. 76. August. in Psalm 77.
Hear ancients; Cyprian, Mare illud Sacramentum Baptismi fuisse, declarat
beatus Apostolus Paulus, dicens. Nolo vos ignorare fratres, etc. 1. Cor. 10.
Augustine, Per mare transitus Baptismus est. The same Augustine; Cum essent
omnia communia Sacramenta, non communis erat omnibus gratia, quae Sacramentorum
virtus est; speaking of the very elements.

Inst. The same let them be, but in signification; not in virtue or efficacy.
Answ. They drank of the Rock, which was Christ: some of them, I mean, as
Augustine expounds in Psalm, 77. And if therein they had Communion with Christ,
how are they not the same in efficacy? Will they say, the effect was one; the
efficiency, or manner of producing, different? It is easy to say any thing:
their proof we want, and require.

Not to be long: Scholast. ad 4. senten.
Concerning the Sacrament of Circumcision, their own Divines confess many of
them, that it had the same effect with Baptism; and in the same manner,
namely, the work wrought. Why may we not then conclude, that their Sacraments
were one with ours in Use, Ends, and Efficacy?

Forsooth, their Sacraments had no absolute promise of grace, ours have. But
before I answer their objections, the Reader must be entreated to observe; that
they change the state of the question: For, the question is not betwixt them
and us, Whether their Sacraments conferred justification, as ours? For we
maintain, that neither confer justification though both equally confirm it, in
manner aboveshewn. But the question is whether theirs had the same efficacy
that ours have, to the uses, and ends whereto they were designed. And so we
affirm; that the same promises for spiritual things, were made to both people,
in both Testaments, and confirmed in both Sacraments. The same promise that is
made to us, was made to Abraham; yea, first to Abraham, and first to the seed
of his loins, walking in the steps of his faith, Gen, 17. How else reasons the
Apostle from the example of Abraham? the promise was given Abraham through
faith; Ergo, Its ours through faith and not by the Law, etc. and again, How
makes he Abraham the father of believers in both people, except that the
Covenant was stablished in him as the father, for his children of both people?

But have our Sacraments absolute promise of grace justifying to be conferred
by them? then what lets infants, even of heretics in baptism of heretics, to
receive justification? And if justification may be had in the Conventicles of
heretics, why not also salvation? We will henceforth be of comfort in the
Church of England, and we will hope for our infants yet that they may go to
heaven.

2. Where have we such an absolute promise made to our Sacraments? Mar. 16.16.
this I read, He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. Acts 2.39. He
that repents, and is baptized, shall receive remission of sins: Never, He that
is baptized shall have justification, or salvation simply, because he is
baptized.

To omit all other their objections, bewraying too foul ignorance in the matter
of the Covenant of grace; their last only I will take notice of: It lies thus;
Our Sacraments are said to save, to regenerate, to justify; and no such thing
is read of theirs in the Scriptures; Ergo. They are not equal in efficacy?
Answ. Many of the places alleged, are to be understood of the Baptism of the
Spirit; as that, 1. Pet. 3.21. Tit. 3.5. Joh. 3.5. And what is that to the
Sacrament? 2 If in other places remission of sins be in show of words ascribed
to the Sacrament; it must be understood significative, at most, but
concomitanter.

Paul once made to the people of Corinth, 1 Cor. 10. upon this ground: That
none of us presume upon Sacraments, as if they sealed up impunity to wilful
transgressions; there is no greater virtue in ours, then was in Jewish
Sacraments: And their Murmurings, Idolatry, Fornication, Tempting of God was
severely punished even in those that partook Sacraments, the same with ours, in
signification, use and efficacy: And, why should any of us adventure the
displeasure of God, upon vain confidence of the work done of Sacraments?
Consider we, that they are not only obsignations of favor but obligations to
duty; and so bined to dutiful carriage; that they seal up pardon of no more
sins, then are repented, and forsaken: It is in this respect with Gods pardon,
as with like indulgence of Princes to Malefactors; they bind for ever to good
behavior: And, I could wish our people thus persuaded of them. But thus it
fares with most, through their ignorance; as it is said of the Heart, when he is
wounded, he runs to the herb dittany known, by natural instinct, to be
sovereign: So our people, when they have wounded their souls even to death,
with the vilest abominations; they post to Sacraments for medicine, adding to
their other sins, this of profaning Gods sacred ordinances: By the law of God
given to the Jews, it was ordained, that none that had contracted any legal
pollution, should on pain of death adventure on their Passover, till such time
as his cleansing, according to the law was accomplished: The statute for the
letter, binds not us; but the signification thus far serves to instruct us,
that none of us renewing his sins should adventure on Sacraments, without
renewing repentance.

The last thing here observable, is this; That Sacraments are ordained, not to
confer justification; but to confirm us in persuasion of it: As, to Abraham
circumcision gave not righteousness, but as a seal confirmed it unto him; for
what? shall we say, as Papists, This Sacrament was so to Abraham only, as his
privilege, not so ours, to us? Thereto has already been answered; and the case
is as plain for Baptism in Cornelius, as this for circumcision in Abraham:
Kemnit. Exam. part 2. de sacram. efficac. and Vsu.
or, shall we say, these instances were extraordinary, and therefore afford no
general rule? First, How appears it of either, that there was any thing
extraordinary? Secondly, Whence should we fetch the rule, to judge of the
ordinary use of Sacraments, save from their persons, that first received them.
Let it stand therefore for a conclusion, that the use of Sacraments, is not to
confer faith, or justification, but to confirm it: For which cause we shall
find, that ordinary faith is required as a pre-disposition necessary in all,
that are admitted to the Sacraments; yea, Act. 8.
faith of the Messiah and confidence in him for justification; between which
faith and justification, the connection is inseparable.

Ob. If any shall say, that they cannot have use in infants?

Answ. To omit other answers, though in infants, while they are infants, they
have not actually that use; yet, to (...) end they are ministered to infants,
that when in time to come, they shall believe to righteousness, their faith may
receive confirmation by baptism in infancy received. August. de Bapt. contra
Donat. lib. 4. cap. 24.
To this purpose, says Augustine, In Abraham praecessit fidei justitia, and
accessit circumcisio signaculum justitiae fidei, etc. that in some,
justification goes before the seal; as in Abraham, and Cornelius: In others,
the seal is before righteousness: Hear his words: Sicut in Isaac, qui octavo
suae nativitatis die circumcisus est, praecessit signaculum justitiae fidei;
and quoniam patris fidem imitatus est, secuta est increscente ipsa justitia,
cujus signaculum in infant praecesserat: Ita and in baptizatis infantibus,
praecedit Regenerationis sacramentum; and si Christianam tenuerint pietatem,
sequitur etiam in cord conversio, cujus mysterium praecessit in corpore.



That he might be Father] That is, that he might be declared, or known to be;
For, these things made him not so, but signified him to be so: so Matthew. 5.45.
Bless them that curse etc. that ye may the sons of your father in Heaven,
that is, that ye may be known to be: Frequent is that phrase in Scripture:
whence is that old rule; That a thing is said to be, when it is (known) to be;
John 15.8. Ye shall be my Disciples: 2 Timothy 2.21. He shall be a vessel unto
Honor, that is, known to be so: Psalm. 2.7. This day have I begotten thee, that
is, manifested that I have begotten thee, as many expound that place, Acts
13.33.

Father of all them that believe.] Rolloc. ad Loc.
Father, that is, say some, Pattern of justification: And they suppose it
usual in Scripture, that those in whom a thing is first exemplified, should be
called Fathers thereof: Cajetan.
Say others, Father, because of him Believers are, after a sort, begotten, in
respect, that by example of his faith, others believed; others, because from
him the Blessing of justification is derived, as an inheritance, or Free
passes from the Father to the Son: Thus rather I think, He is called the
father of believers in both people, because in him the covenant is made with
all believers: And, they are all counted Abraham's seed, with whom the Covenant
of Grace is made in Abraham the Father, that walk in the steps of his faith.

Of them that believe, (...)] That is, of Gentiles uncircumcised; by
uncircumcision, enallage praepositionis, as Romans 2.27. Howbeit, perhaps, it may
stand without any such enallage, as intimating, that the want of circumcision
occasions, after a sort, the Gentiles betaking themselves to faith; thereof if
any difficulty be shall be after explained.

Gregory's speech is something too large, if we take it universally; but make
it particular, it has frequent Truth; Scriptura, dum narrat gestum, prodit
mysterium: Abraham was justified, before circumcised; chat wanted not its
mystery: Thereby was signified, that Abraham was father even of uncircumcised
believers: That of his two wives, and their children, with their several
condition and issues, Gal. 4.24.
the Apostle has avouched to be mystical: the like thinks Augustine of his
offering his son; of taking Keturah to wife after Sarahs death, and resolves
(though too largely) Quicquid dicit Scriptura de Abraham, and factum est, and
Prophetia est. Augustine. Ser. 72. de Temp.


Augustine, out of this ground, takes occasion, though not to justify the
falls of Saints, yet to defend the Scriptures of the old Testament, recording
them, Nos Scripturas sanctas, non hominum peccata desendimus: Augustine. contr.
Faustum Manich. l. 22. c. 45. etc. 42.
against Faustus the Manichee; and shows how many the sins of Saints are
holily recorded in Scripture, though wickedly committed by them: They are
recorded, says he, as Prophesies, and presignifications of things to come; God
so disposing even of their falls, that they figured mystically some matter,
either of knowledge, or practice: one instance he gives of Lots Drunkenness,
and Incest, allegorizing it vainly, as he does many other things; and at length
concluding; Illud factum cum in sancta scriptura narratur, prophetia est; cum
vero in illorum vita, qui hoc commiserunt, consideratur, Flagitium est: Better
satisfaction to the Manichees cavil he gives after; Narrata ista sunt, non
laudata, etc.

Papists, some of them, have hereby taken occasion to turn the whole Scripture
into an Allegory, and endeavor a mystical interpretation of every part of
Scripture: It were a wonder, they should attempt it in the ten Commandments;
Yet, that ye may see, how spiritually these men understand all things in
Scripture, Dionys. Carthus. in Exodus 20.
the very Decalogue has, with some of them, besides the sense literal,
another mystical.

Others of them more judicious, acknowledge, that there is not in every
sentence of Scripture, to be found or sought after this spiritual, Bellarm. de
verb. Dei interpretat. l. 3. c. 3.
or mystical sense: But yet in many they acknowledge it; And in so many they
hunt after it, as may afford them, either arguments to support their errors,
where the letter fails them, or evasions, to decline the stroke of the letter,
when it directly strikes at them.

An acute disputant amongst them, would needs take upon him, to prove by
Scripture, the Imperial power an underling to the Papacy: What is his
argument? God made two lights, the sun (the greater light) to rule the day and
that signified the Pope; the Moon, to govern the night, and that was the
Emperor: Another would prove, that spiritual, and temporal jurisdiction are
both, by Christ's ordinance invested in the Popedom: For, Peter said to his
Master, Ecce duo gladii hic: The like in sundry answers to our arguments they
practice; such, and such texts must be understood mystically. My purpose is
not, on this occasion, to run out into that controversy: I note it only, for
that I have long observed it with grief; our Ministers growing into a
Fryer-like Preaching, turning all things almost into Allegories; wherein
howsoever they make show of some such wit, as he speaks of, Wit whither wilt?
yet questionless, with judicious men, they lose all authority in Conscience,
the chiefest point of eloquence in a Preacher.

I would entreat them to consider, the inconveniences should I term them, or
mischiefs? such dealing with Scriptures brings with it: As 1. Leaving little,
or no certainty in the sense of Scripture, and strenthening many in that
blasphemous opinion of the waxen nature of Scripture, flexible to any sense
that man's wit shall bring unto it.

2. Occasioning many, through ignorance, to deny the truth of the History,
understood according to the letter, and to fancy all things after the course
of Allegories: From my experience, and knowledge something I can speak; An id
to once falling on a Friar Allegorizing, after their fashion, The History of
David, and Goliath, grew stiff in the opinion, that there never was such a
monster as Goliath; He would have added, nor such a Saint as David: His reason;
For Goliath signifies the Devil; David, Christ; the stone wherewith he was
slain, the Word of God: and what, I wonder, the scrip, and sling? But such
mischiefs draw wrested Allegories frequently with them.

But, affords not Scripture, often, such Allegories?

Answ. No question, Yes; but, it is good for us to be sure, we have Gods spirit
directing us, in their accommodation, before we propound them, as things
intended by the inspirer of Scripture, least we belie the Holy Ghost, in
fathering on him a sense, that he never intended: Hieron. praesat. december
vision. Esaiae.
Saint Hierome speaking of Origin, (the Father of Allegories) though himself be
faulty enough in that kind; Yet, casts on him this aspersion; Origines (says
he) liberis Allegoriae spatiis evagatur and ingenium suum facit Ecclesiae
sacramenta: Would God not many of our Ministers also! And other ancients,
though bold enough this way; Yet, set limits to us, in this kind. Basil in
Hieron. Hieron. in Zech. 4. and Gal. 4.
1. Ever preferring the sense literal. 2. Prohibiting Allegories to be
attempted in praeceptis, quae ad vitam pertinent and in his quae perspicua, and
manifesta sunt: Later Divines have straighter bonds. as, 1. That it be done,
Parce. 2. For illustration, rather then proof; except where Gods spirit points
at the Allegory. 3. Let this be added, that as similitudes, such things may be
used; so be it, we be not too peremptory, in fathering that sense upon the
Spirit of God: For example, it is said of Moses, He brought the Israelites to
the skirts of Canaan; but Joshua gave them possession of it; perhaps in that
was this mystery: That the Law prepares to Gods kingdom, but it is the Gospel,
that brings thereinto: howbeit, it were too much audaciousness, in any, to say
any such thing was taught thereby; though, by way of similitude, it may be so
applied, Of this observation, thus far.

2. Whereas Abraham is said to be the Father of all that believe in
uncircumcision; Note we, That the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham, reached,
by Gods intention, from the beginning, even to the Gentiles believing: And this
appears, Genesis 17. inasmuch as to strangers, and those bought with money,
Circumcision must be administered: And long after, when the greatest enclosure
of Grace to Jews seemed to be; if strangers sojourning amongst them, would
consent to be circumcised, they might eat the Passover; there was one Law, for
the home-born, and for the stranger, sojourning amongst them. Exodus 12.48, 49.
And if any ask, Why Paul says of them, They were strangers from the
commonwealth of Israel, Aliens from the Covenants of Promise, Ephesians. 2.12.
Answ. In respect of the dispensation of the Covenant, the body of the Gentiles
were Aliens; because God had not yet so generally manifested his Grace to them,
by calling, Ephesians. 3. Yet, in respect of Right, it belonged to as many of them,
as walked in the steps of Abraham's faith: or otherwise thus; The Covenant, from
the beginning, was intended to Gentiles; Howsoever the Visible admission of
them into the Covenant, was not, till the days of the new Testament: so that,
who can blame the Lord of hard dealing toward Gentiles, even before Christ's
coming, that (even in Israel) gave place unto as many of them, as would submit
to the conditions of the Covenant? will any say, the Lord should have called
them, as he did the Jews? Answ. Who has given him first, and it shall be
recompensed him? Romans 11.35. And, his church was conspicuous, and eminent in
the eyes of the whole world, that who so had hearts, might thereto join
themselves, and share in the privileges thereof.

And father of circumcision] That is, of Jews circumcised: To them, etc.] that
is, to as many as unto circumcision added imitation of Abraham's faith.

So then circumcision alone while it stood in force as a Sacrament, made no man
a child of Abraham; they must as well imitate his faith, as admit circumcision,
that would be indeed and truth of that seed of Abraham, to whom the Covenant
belonged: Children of Abraham were of three sorts; some such by propagation
only, so Israelites, yea Ishmaelites, are all his children: some by imitation
only, as Gentiles, that descended not out of his loins: some both by
propagation and imitation, as believing Jews. Now here let it be observed, that
faith is the predominant, and that that has chief virtue, in making children
of Abraham; such I mean as to whom the Covenant belonged; insomuch, that faith
severed from circumcision, made children of Abraham; circumcision severed from
faith not so. The Jews, says Theophylact wanting faith, Theophyl. ad loc.
vaunting of circumcision, are as they that make show of a sealed bag, empty
of money; such Jews, says he, marsupium gestiunt, circumcisionis signo munitum
etc.

And why may we not so say of Baptism, the Sacrament of the New Testament?
Has it more virtue to bring us into the Covenant, then had Circumcision? He
that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, Mar. 16.16. he that believes
not, shall be damned, yea though he be baptized. Why then do Papists obtrude
upon us the work done of our Sacraments, as if it had such virtue to make us
sharers in the Covenant of grace? they will never be able to prove unto us a
disparity in this kind, betwixt old and new Sacraments. Indeed, says Peter
Baptism saves; but it is not the element, but the interrogation of a good
conscience, 1. Pet. 3.21. And let me here once again advise our people, to add
to that they call their Christendom, faith unfeigned, as they desire to become
Christians indeed; and to share with Christ in his benefits conveyed unto us in
the Covenant of grace. They err dangerously to their souls peril, that think
the naked Sacrament makes them Gods confederates: To us indeed, the baptized
are such till they discover hypocrisy; to God, none else but hearty believers.
Now in describing the circumcised sons of Abraham, that are such not by
propagation only, or participation of the Sacrament, but by imitation; the
phrase of the Apostle is to be observed: They are said to walk in the steps of
his faith; A Metaphor expressing the exactest kind of imitation. Not much
unlike is that, that Job has, expressing his precise, and accurate obedienee;
Job 23.11. My foot has held his steps. So accurate would the Lord have us, in
imitating the virtuous examples of his Saints: But of this point of imitation,
with the cautions and limits thereof, more hereafter on another occasion. Here
it shall suffice to observe, that whosoever will share with Abraham, in the
blessing of righteousness, must imitate Abraham in the condition of
righteousness; Believe as he believed, and as near as may be, tread in the
steps of his faith: Needs proof? see verse. 24. and consider, that the
conveyance of all blessings is made to Abraham and his seed, on even terms:
From hence is it, that in the next verse the Apostle takes it for granted, that
as the promise is one made to Abraham and his seed; so the condition is one,
required of Abraham, and his seed. Only let it be remembered, that Abraham's
measure is not required of all; so we follow him in faith, though we keep not
pace, we have interest in his blessing; provided always, we strive to equal,
yea to excel him, albeit through weakness, we reach not his perfection.

This point, had it been well understood, or considered of ancient Jews, they
had not perished so many, through vain confidence in their carnal descent from
Abraham; but so besotted were they in that presumption, that they thought very
birth of Abraham to give them title to his blessings; what more frequent in the
mouths of the most incredulous, then this, We have Abraham to our father? Joh.
8.36, 39. We be Abraham's seed; Abraham is our father. But our Savior well
distinguishes, They were his seed by generation; not his seed by imitation: If
they were Abraham's children, they would do the works of Abraham, but now they
seek to kill Christ, thus did not Abraham, etc.

And I know not how that Jewish error has place in many of our people; that
think they have enough even to salvation, that they proceeded from the loins of
virtuous Parents. A blessing, I confess, not to be despised; and such an one,
as in temporal favors, brings a share often, even to graceless children: But
what advantage in spiritual things a religious parent brings to degenerating
posterity, I conceive not; except, perhaps, the heavier condemnation, Read
Ezekiel. 18. And of this period thus far. Proceed we in the Text.

VERSE. 13. For the promise that he should be the heir of the world, was not to
Abraham, or to his seed through the Law but through the righteousness of faith.


THe Apostle having now sufficiently cleared the doubt, moved touching the
persons to whom this blessing belongs; returns now from that digression to his
principal purpose, propounding new arguments to confirm his conclusion. His
return is very artificial, and such as matcheth the skill of the chiefest
Rhetoricians; the close of his digression rescuing, after a sort, the
conclusion from which he had digressed. His passage thus conceive; Describing
the Jews, to whom he extends the blessing of justification, he will have them
thus qualified; That they walk in the steps of Abraham's faith: And marvel not,
says the Apostle, that I interpose that condition: For the promise was not to
Abraham, or to his seed, by the Law, but by the righteousness of faith.

This third argument therefore, is in sum this; Look (as) the blessing was
promised to Abraham and his seed, (so) it must be obtained; But it was promised
to Abraham, etc. not through the Law, but through the righteousness of faith;
Ergo, it must be so obtained.

The promise] Whether we are to take it properly, for that act of Gods mercy
binding himself by promise, to give Abraham this blessing; or Meconimically,
for the thing promised, is the question: The first acception seems most
pertinent, as well for the scope of the text, as for that we read, Gal. 3.16.18.

That he should be heir of the world] The doubts here are many: 1. What is here
meant by the World and Abraham's being heir thereof? 2. Where we find this
promise made unto Abraham? 3. How it fits the purpose of the Apostle?

For the first; Beza, Paraeus, and alii
Most Interpreters here understand by the World that Mundus credentium;
whereof, 1. John 2.2 and by his being heir thereof, his fatherly dominion, and
title he had to them by Covenant. But then the question is, How this belongs to
his seed? for howsoever such dominion was promised to Abraham and he by
Covenant was to become Father of many nations; yet to his posterity was no such
promise made. Now the promise here mentioned, extends it self to his seed also.
If any shall say, that by the seed we are here, as Gal. 3.16. to understand
Christ; the circumstances of the Text seem not to bear it: for, shall we say,
the promise was made to Christ by the righteousness of faith? surely it
appears, his title that he has to the world as Mediator, comes to him as a
reward of his Legal obedience, Phil. 2.9. and besides, the confirmation added,
ver. 14. seems to force us, by the seed, to understand Abraham's other
posterity; except perhaps we shall say that the Apostle intends to show, not so
much what condition the Lord required of Abraham, or Christ (his chief seed) to
the end they might be heirs of all the world; as the means by which he intended
to set them in possession of that inheritance; which was not by the Law, but by
the righteousness of faith: and that indeed is a truth, and affords
accommodation of the reasons subjoyned fit enough: Judicent docti. Others by
the world understand, by Metalepsis, the Kingdom of Heaven, figured (they say)
by Canaan, as the principal part of the world; and that was, as they say
truly, Heb. 12.
a type of heaven. But where find we in all the Scripture, the word (world) so
used?

To the second doubt, Where this promise is extant in Scripture? They that by
the (world) understand Believers of all nations, allege that place, Genesis
22.17, 18. I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, etc. that for the
promise to Abraham: and for Christ his seed, Psalm. 2.8. I will give thee the
heathen for thine inheritance.

They that by the (world) understand Canaan, and that which it Typically
shadowed, produce these Scriptures, Genesis 12.7. and 15, 8.8. The first concerns
his seed; the second, Abraham himself. To the third question, touching the
accommodation to the Apostles purpose; their conceits are diverse; the drift is
diversely conceived: The conclusion some imagine this; That Abraham is father of
nations, not by circumcision, but by faith: To this conclusion, the
accommodation is plain.

The promise, That he should be heir of the world was made to Abraham by faith:
Ergo, He is father of them in respect of faith; not of circumcision, or the
law; because it is the promise that makes him heir: Look therefore how the
promise is made, so Abraham has his inheritance.

The conclusion seems this rather; That to believers the blessing of
righteousness belongs, in respect of faith: How follows that from the Apostles
proof? Answ. The inheritance of the world, that is, of Heaven, was made to
Abraham, through the righteousness of faith; Ergo, Righteousness it self is
obtained by faith; there being one condition and means both of justification,
and salvation, according to the course of the Covenant: Now, the defect of the
verb is diversely supplied; Cajetan.
some thus; adimplenda fuit; others thus, contingit or contigit; and these by
the promise, understand the thing promised: I would rather thus, facta est; as
Gal. 3.16.

By the Law] That is, works, or righteousness of the law: but, of what law?
that given in Sinai, or, that of nature? Paraeus.
Answ. Understand either, or both; and that some think is intimated, by
abscence of the article: as a condition, or a means, we shall anon resolve.

I have now propounded the several judgments of Interpreters, touching the
sense; Whether shall we resolve of, for my own part, I will peremptorily
prescribe to no man: My judgment only I will propound.

The conclusion I think is this; That justification belongs to believers, all,
and only, in respect not of works, but of faith. The Reasons proving it, is
taken partly from the form, or manner of conveiance in the promise; partly from
parity: In this form; If the promise of inheritance to Abraham and his seed,
was to be accomplished, not by legal obedience, but by righteousness of faith;
then it follows, that we are justified by faith, and not by works: But the
promise of the inheritance to Abraham, was to be accomplished, not by the law,
but by the righteousness of faith: Ergo. The consequence of the proposition
has this ground, because that justification must be by such means, as the
inheritance may be obtained; and, that is obtained, so as it is promised; it is
promised to be obtained, by the righteousness of faith, as a mean, or
disposition thereto tending: Ergo. Justification is by faith, and not by the
law: Hitherto the Connection.

The particulars of this verse are these.

First, The ground of Abraham's, and our title to the blessing, and that is the
promise.

Secondly, The matter of the promise; To be the heir of the world.

Thirdly, The means whereby we partake the promise, set out (...); not by the
law, but by the righteousness of faith.

sub titulo promissionis; compare, Gal, 3.18. For this cause I think it is,
that the blessings of God which we partake, are so often called promises; and
the Children of God, the heirs of the promise; see Heb. 9.12, 17. and 10.36.
because, by virtue of the promise, accrewes our claim, title, and possession of
the blessing: Hence Peter, Act. 2.39. reasons for the blessing and seal
thereof, in respect of the humbled Jews; the promises are made to you, and to
your seed: And, to assure us of enjoying them Gods Spirit usually sends us to
consideration of the Lords fidelity, 1 Cor. 1.9. and 10 13. 1 Thessalonians, 5.24. 2 Thessalonians. 3.3. Heb. 10.23, etc. And it is not to be omitted, that Budaeus
observes, that the word ((...)) signifies a promise merely voluntary, and
gratuitous; without respect to any worth in the party, to whom it is made: In
which respect, it seems to be opposed to the law, Gal. 3.18.

From whence it well follows in Paul's Divinity, that it is not founded on the
worth of any our works, Gal. 3.18. neither may we claim them, as due to us for
the merit of our obedience: And, howsoever obedience be required as a
qualification of our persons, to make us capable thereof; yet, the cause moving
God to bestow them, is not our righteousness, but Gods promise. Memorable is
that caveat Moses gives to Israel, being now at the skirts of Canaan; say not
in thy heart, etc. for my righteousness, Deuteronomy. 9.4.5.
the Lord has brought me in to possess this land, etc. Not for thy
righteousness, or, for the uprightness of thy heart do thou go in; but, for
the wickedness of these nations, etc. and that the Lord may porform the word.
Which the Lord swear unto thy fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; his reason
is, verse. 16. Thou art a stiff-necked people; which self-reason has place in
us all, whatever our righteousness be by grace; Rebellion alas! Romans 7.23.
how much is still in our nature? Hence it is, that the Saints of God in their
prayers to God usually acknowledge their own unworthiness; and the blessings
they crave, and lay claim to, they claim by promise; read Neh. 1.8, 9. And, if
ever we read in any of them allegation of righteousness, as Isai. 38.3. It is
not intended, as cause of the blessing, but as a disposition in the person,
fitting it to receive the blessings made ours by promise.

In the next place, consider we the matter of the promise; That he should be
the heir of the world] The Heir, that is, says Mr. Beza, out of Vlpian, Lord
or, owner; agreeably to that, Gal. 4.1. Howbeit, something else is withal
signified, that this possession descends upon him freely, as an inheritance,
not as by way of purchase.

Of the world] That is, say some, of believers of all nations; whereof supra:
say others, of the Kingdom of Heaven; others of whole heaven, and earth, and
all the creatures therein, with whatsoever heaven or earth can afford to make
him blessed; in token, and pledge whereof, Canaan was given him by promise, as
being the most fertile and pleasant part of the world, and withal a type of
Heaven; and as Heb. 4, and 12. the rest, pleasantness and glory thereof: This I
think the best interpretation, for reasons above assigned.

All things are yours, says the Apostle, whether Paul, or Cephas, or the
world, etc. or things present, or things to come, all are yours, 1 Cor. 3.21,
22. And again, godliness has promise of the life that now is, and of that
which is to come: And if any shall say, that in experience we see Gods Children
none of the greatest sharers in the things of this life? Answ. The lack of use
hinders not our title, and property in them: The heir is Lord of all, in title
though in this nonage, he differs nothing from a servant, Gal. 4.1.2. That
little they enjoy, they enjoy comfortably as their own, without usurpation,
Tit. 1.15. 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. 3. A recompense they have in graces equivalent here,
Mar. 10.29, 30. by an happy commutation. 4. And in the life to come, full
fruition of that happiness, which passes all the felicity earth can afford
unto them. 5. Besides, there is in the best something, that turns many of these
earthly blessings into poison, as Agur intimates, Prove. 30.8, 9. And experience
daily teaches: In that case therefore, if the Lord keep us short, to prevent
our mischief, shall we say, his promises is not made good? 6. Finally, our
wants in this kind, are usually chastisements of particular disobedience, etc.

From whence follows, as a just consectary, this paradox; That Gods Children
are the richest heirs in the world, being by promise, heirs of the whole world,
and of all the comforts, earth, or heaven can afford them: And should it not
teach us, to labor to come within the Covenant of grace? Questionless, it is
true, that though in civil states, men aliens from the Covenants of promise,
have by humane right a dominion, and property in the things they enjoy; yet, in
respect of spiritual, and true interest, they are but usurpers: the air they
breath in, the earth they tread on, the heavens they look on, the meat they
eat, the clothes they are clothed withal, are not theirs; much less the
comforts of a better life: For the promise, whereon such right is founded,
belongs only to Abraham, and to his seed, etc.

The last thing remains, and that is the means whereby the promise was intended
to be accomplished; Not by the law, etc. but by the righteousness of faith.

Not by the Law? may some men say; though to Abraham the promise was given,
through faith, yet to his seed, it was made by the law, Romans 10.5. Lev. 18.5.
Answ. Made it might be to his seed, by the law hypothetically; but the
exhibition and performance, was neither accomplished, nor yet intended to be
accomplished save only by the righteousness of faith: And yet was not the law
vainly given; there being so many other ends to which the promulgation in Sinai
tended, as the Apostle afterward, cap. 5. fully shows.

Now, from the manner of the Apostles reasoning, we learn, so to exspect the
blessings promised, as they are promised, and intended to be performed: God
promised Abraham and his seed, to be heirs of the world; the means whereby that
promise was intended to be performed, was not by the law, but by the
righteousness of faith; by faith therefore, and not by works, must we exspect
the enjoying of them: and of all our hopes of things promised, this must be the
measure: By what means, In what manner, In what measure they are promised, so
to exspect the blessings: For example, he has promised to godliness all the
good blessings of the earth; but how has he promised it? with limitation to
experiency; with exception of the cross: Disjunctively, either the blessings,
or, the equivalent, etc. He has promised victory to us in the spiritual
combat; but it is neither perfect victory, nor without condition of striving
lawfully; nor so, but that for our humiliation, and to teach us compassion, he
may leave us to our selves, and permit us to foyls in many particulars: Sic de
reliquis

The due meditation whereof serves to support Gods truth in his promise, and
our hopes of enjoying the blessings promised; both which, our ignorance often
makes to waver, because of our misprisions: the Matter of the promise we look
at; the Manner how it is made we seldom consider: For example, Godliness, we
say, has the promise of this life: How is it accomplished, says a weakling in
his wants? Answ. (As) it is promised, (so) I dare say it is performed to thee;
so far as these Temporalities are expedient for thee, so be it thou demean
thy self as becomes a child of God; either in the kind, or by a compensation in
spiritual things equivalent, thou enjoyest them, etc.

And want of this Prudence, in weighing the manner, how the promises are
conveyed, alas! how many inconveniences has it drawn Gods great servants
unto? Abraham had a promise of a seed to come out of his loins, intended by
Sarah; because the time is delayed, and natural vigor decays, Sarah begins
to distinguish; she shall obtain children by her maid, it may be; and so
Abraham goes in to Hagar, to have the promise hastened; Rebecca had learnt from
Gods mouth, that Jacob was the Beloved, and the blessing should be derived from
him to his brother Esau; but see, how she betakes her self to shifts of her
own, that Gods intentions may take place, etc. the like in sundry particulars,
might be instanced: Learn we to exspect the promises, by means, in manner,
measure, time, that God has been pleased to limit them withal.

A more particular observation out of the Text, is this; That the inheritance
promised to Abraham, and his seed, was never intended to be exhibited to them,
through the righteousness of the Law, as a mean, whereby they should obtain it:
What needs much confirmation? the conclusion being the Apostles, almost in so
many words; and reasons by him annexed to that purpose: Had God a purpose, by
the Law to make us partakers of the Inheritance; What meant he then to
substitute another mean? namely, the righteousness of Faith: Perhaps some
should obtain it by the Law; others, by faith? How absurd is that conceit? when
as the Apostle has taught us, that God is unvariable in his courses in this
kind, Romans 3.30. and, can we think the posterity obtained it, by any other mean
then Abraham the root of blessing? Either therefore, God intended not unto us
the inheritance, by the Law; or else, vain was the substitution of faith:
Hereto let us add this consideration, That no man ever yet obtained it, by the
righteousness of the Law; and can we better judge of Gods intentions, then by
the event? Besides, How was it, that the Lord creating Adam in the perfection
of righteousness, wittingly permitted his fall; if he had meant to give us the
inheritance, by the Law? see Romans 11.32. And, wherefore is it, that having
power to enable us to perfect performance of the Law, He never yet supplied any
of his Saints with perfection of strength to fulfill it? Certes, if by Legal
righteousness he intended for us the inheritance; that righteousness should be
at least by Grace given unto us: But it is given to none. If any shall now
demand, why the Law was given, except to be a mean of the inheritance? Answ.
Let him hear the Apostle: To show us our sin, Romans 3.20. To beat down pride,
to drive unto Christ, Gal. 3.24. And if to any it be propounded as a mean of
life; I dare say, it is to a proud Justitiary, to the end to humble him, and to
drive him through conscience of infirmity, from confidence in works, to
believing in Christ for righteousness.

Synagoga, Bernard ser. 14. super Cantica.
says Bernard, fortis est: the Jewish Synagogue, so may we say, the Romish
also, is strong; she cares not for the light burden, nor for the sweet yoke;
Confidet in Lege, liberet eam, si potest: but sure, says he, there is no such
Law given, as can give life: and supra: I^st judicium ut qui contemnunt Dei
misericordem justitiam, and suam volunt constituere -- eidem suae justitiae
relinquantur, opprimendi magis, quam justificandi: For us, Let us learn to
expect the inheritance, by the means whereby God has intended to give it.

What is that, if not the Law? the Apostle answers, The Righteousness of Faith:
And what is that righteousness? say Papists Cui fides est initium; that is, in
short, Bellarm. de Justif. l. 1. c. 17.
obedience which we, in our own persons, perform to the law, after we have
received to believe the word of God: so great force is there, in general faith,
to make works imperfect in themselves; and therefore condemned by the law, to
be the mean of our inheritance, and salvation: But, I wonder what made Paul now
a believer, having it in so exellent a measure; yet to say he was not thereby
justified? 1 Cor. 4.4.

Large discussing of the point, I mean not, on this occasion, to enter into:
But this I am sure of, the law to salvation requires perfection of obedience,
curses to hell even the least imperfections; Gal. 3.10. and, does any man
believing receive ability to perform it to the full? I am sure, its Augustines,
and Hieromes resolution, that howsoever, perhaps, such measure of grace may be
obtained; yet there never yet lived the man on earth, nor should do, to the end
of the world, so righteous, that he did good, and sinned not; Eccles. 7.20.

Say others; The righteousness of faith] That is, the righteousness, which
stands in faith: so making faith the substance, as it were, of that
righteousness, whereby we are justified, and saved: against it are these
reasons. 1. That then our righteosness, whereby we are just in Gods sight,
shall be a thing that is imperfect; for, has any man, at all times, perfection
of faith? 2. Accordingly, conscience shall never have solid peace; neither in
act, nor in the cause. 3. Righteousness of Justification shall be variable in
the degrees, according as faith is more or less, in the same, or diverse
subjects; so that some shall be more, some less justified in the sight of God;
and the same man, according as his faith ebbs, or flows, shall be, whiles
perfectly, whiles partially, whiles not at all, justified in the sight of God:
For, the act of faith, wherein, according to this opinion, our righteousness
stands, may, by the consent of all, be lost for a time.

The old way still is the good way; by righteousness of faith, that is, by
righteousness which faith apprehends in Christ; see Romans 5.17. By righteousness
of Christ, then, apprehended by faith, obtain we the promised inheritance, Gal.
3.22. The Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith of
Jesus Christ, might be given to them that believe; and verse. 9. They which be
of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham: By faith they are made partakers
of the Blessing.

Romans 10.3. that going about to stablish their own righteousness, they were not
subject to the righteousness of God: And was it for nothing, think we, that the
Apostle counts all dung and dross for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ?
and desires to be found in him not having his own righteousness, by the Law,
but that which is by the righteousness of faith, Phil. 3.8.9. Surely, if any
had cause to trust therein the Apostle much more; that from the time of his
calling had lived in all good conscience, before God and men, Acts 23.1. and
yet knowing, that thereby he was not justified or saved; he utterly disclaims
confidence therein, and rests only in that which is by faith of Christ: Whose
example let us follow as we desire to have comfort in the day of judgment.
Bern. in tantic. Ser. 30.
S. Bernard elegantly comparing grace and the Law together in their effects,
says, Quam dissimili vultu ad omnem conscientiam se offerunt, suavitas hujus
and illius austeritas? quis sane ex aequo respiciat condemnantem and
consolantem? reposcentem, and ignoscentem? plectentem, and implectentem? And
surely, they know little the terror of the Judge, and have had as little
experience of the Laws arraignment in the conscience, that trust to their own
polluted righteousness, and not to that absolute obedience of Christ the
Mediator.

Proceed we now in the Text.

VERSE. 14, 15. For if they which are of the Law be heirs faith is made void and
the promise made of none effect: Because the Law works wrath: For where no
Law is, there is no transgression.


THe words tend to confirmation of the Apostles former argument for
justification by faith: the sum whereof was this, That the promise of
inheritance was not to be accomplished by the Law, etc. the proof of it is here
laid down, taken from a double inconvenience, issuing from that manner of
attaining the inheritance. If they which are of the Law, be heirs, then is
faith made void, and the promise of none effect: But neither is faith void, nor
the promise of none effect: Ergo, They which are of the Law, be not heirs; or
which is equivalent, the promise of inheritance is not obtained by the Law.

They which are of the Law] That is, says Theodoret, Qui ex Lege vitam
instituerunt: says Cajetan, Qui subditi sunt Legi Mosi: Sasbout, Qui Legis
observatores sunt. Many the like Expositions might be cited: Thus, I think,
rather, They which are of the Law, that is, which by the works of the Law seek
the inheritance; as Gal. 3.9, 10. The Apostle sorts them that seek
righteousness, and salvation into two kinds; Some are of faith, they are such
as by faith seek the inheritance: Theophylact. ad Gal. 3.
Some again are of the works of the Law; they are such as by the Law seek
salvation: or, as Theophylact, They are of faith, Quirelicta Lege, ad fidem se
conferunt: They of the Law, which leaving faith, betake themselves to the Law.
If these be heirs] namely, ex Lege, as Ambrose interprets; if they get the
inheritance by the Law.

Then is faith void] Whose faith? Gods or Man's? Gods, says Cajetan, that is,
his fidelity in keeping promise; impertinently: rather Man's, prescribed of God
to be the means of inheritance.

Their faith is void or vain] What is that? whether frustrate in respect of
fruit? or unnecessary, and needless in the prescript? Calvin Instit. lib. 3. c.
11. S. 11.13. and 3.
or else, as M. Calvin, so shaken that it turns to distrust, and degenerates
toward desperation? this latter is a truth, as he explains it; there being
left no place for persuasion of justification, if it depend upon condition of
fulfilling the Law; inasmuch, as no man can ever be assured that he has
fatisfied the Law, nor indeed can by works fulfill it. But the other
Expositions seem more pertinent: let us view them: Faith is vain] That is, say
some frustrate and fruitless, though how, they explain not; perhaps they thus
conceive it; If they only which fulfill the Law be heirs then faith is
fruitless, and can never attain the inheritance promised; inasmuch as no man is
able to fulfill the Law.

But, I take it, the Apostle has eye rather to the prescription of faith on
Gods part, then to the fruit on ours: So that the sense is this; If they which
seek the inheritance by the Law, do by the Law obtain it; needlessly and vainly
was faith prescribed to be the means of inheritance.

To discern the consequence of this argument, view we whereupon the necessity
of substituting faith instead of works grew.

The Lord had made a covenant of life with man, upon condition of fulfilling
the Law; so that if he kept the Law, and continued in obedience thereof, he
should live: see Romans 10.5. Lev. 18.5. Man falling through disobedience, lost
the benefit of that Covenant and withal propagated to posterity a nature, so
not only impotent to fulfill the Law; but vitiously inclined to the breach
thereof, that there was no hope of salvation, by the Law. Howbeit, the Lord out
of his love to mankind, and loath that the whole posterity should perish, in
his rich mercy was pleased to enter a new covenant of life and salvation,
establishing another means for our happiness which was faith of the Messiah, by
which through grace, performed, we might from Christ receive a better, and more
firm title to the inheritance. This was one reason, why faith was prescribed;
as is intimated, Romans 8. and Gal. 3. Now, how needless had this been, if by the
Law we might inherit salvation? To what end go we, by faith, out of our selves,
to seek righteousness and salvation in Christ; if by the Law performed by our
selves, we might have obtained it? The Consequence therefore we see to be firm.

Let us now consider, what out of this argument may be collected: viz.

Gal. 3, etc. If righteousness be by the Law, then Christ died in vain; it had
been needless for the Lord to send his Son to die for our sins, thereby to
procure unto us justification, if by the Law we might have obtained the
blessing: and Romans 8.3. he makes this his reason, why the Lord sent his Son, in
the similitude of sinful flesh; because it was impossible for the Law, weakened
by the flesh, to give us righteousness.

Whereto, what say our adversaries? Forsooth, their old distinctions they
obtrude for answer: Works are of two sorts; some done by strength of natural
free will; some by grace and faith: works of natural free will, indeed
frustrate faith, and grace, and Christ's death; not so works done by grace in
faith: yea, the Apostles consequence, Gal. 3. is very firm, if by them we will
exclude works done through grace: For, it follows not, that if we be justified
by works following faith, that then Christ dyed in vain; Bellarm. de justif.
lib. 1. cap. 19.
nay, if Christ had not dyed, we could not have been justified by faith, or
works issuing therefrom: It being Gods grace in Christ, that has made our
works so virtuous. Answ. Where, first, we desire to know, for our learning;
where in all the Scripture, we may find, that Christ's death, or our faith,
gives to our works justifying, or saving virtue? That our services are
acceptable to God, by Jesus Christ; that our works done in faith are pleasing
to him, though in great weakness performed, we find: that they are of value to
countervail our sins, or to purchase Heaven, we find not: nay, the contrary we
find in sundry Scriptures taught us. 2. Yea, the purgation of our sins, we
know Christ made by (himself,) Heb. 1.3. and the way into the holy of holies to
be opened, by his flesh, never by our righteousness, Heb. 10.19, 20. 3. Let the
Reader observe, how cleanly a gull they would put upon us, in this distinction
of works done by grace, and those done by power of natural free will: For, in
these works of grace, free will is, according to their principles, the
predominant. 4. Does the Law of God in any place, allow us justification, by
works imperfect, though done in grace? search, and see, whether it damn not to
hell the least blemises cleaving to our works; and require, not only that the
principal manner, and end, be regular, but that in every respect, they be pure
and free from blemish: All which considered, return us our conclusion firm, and
undoubtfull; notwithstanding these cavills of popish Iustitiaries. In our
passage, let us take notice of the intolerable pride of our merit-mongers,
choosing rather to rob God of the glory of his wisdom, then in humility, to
acknowledge the imperfection of their own obedience: How much better were it,
with holy Job 4^.6. to abhor our selves in dust and ashes, then thus to
nullify the wisdom of God, in frustrating his prescripts: has God appointed
faith, the sole mean of inheritance? and shall we by works, seek to inherit the
blessing? I say not much; but sure, Gal. 4.30.
if Ishmael may not be heir with the Son of promise no more shall Workres with
believers.

The second inconvenience follows to be scanned: The promise by this means,
becomes ineffectuall; How, if any demand? Answ. Because, the inheritance
promised, shall never by this means be obtained: For hangs it on condition of
fulfilling the law? And must those that desire to inherit by legal obedience,
obtain salvation? Who then can be saved? Seeing no man is able, by any measure
of grace in this life given, to fill up the measure of legal righteousness:
This, saving the judgment of more Learned. I take to be the ground of the
consequence; the rather, for the reasons objoyned.

Hence the inference is fluent; That who so teaches us to seek salvation by
works, frustrates Gods promise, and deprives us of salvation: Not but that good
works are necessary; but as duties, not as merits; for thankfulness, not for
righteousness; as the way to the kingdom, not as causes of salvation; the son
of the bondwoman, shall not be heir with the son of the freewoman, Gal. 4.30.
That is, by Paul's intention, not legal workers, with Evangelicall believers,
Gal. 3.9. As many as are of the works of the law, are under the curse; so far
is it, that they should have any title to the blessing. Such mischiefs bring
pharisaicall Iustitiaries upon their sectaries.

Hear the Reasons: They bind us, by this means, to a condition, and means of
Salvation, impossible not only to Nature, but to Grace, according to that
portion, God is pleased, in this life, to proportion to us; that is, the
fulfilling of the whole Law; Gal. 5.3. our Savior to such a boaster, asking,
What he must do to inherit salvation, suits answer to his proud humor; Thou
know the Commandments; if doing be the means thou seek to inherit by,
Keep the Commandments, this do, if thou will needs be doing, and thou shall
live; fail in the least apex, the Curse is upon thee, Gal 3.10. Now, dares any
arrogate power of fulfilling the Law? it is strange; and yet, what will not
Popish pride assume? Anathema to them, says the Trent Council, whosoever shall
say, Dei praecepta homini etiam justificato, and sub gratia constituto esse ad
observandum impossibilia: of that question hereafter.

2. Add unto this, that other reason of the Apostle; Christ becomes of no
effect to such as by the Law, seek to be justified, or saved, Gal. 5.4.

3. They are fallen from Grace, not which they had, but which they (might) have
had; had they not renounced it, by cleaving to their works.

Shall I need now to exhort, in the Apostles terms, Gal. 1.6. to hold Anathema
all such as teach us by works to seek salvation? they deprive us of the
promised salvation; exclude from fellowship in Christ's merits, the sole pillar
of hope; deprive us of Gods grace, which alone is made the fountain of
salvation: I say not, but other errors in the foundation, obstinately holden,
deprive of salvation; I say not, but all heresies, in their kind, are so many
blasphemies against God: Neither blame I the rigor of Magistrates, that with
extraordinary severity, labor to bring Heretics, and their heresies into
ashes: But surely, an error more pernicious to the souls of Gods people, more
derogatory to the glory of Gods grace, and the validity of Christ's merits, I
know none, then this of Justitiaries; and can but wonder, How the severity of
Laws against Popish Seminaries has gotten relaxation; that it should now no
longer be holden Capital, so dangerously to seduce Gods people, to evacuate
the virtue of Christ's death, and to plunge so many souls, bought with the
precious blood of Christ, into eternal perdition: Amongst Jews, no recompense
might be taken for blood, but the blood of the slayer; the blood of souls how
cries it louder, then the blood of Abel? And yet the Murderer has benefit of
sanctuary: More I add not; save this only, He loves not his own salvation,
that hates not the enemies of the grace of God.

VERSE. 15. Proceed we in the Text: Because the law works wratht for where no
Law is, there is no transgression.


Ergo, it frustrates the promise to all that cleave thereto for justification:
And this Antecedent has proof from another effect of the Law, betwixt which,
and wrath, the connection is inseparable, to wit, transgression; it causes
transgression; Ergo, wrath. This the context.



The effect of the Law is wrath; whether Gods, or man's? Man's, says Sasbout,
alleging to that purpose the judgment of Augustine: neither dissent some of
our own Divines. Illyricus.


And if any ask How? They answer, by urging things upon the conscience as
duties, from which our vicious nature is most abhorrent; as also, by showing
how odious all a man's best actions, yea his whole nature is; and adjudging him
to hell for his sins: against those acts of the Law, how does man's vicious and
proud nature storm? that not without cause have learned interpreters thus
expounded.

But fitlier to the Apostles purpose, it is expounded of the wrath of God, that
is, of the punishments which for transgression, God is in his wrath ready to
execute. Now if any demand, How the Law should have this effect? Not of it
self, as if it were originally destined to subject man to punishment; but by
accident, and occasionally only in respect of our disobedience; which since it
is by means of corrupt nature inevitable, as inevitably does the Law adjudge us
to punishment, as our vicious nature forces us to rebellion.

This is the sense of the first clause.

It also has its proof: The Law causes wrath, for it causes trangression,
betwixt which and Gods wrath the connection is inseparable: How, we shall hear
by and by; if we shall first view the manner of the Apostles reasoning. It is
thus, as most conceive, A contrario sensu: Where is no Law, there is no
transgression; therefore where the Law is there is transgression. But what if
we conceive the Apostle to reason a signis; Where is no Law, there is no
transgression; an apparent sign that is, that by means of the Law
transgression follows: take away the Law, there is no transgression;
therefore apparent, that by putting the Law we put transgression.

See we how; how comes it, that the Law draws with it so unavoidably
transgression? since it forbids, and threatens disobedience; enjoins and crowns
obedience? Answ. Not of it self; but by accident, through the corruption of
nature: ut supra.

In man corrupted, the Law has a double advantage to further transgression: 1.
Because by it corruption is provoked to be the more sinful; as in men
unregenerate, Romans 7.5, 13. 2. Through impotencie and weakness that remains in
nature even reformed, to perform that obedience which the Law requires, in that
manner it requires it; Romans 8.3.

Some other explanations might be annexed, as this; Every sin is therefore sin,
because it violates some Law; take away all Law, thou take away all sin; for
sin essentially presupposes some prescription of Law violated. Had not God by
his Commandment, forbidden Adam the eating of the fruit it had been no sin in
him to eat it: This is a truth, but not all t^^ Apostle here intends; whose
purpose is, to show, not s^ much the necessity of a Law to the being of sin; as
the necessary sequel and exsistence of sin in man since the fall, by occasion
of the Law.

Hence called the Ministry of condemnation, and death, 2 Cor. 3.7. and the very
strength and vigor of sin, 1 Cor. 15, 56. That not without cause, said Luther
though therefore traduced by Papists; the law always accuses, terrifieth,
condemns: The several branches will be evident if we shall clear the last
only; and show, how inevitably it draws after it transgression in all the
posterity of Adam: That mass, let us conceive, to admit this distinction; part
of it is merely natural, such only as it is derived from Adam; part
sanctified, and purged in a measure by the Holy Ghost: For that merely
natural, it is confessed by adversaries, it is so merely rebellious against
the law, that the more it is restrained, the more it rebels: things prohibited
therefore the more affected, because prohibited, confer, Romans 7. and 8. The
main question is, touching those of Adams posterity, that are by grace renewed;
whether in these also the law puts a necessity of transgressing? Now, howsoever
we acknowledge, that grace so far prevails against nature, that there is
something in every man regenerate, so far from fretting against the law, that
it finds a kind of complacentia, and delight in the laws prescripts Romans
7.22. Yet, 1. Neither are we so wholly purged by grace; but that there still
remains in us, part of that carnal wisdom, that is not nor can be subject to
the law, Romans 8.7. There still is a law in the members, rebelling against the
law of the mind Romans 7.23. And, 2. Though it were granted, we are wholly freed
from enmity to the law, yet are we not wholly delivered from frailty in
obedience; in which last respect at least, sinning even in men regenerate, is
occasioned by the law inevitably, in respect of the event: Let us yield then,
ex abuntdnti, that transgression is not in Gods Children caused, ex fremitu;
yet (I hope) it is occasioned, ex infirmitate, by frailty: And though Gods
Children sin not, out of fury; yet sin they out of impotency: Besides the texts
now alleged, compare we the perfection of the righteousness, which the law
requires, with the perfection of that holiness grace works; and we shall not
choose but acknowledge, that howsoever out of another principal; yet sin is by
the law occasioned infallably, in the Children of God so long as they live
here, in the spiritual warfare; see Romans 7.

For clearing of this point, since thereon turns the whole controversy: It
shall not be amiss to handle that controversy: Whether the righteousness
performed in the law to justification, fall within compass of our power to
perform, so long as we live in this world? Or, whether all transgression of the
law, may be, by any strength of grace here attained, avoided? In this question,
the opinions are three. First, That of Pelagians, condemned long since, to the
pit of hell: The law they say, is possible to nature; If a man would strive
with his natural abilities to the utmost, he might perfectly fulfill the law,
without any assistance of grace supernatural: And, the only reason, why men
fail in legal obedience, is, because they want will: Touching this, though I
refer the Reader to what was long ago written pithylie, and truly, by S.
Augustine, Hierome, and others: only remember we, what Paul, that had more then
nature, professes of himself; To will is present, but I find not power to
perform, Romans 7.18. He failed in obedience; not for that he wanted will, but
because he lacked strength: And least any should think it was his personal
weakness; he shows the same impotency to be in all Gods Children, even after
regeneration, Gal. 5.17.

S. Augustine, S. August. de peccat. merit. and Remiss. lib. 2. cap. 17.
ex abundanti, yields to Pelagius, that we may keep the law, si volumus; but
the Hypothesis, says he, is impossible; We cannot (will) to make good the
obedience of the law: His reasons are; because impediments unavoidable the will
has always clogging it, in this life; 1. Ignorance. 2. Infirmity: And
sometimes our wills are not moved to do what the law prescribes; quia latet
quod justum est; sometimes, quia minus delectat: From both these who can say,
he is, or can be free, during state of this life?

Second opinion is that of Papists; The Law is possible, yea easy, though not
to Nature, yet to Grace: and anathama to him, that shall say, the Commandments
of God are impossible to a man, in state of Grace.

The judgment of our Churches stands thus: obedience to the Law is thus
distinguished; there is an inchoate obedience, standing. 1. In love of the Law.
2. Desire. 3. Purpose. 4. Endeavor to obey. 5. Some measure of actual
performance. 6. Grief for imperfections: this is possible to every regenerate
child of God.

There is also perfect, and complete obedience, which answers exactly to the
rigor of the Law, for matter, manner, measure of performance: of this is the
question; and hereof teach we, that by no measure of grace here given, it can
possibly be attained.

See we therefore the terms. 1. What that obedience is, which the Law requires.
2. What measure of grace it is, that God, in this life, gives to his children.

The justice of the law, in Bernards terms, must thus be qualified. 1. It must
be Recta, according to rule, so that all that is prescribed, and only what is
prescribed, must be done. 2. It must be Pura, free from blemish in manner and
measure of performance. 3. Firma, steady for continuance, without any the least
intermission, and interruption: And this explanation has ground, Gal. 3.10.
Where, the law curses to hell every man that continues not in all things,
written in the book of the law to do them.

In Hieroms term, somewhat unusual, but significant, the law requires to
righteousness, Impeccantiam, that is, Freedom from all sin; not only that,
which he calls (...), Enormity, but (...), Infirmity; and that explanation has
ground, Romans 6.23. because the wages of every sin, more or less, is death.
According to the Apostles explication: The righteousness of the law must be 1.
Universal Gal. 3.10. so that no duty, nor branch of duty, in any Commandment,
may be omitted; No sin, nor degree of sin, against any precept, may be
incurred. 2. As the law is spiritual, Romans 7.14. so prescribes it spiritual
obedience; not only binding the outward man to good behavior; but reaching to
the very thoughts, and affections, and ordering them; so that, though it were
possible for a man, to omit no outward act of duty enjoined; to incur no
outward act of sin forbidden; yet evil purposes, desires, yea thoughts of evil
approved; yea, if they arise from that inward principle, Concupiscence,
unapproved, disable us from being justified by the Law: For, the tenor thereof
runs thus, Love the Lord with all thy soul, with all thy thought, etc. This
measure of obedience we teach, S. August. de peccat. merit. and Remiss. l. 2.
c. 6. etc.
not only as Augustine that it never yet fell into any man, in this life, nor,
in likelihood, shall be attained; but that it is impossible, to be reached
unto: That that term offend not, know we, that though all things are possible
unto God, nothing hard unto Him; yet that infinite, and boundless power of God
admits a double limit. 1. His nature; hence said the Apostle, God cannot lie,
and, it is impossible, that God should lie, Heb. 6.18. or deny himself, 2 Timothy
2.13. These, and the like defects being so repugnant to his nature, that if
they were incident into Him, he might cease to be God. 2. Besides his nature,
his will, and ordinance further restrains his power in respect of the
executions thereof; whereby it comes to pass, that of many things agreeing well
with his nature; yet, supposing his peremptory ordinance, and decree to the
contrary; we may say, They are impossible: For example, It was possible for God
to have saved his children, by some other means, then the death of his son;
but supposing his ordinance, determining this; we say, without blasphemy, it is
impossible, that any should be saved by any other mean, then the death of
Christ, Acts 4.12. So, though we confess, it had been possible for the Lord, to
have given his children Grace, fully proportionate to the obedience of the Law;
yet considering his Will to the contrary, we say, it is impossible, that by
measure of grace here given, to make good perfection of legal justice. That
measure Paul thus expresses; we have primitias, the first fruits, Romans 8.23.
and arrham spiritus, The earnest of the spirit only, 2 Cor. 1.22. A measure of
renovation that grows, 2 Cor. 4.16. Corruption still cleaving to the most
sanctified, still there is some of the old man to be put off, Ephesians. 4.22.
Corruption still to be mortified, Col. 3.5. In a word, Grace such, as that when
we have attained to the greatest measure appointed to this life, and stretched
our gracious abilities to the utmost, has need of mercy to cover
imperfections; and pardon, to clear from guilt contracted.

Let us now out of these grounds, assume; And first, out of Bernards
Requisites: Can any possibly say, His actions are all so regular, that in none
of them, there is want of that rectitude, required in the law? whose measure of
illumination is so great, as to comprehend that depth of righteousness
contained in the Law? Certainly David, a man of a Prophetical spirit, prays
for pardon of secret sins, Psalm. 19.12. and still finds need of further
Revelation to know the wondrous things of the Law, Psalm. 119.18. And Paul's
profession is, That we know in part, 1 Cor. 13.12.

But yield a man may know all enjoined, and do all he knows; can any say, His
performances are without blemish? so that no imperfection cleaves to any of his
actions? says Bernard, Nostra, si qua est, humilis justitia; Recta forsitan,
sed non Pura; Except, happily we are better then our fathers, whose humble
confession it was, that all their righteousnesses were as filthy clouts, Isa.
64.6. If any say, The Prophets so speaks in humility? Nay, says Bernard, Non
minus vere, quam humliter; in as much truth, as humility; say Pelagians, He
spoke as the mouth of the people, and as a member of the Body, wherein those
blemishes were: Hear then that great Daniel, S. August. de peccat. merit. and
remiss. lib. 2. cap. 10.
says Saint Austine, of whom said the Prophet, Art thou wiser then Daniel? He
professes to confess, as well his own, as the peoples sins, Dan. 9.8.

But suppose our performances may be thus universally regular, and free from
(blemish); is it, or can it be so (steady) in any, that it at no time admits
interruption? Hear James, In many things we sin all: and Solomon, There lives
not the man so just on earth, that does good, and sins not: and our Savior
taught not only the common rank of his children, but the Apostles also, to
pray daily, forgive us our sins: yea, say Papists, but he would be understood
of venial sins; and they, though they be praeter Legem, yet are not contra;
Apage! are they sins? then are they breaches of the Law, 1. Joh. 3.4. and so
impair that justice which the Law requires to justification: say Pelagians,
these Scriptures testify, De facto only; not De impossibilitate. Augustine
answers; It is a strange possibility, that never yet came into act, no not in
those whose measures of grace were greatest. Besides that, the Apostle tells us
of an (...); and by a reason irrefragable, shows not only that through
negligence we do not, but that through impotency we cannot do what we would:
Gal. 5.17. the Apostles requisite is, that our obedience be spiritual Romans
7.14. The second Commandment forbids, not only manual, but mental images or
similitudes of the Diety: We may not so much as think the Godhead like to
silver, Acts 17.29. Matthew. 5.28.
or gold, or any thing that either sense imagines, or reason conceives: and
our Savior tells us of adultery, that may be committed in the thought, and
desire, though the act of uncleanness follow not.

S. Hierome to this purpose, mentioning that of our Savior, Matthew. 15.19. out
of the heart proceed evil thoughts, etc. Procedat, says he, qui in cord suo
haec non esse testetur and plenam in corpore isto mortali justitiam confitebor.
Let me see the man that can say, he never feels these in his heart: I will then
say, there may be complete justice in this state of mortality. And could ever
any claim to himself perfect freedom from those inordinate motions of wrath,
grief, fear etc. of him that is such, I will say, says Hierome, Aut Deus est
aut saxum: I not so; but sure he is either an Angel, or a glorified Saint.

To these let be added that continual in-dwelling of original corruption in
men most sanctified, Romans 7.23, Gal. 5.17. empty the heart of all relics
thereof, then I will say, Perfection may be attained: yield that sentina cannot
be drawn dry, thou must needs yield pollution, and stench in thy best obedience.

Add moreover, the ingenuous confession of the Saints of God, and the recorded
examples of frailty in the strongest. Augustine has all in a short sum;
Quid excellentius in veteri populo sacerdotibus sanctis? and tamen bis
praecepit Deus sacrificium primitus pro suis offerre peccatis: Quid sanctius in
Novo populo Apostolis? and tamen praecepit bis Dominus in oratione dicere
Demitte nobis debita nostra, etc. The conclusion is this; Omnium igitur piorum
sub hoc onere corruptibilis carnis, and in istius vitae infirmitate gementium
spes una est, quod Advocatum habeamus apud Patrem, etc.

Thus far we have avowed the truth of this controversy, by grounds of
Scriptures, and Fathers. Whereto if any shall object, that Fathers deal against
Pelagians only? I answer that their grounds conclude as well Papists, as
Pelagians. As to their objections they are the same that of old were made by
Pelagians: as, 1. Christ says of his yoke, it is easy, Matthew. 11.30. S. John
that his Commandments are not grievous, 1. John 5.3. Answ. Says Hierome, Poyse
but a piece of the yoke, a little portion of the burden, and then tell me
whether it be of so easy carriage: He that takes not up his Cross, and
follows me, is not worthy of me, says our Savior, Matthew. 10.38. Crux Christi
facilis est; nudum post Christum ire, ludus est, jocus est; Christ's cross is
easy, to follow Christ stripped of all helps of this life, it is a matter of
sport, Hieron. advers. Pelag. lib. 2.
a very play-game. Thus S. Hierome Ironically. His answer is this; It is
certain they are called light, not simply; but in comparison to the yoke of the
Jews: something he aimed at. Thus we answer, The Commandments of God must be
two ways considered, 1. As propounded in the rigorous terms of the Law; so the
yoke is importable. 2. As tempered to our weakness in the Gospel; so
comparatively light; In respect, 1. of the assister, Gods Spirit: 2. of the
accepter, that is content to approve endeavors, Aug. Retract. lib. 1. cap. 19.
and to pardon omissions. Augustine, Omnia mandata facta deputantur, quando
quicquid non fit, ignoscitur.

Object. Instances we have many of such as have kept the Law, as of Zachary,
David, Job, etc. to whom the Scripture gives the title of Just men? Answ. Just
they are called, because absque vitio; free from notorious crimes; non quia
(...), void of all sin, even infirmities, Hierome. 2. Not simply just, but in
comparison to others of their times, August. de pecc. mer. and remiss. l. 2. c.
12 Ex hominum, qui sunt in terra, comparatione laudatur.
Augustine. 3. Just, in respect of their endeavor: for Zacharies foul
incredulity is recorded, and chastened; so is David's adultery, and murder; and
Jobs defects in that grace, wherein he was the greatest mirror.

Object. May do more then is commanded, as sell his possessions and give them
to the poor. Answ. Duties enjoined are of two sorts: 1. Some generally and
perpetually binding. 2. Some duties in casu; as leaving goods, life, etc. for
Christ's sake: which though, till God call to performance, they are not
necessary, to be done, yet stand they in force upon the conscience, by Gods
precept, Quod ad praeparationem animi; and in case the Lord call to actual
forsaking of goods, or life; it is so a duty, that the omission thereof makes
culpable of damnation, Matthew. 10.37.

Object. Impossibilia non ligant: No man is bound to an impossibility; yea, it
were not only vain to propound impossible precepts, but tyrannical in God the
Lawgiver, to exact obedience. Answ. Man is to be considered, 1. In pure nature.
2. In impure nature. 3. In nature purified. 4. In nature glorified. In nature
pure, before the fall, they were possible: In nature glorified, they shall be
possible: In nature merely impure, merely impossible: In nature purified,
partly possible: In perfection, impossible. Inst. Then they bind not? Answ. It
follows not: God made man righteous at the first, Eccles. 7.29. and has not
lost his right of exacting, because we are wilfully disabled to performance. In
a word they are impossible, not per se, but ex accidenti. Inst. However, yet
vainly enjoined? Answ. Nor that, says Augustine: August. de pec. mer. and
remiss. lib. 2. c. 16.
In contemptorum damnatione facit Deus quod justum est; in proficientium
mundatione, quod bonum est: and the Apostle sets down uses sufficient; as, 1.
To acquaint us with sin, Romans 3.20. 2. To drive us to Christ, Gal. 3.24. in
whom God has provided a remedy for our imperfections. Legatur Bernardus, Ser.
2. in vigil. Not. Dom. fol. 11. A, Propterea mandata sua.

Object. He that is born of God sins not, 1. John 3.9. Answ. And yet, says the
same Apostle, If we say, we have no sin, there is no truth in us, 1. Ioh.
1.8.10. Bern. sermon. 1. in Septuag.
Bernard thus interprets, He sins not, that is, non permanet in peccato, he
lies not impenitently in his sin. 2. Or thus, tantundem est, ac si non peccet,
pro eo (scilicet) quod non imputatur peccatum. 3. Augustine thus; We are all,
after regeneration, August. de pecc mer. and remiss. lib. 2. c. 7, and 8.
in part the children of the world, though in part also we be the sons of
God: and though per quod filii Dei sumus, per hoc non possumus peccare; yet,
per hoc, quod adhuc filii seculi sumus, per hoc peccare adhuc possumus. Other
Expositions there are many; the fittest these: He sins not, nor can sin, 1.
Namely unto death, 1. Joh. 5.18. 2. Not with full or whole consent, Romans 7.15.
Gal. 5.17. 3. Not customarily practicing known sins; or in the Apostles phrase,
not (walking) after the flesh, Romans 8.1.

The sum of all is this; That in respect of frailty of flesh, and small
measure of grace, in this life given, the righteousness of the Law is
impossible, the transgression of the law inevitable.

He goes away sorrowing, says the Text, and thereby bewrayes his proud
dissembling. Let the trial be far more reasonable unto our people; Leave but
profane pastimes, unlawful profits for his sake you love so well: this speech
is as harsh to our proud, dissembling, self-loving people.

To us all, Let me say as Paul, Gal. 4.21. You that will needs be under the
law, for justification, do ye not hear the law? you look for righteousness by
the law, it causes transgression; for salvation, it causes wrath: And is it
not strange, men acquainted with Scriptures, should cleave so close to the
justification of the Law. I had once to deal with a Papist, in this question,
and that of merit: Mentior, if he professed not; that except he thought, he
could merit righteousness and salvation by his works, he would never do any
good work: Miserable man! are there not motives strong enough to obedience,
except thou may thereby be justified? Is not that love of God, in sending
his Son to dye for thy sins, that he might make thee zealous of good works,
enforcement sufficient to all obedience, except thou may part stakes with
Christ, in the glory of thy salvation? Hear Paul, The love of Christ
constrains me to all faithfulness in my calling, 2 Cor. 5.14. 2. And is it
nothing that by this means, we make our calling and Election sure? 2 Pet. 1.10.
3. Nothing, that others by seeing their spotless conversation, are occasioned
to glorify God? Mat. 5.16. In a word, that nothing might be wanting, to
quicken our dullness; the Lord has been pleased by promise, to bind himself,
to recompense even of slenderest duties, tendered to him in sincerity, Mat.
10.41. A reward thou shall have accrewing, not from worth of thy works but from
grace of the promiser: Will not that satisfy? Not at all, except they may
merit Heaven; as if they should say, they had rather have no salvation, then be
beholden to Gods bounty for the bestowing: The Apostle methinks thunders
against such meritmongers, They are fallen from grace, and Christ shall profit
them nothing, Gal. 5.4.

Lastly, Hence learn to detest, as greatest enemies to thy salvation, all such
as teach to seek it, by the law: of such, says Paul, let them be Anathema;
Aut, utinam exscindantur, Gal. 5.12.

Of all Heretical, and false Teachers this last age has afforded; I know none
more pernicious then these two. 1. Libertines, that teach to neglect obedience,
as in every respect unnecessary. 2. Justitiaries, that press obedience, as
available to justification: The first sort are odious to all, except Epicures:
The latter, by how much the more strictly they urge obedience, and that so
fittingly to the humor of nature, by so much the more pernicious: As much
excludes from Heaven, the intention of meritting, by performing; as the neglect
of the Lawgivers authority, in omitting obedience: These are enemies to the
Dominion, The other, professed adversaries to the grace of God.

VERSE. 16, 17. Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace, to the end,
the promise might be sure to all the seed, not to that only, which is of the
Law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us
all, Verse. 17. As it is written, I have made thee a Father of many nations etc.


HItherto has been shown, that justification is not by works: Follows now
farther confirmation of the affirmitive part, that it is by faith. The
arguments here laid down are from the ends, and scope, which the Lord propounds
to himself, in our justification, and salvation. First, The glory of his grace.
Secondly, Our comfort. Thirdly, And both these are intended to all the seed.
All these several arguments are artifically linked together by the Apostle,
and as it were entwyned one in another, by mutual dependence: Let us view them
severally. It must be by faith that it may be by grace: If the inheritance be
ours by grace, and not by debt, then must it be by faith; but it is ours by
grace; Ergo. The force of the consequence we will show, after we have a little
explaned the text.

The verb, and suppositum are both wanting; It is by faith: What must be by
faith? Either the promise, or the inheritance: the inheritance rather, see
verse. 13.14. What is the verb to be supplied? whether it is promised, or, it is
attained? whether we will, the sense no whit varied by either.

The parcells here to be considered, are two.

First, That the inheritance is attained by grace.

Secondly, That except it be attained by faith, it cannot be ours by grace.

It were impertinent, perhaps, on this occasion, to run out into that question;
Whether by grace, we are here to understand the gifts of grace in us, or the
favor of God toward us?

The best Interpreters amongst the adversaries, oppose it to debitum; and
expound it liberality: Cajetan. Sasbout.
By grace then understand we, Gods free and undeserved favor, without any of
our works, or debt accrewing from God to us by merit, see verse. 4, and Romans
11.6.

latet anguis: Whether merely of grace, or mixtly of grace and merit? Who so is
conversant in their writings shall find them so sharing the matter, betwixt
grace and merit; that he would think the spirit of Pelagius to be revived in
them: He seeing how odious his barefaced heresy was, teaching that a man
without help of Gods grace, might live without sin, began to color it with
equivocating, and in terms, to join with orthodox teachers; and to give place
to the necessity of grace assisting, in the fulfilling of the Law: whereupon
said Austin; finding but the term of grace and mercy, by cunning concession,
inserted by Pelagius; Augustine. de nature. and great. cap. 11.
Laetitia repent perfusus sum, quod Dei gratiam non negaret, per quam solam
homo justificari potest.

But, what was this grace of God admitted by Pelagians? Nothing else but
freewill, which our nature receives from God, without any precedent merits; and
the law, or doctrine of God, Augustine. de Haeres. Haer. 88.
whereby we are taught what we should do, and in doing hope for: With like
cunning deal our adversaries: Justification and salvation, they are of grace;
But what is grace? the gift of charity in us: How of grace? because not without
it, but prinbipally and originally from it.

Let us enquire, whether this can be the sense of the Apostle, in ascribing the
inheritance unto Gods grace; or whether his purpose be, only to make grace a
sharer with our merits, and not rather so to give all to grace, that he
excludes all debitum, that may accrue to us, in respect of our works, See
Annotat. ad cap. 3.24.

Freely by grace, that is, merely by grace, and verse. 27. So that all boasting
in our selves may be excluded. In a word, See, 1. Our state before calling; it
is such, as wherein no merits, except (for the truth of the point,) merita mala
as Austin terms them, Augustine. de great. and lib Arbitr. cap. 5.
can have place; whence is that of Paul so often repeated; not of works of
righteousness, Tit. 3.5.2 Tim. 1.9. 2. After calling, works imperfect, Romans
7.3. The good that is in them, merely the work of Gods grace, whence that of
Austin; Si donasunt bona merita tua, non deus coronat merita tua, tanquam
merita tua, sed tanquam dona sua: Augustine. de great. and lib. Arbitr. cap. 78.
And again Si vita bona nostra nihil aliud est, quam dei gratia; Sine dubio,
and vita aeterna quae bonae vitae redditur, Dei gratia est; and ipsa enim
gratis datur, quia gratis data est illi cui datur. The labor would be long,
and endless almost, to point at all the dreams, and devices of the enemies of
Gods grace, with their cunning shifts, in that no less then Sacrilegious,
diverting the more part of the glory of man's salvation, from Gods grace to our
selves: Fitter occasion will hereafter offer it self: only I say as Augustine,
Augustine. tract. in Ioh. 3.
seeing God gives freely, let us love freely: quia gratis dedit, gratis ama;
noli ad praemium diligere deum.

The Second point follows; That it may be of grace, it must be of faith: This
way of justification, and no other preserves the glory of Gods grace entire:
Let us see how, say some, because grace is promised, and given only to the
believer; Paraeus ad loc.
that is a truth: But the Apostles purpose in this argument, is not to show the
necessity of faith, to the obtaining of grace; but rather to the maintaining of
the glory of Gods grace, in the matter of our righteousness, and salvation. Let
us enquire therefore, how this means of justification by faith stablisheth
grace; and how that other by works, either overthrows, or empairs it: May we
say as some of late, because faith is a free gift of God in us? The like may be
said of charity: But take faith correlatively, thou shall see easily, how this
means of justification alone, and no other, makes grace glorious: For, if all
our title to righteousness, and salvation accrue to us only, for the obedience
sake of Christ, apprehended by faith; who sees not how entirely the glory of
all, belongs to the grace of God?

But I wonder how Papists, with all their skill, can uphold the concurrence of
works, in procuring our title to righteousness, and salvation; and not
overthrow, or clip, at the least, the glory of Gods grace: Perhaps, because our
works proceed of grace: but, Dic sodes; are they merely of grace? or partly, of
the power of nature? Their common consent is, that though grace be a
principal, yet natural abilities have their partnership in every good work:
So much as they ascribe to nature, so much they derogate from the grace of God:
See Annotat. ad cap. 3. verse. 27. S. Bern Ser. 67. in Cantic.
28. Deest gratiae quicquid meritis deputas, as S. Bernard.

The Second argument follows; That the promise may be sure, and that to all
the seed:] Whether we make this a second argument, or a confirmation of the
minor, in the former, is not much material: If a new argument, thus is the
frame; If the promise must be sure, then must the inheritance be of faith: But
the promise must be sure; Ergo. Take it the other way; It is of grace: Why?
Because else the promise cannot be sure: I rather conceive it as a second
argument, though linked thus artificially with the former.

In it we have also two points.

First, That the promise is sure.

Secondly, That except the inheritance be of faith, the promise cannot be sure.

Sure] Whether in it self, in respect of certain accomplishment; or to us, in
respect of our apprehension, and undoubtfull persuasion: This later some insist
on, and thus give the sense; If the inheritance depend on any thing, except
faith and grace, we can never have any assurance to obtain the promise; but
must needs be filled with uncomfortable doubtings, and uncertain waverings: And
that is a truth, but not here directly taught; The Apostle speaking of the
certainty of the promise rather in it self; then to our apprehension and
persuasion; though by Consequence, this follows from the former.

Heb. 8.6. where the Apostle compares the two covenants together, and shows
that of grace to be preferred, especially in respect of the certainty of it,
and of our attainment of the blessings therein conveyed: And, view. 1. The
Mediator Christ, in whose blood it is ratified, Heb. 10.2. The removal of
impediments, by merciful pardon of sins, and imperfections, Heb. 8.3. The
certain donation of graces necessary to attainment, and our confirmation
therein; ibidem: the certainty of accomplishment is easily discerned.

The more solid is our Hope, and the more firm should be our faith, and
confidence, as the Apostle inferres, Heb. 10.23. So that neither violence of
afflictions, nor prevailing of heresies, nor conscience of our own weaknesses
and imperfections, to which pardon is promised, Heb. 8. nor any doubt of
perseverance in state of grace, should make us waver: 2 Timothy 2.19.
For he is faithful that has promised, not only salvation but pardon of
sins, donation of spirit, perseverance, and perfecting the work of grace to
the day of the Lord Jesus Christ: It is true, there are duties required of us,
to the obtaining of the promises; as faith, and perseverance in faith;
obedience, and perseverance in obedience; but that God that requires them, has
covenanted to work them, Jer. 31. and, 32.40.

The next point is, The necessity of faith, and the property it has peculiar
to it self, in making firm, after a sort, the promise: the truth of this point
will the better appear, if we shall consider a little the consent, and
difference of the two Covenants: Their agreement is this; in both is promised
Salvation, and Blessedness; of the Law it is said. That if a man do it, he
shall live thereby; as of faith, he that believes, shall be saved.

Their difference stands. 1. In the condition, the Law requiring perfect
obedience to be performed in our own persons; threatening a curse to every
transgression, Gal. 3.10. The other Covenant requiring faith of the Messiah,
and sincere endeavor of obedience. A second difference; the Law requires
perfect obedience; promises neither ability to perform it, nor pardon to any
imperfection: The Gospel so requires faith, that it promises to work it; so
new obedience, that withal, the Lord covenanteth to make us walk in his
statutes, Ezekiel. 36. Yea, and to pard on imperfections, Jer. 31. Heb. 8. And
besides, delivers all these promises, as ratified unto us, in the blood of
Christ.

These things thus briefly laid together show, how faith only makes the
promise sure; because, to the believer promise is made. 1. To remove
impediments, by pardon, and sanctification. 2. To enable to do, and to
persevere in doing whatsoever the Lord, in the Covenant of grace, requires to
salvation: Who can show like promises made to the Worker? that, not without
cause, said the Apostle. It must be of faith, that the promise may be (sure;)
it being impossible by the Law to obtain the promises.

The third Argument, from the extent of the promise, both in the making, and
accomplishment; It is made, and must be sure to (all) the seed, not only to
that of the Law, but to that also, which is of the faith of Abraham; therefore,
it must be of faith, and not of the Law: The minor has its proof, in the
latter end of the verse, and is also further confirmed and illustrated, verse.
17. Abraham is the father of all both Jews, and Gentiles, as it is written;
Therefore the promise must be sure to all the seed.

Paraeus.
as some think, described by properties; as I rather think, distributed into
kinds: They that think it described, imagine a trajection of the Article, and
thus render; To the whole seed which is not only of the Law, but also of the
faith of Abraham. But against this exposition are these reasons. 1. That by
this means the promise shall be here restrained to the Jewish seed only;
inasmuch as they only are that seed of the Law; whereas the Apostles purpose
is, to include the seed of the Gentiles, as appears by the confirmation; I have
made thee a father of many nations. And, 2. The Emphasis of the argument lying
in the universal particle is, by this means, much abated: besides that the
Trajection is harsh, and has no pregnant example in other Scripture, nor
warrant from circumstances of the place to approve it.

I rather conceive it, as a distribution of Abraham's seed, brought to
illustrate, and explain what the Apostle meant, By the whole seed; as if it had
been said, The seed of Abraham is of two sorts: One, part of the Law, as the
Jews; another, not of the Law, but of the Faith of Abraham, as the Gentiles: To
both these must the promise be sure; which cannot be, if the law be made the
condition, or mean of inheirtiance.

What is the ground of the Consequence? this as I think; because the Law was
given to the Jews only, and not to the Gentiles, Romans 9.4. and 2.14.

The question then here is, Whether the Law were not given to Gentiles, as well
as to Jews? Answ. Some here distinguish on this manner: The law of ordinances,
and ceremonial rites was given only to Jews: that that enjoins moral duties,
to Gentiles also; as who say, the Apostle spoke only of Ceremonies, and not
chiefly of the Law moral.

Was not then the Law moral given to the Gentiles? how then binds it us to
obedience? Answ. In the moral law, we must consider two things. 1. The
substance of doctrines, and prescriptions. 2. The accidents, and circumstances
of giving: For the substance of doctrine, it belongs to all, Jews, and
Gentiles, as having at first an impression in men's hearts, Genesis 2.
and being by immediate voice of God delivered to Adam: Touching accidents,
under which comes the delivery of it written, in two Tables, by the finger of
God in Sinai; so, not given to Gentiles, but to Jews only, no not to Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob; as Moses amplifies the Lords love to the people of his time,
Deuteronomy. 5.3. He made not this Covenant with our fathers but with us; The Negative
seems absolute; but is respective only to the manner of giving.

But howsoever the law was given to the Gentiles whether in writing, or
otherwise, the Apostles ground seems infirm? Answ. Supposing the Cavilsome
objection of Justitiaries, firm enough: For this very circumstance they urged
strangely, in the point of justification: that the law was given in writing to
the Jews, with promise of life to the observing thereof; which in their
judgment had been vain, except righteousness might be in part by the law?
according to which supposition, the Apostle in this place disputes; see Gal.
3.17.

Now, though I love not extravagances, yet let me have leave a little, upon
occasion of this question thus assoiled, to note the idle inference of some
Antisabbathists: Therefore, say they, The precept of Sabbath binds not the
Church of the Gentiles, because the Decalogue was given only to Jews? Answ.
And why infer they not the like for other Precepts, and so become absolute
Antinomi? Object. Forsooth, other precepts are revived, in Scriptures of the
new Testament, and their recital there gives them authority with us? Answ.
Belike then, no precept of the Decalogue binds futher, then it is recited in
the new Testament: It was wont to be taught, that the whole Decalogue stands in
force for ever unto our consciences, in respect of that congruence it has with
the Law eternal, and the impression it once had in our hearts, in Creation
some rudera whereof, in all the Commandments, are to be found in very Ethnicks.

But, to their argument. It is fallacious, and, except it be limited, untrue.
Take the Decalogue for the (substance) of precepts therein contained, so it is
given to Gentiles; respect the (circumstances) and accidents of giving, as the
writing in so many letters and syllables, etc. so the peculiar favor of Jews;
but so understood it affords no such conclusion. Leave we them, and see what
out of this argument we may observe.

Answ. If from that ground, we may infer a possibility to be justified by the
Law; from the self-same may we prove justification to be peculiar to the nation
of the Jews; for theirs only was the giving of the Law, Romans 9.4. But the
promise belongs to Gentiles, as well as to Jews: Ergo. Whereto then served the
reviving of the Law? Paul answers, Gal. 3.9. It was added because of
transgressions; not so much to restrain them by prescriptions and threats,
Theoph. ad Gal. 3.
as Chrysostom and Hierome, and after them Theophylact; Vt pro fraenis esset
lex illa Iudaeis, quae hos vel a mandatorum quorundam transgressu, etsi non
omnium prohiberet: but rather to detect and discover them, as Augustine centies
interprets; agreeably to the Apostle, Romans 3.20. and 5.20.

Here also occurs that observation before made, ad ver. 11. That the promise of
righteousness and salvation belongs to Gentiles believing, and not to Jews
only: because it has been often fore-treated, I will not long insist on it:
only, since the Apostle is pleased so often to inculcate it, and here to add
new confirmation; it shall not be amiss to explane his proofs, against the
foolish limitation and enclosure of Abraehams covenant made by Jews to
themselves. The argument of the Apostle is this, because Abraham is father of
us all both Gentiles and Jews believing: the covenant and promises therefore
belong to the whole seed and generation of believers. Because the antecedent
might be doubted, the Apostle first proves the universal paternity of Abraham,
and after illustrates it; the proof we have extant, Genesis 17.5. whwere the Lord,
to signify the point in hand, is pleased to alter the name of Abram to
Abraham; himself giving the Etymon and signification, Because a father of many
nations I have made thee.

How then say Jews, that the Covenant made with Abraham belongs to them only,
and think the fidelity of God must needs fall to the ground; if either they be
rejected, or Gentiles admitted to be the people of God. Certes, the name of
Abraham, considered with the signification pointed at, by the Imposer, might
well have taught them; that other nations believing, as well as Jews, might
call Abraham father; themselves being, though a populous nation, yet but one
nation; whereas Abraham has promise to be father of many. And of the argument
thus far. Follows now the illustration of Abraham's Universal Paternitie.

VERSE. 17. Before him, or (as some better render) like unto him, or, after the
example of him, whom he believed, even God who quickneth the dead and calls
those things which be not, as though they were.


THe Fatherhood of Abraham is here illustrated, Cajetan. Beza. Sasbout.
as some think by the quality, or manner of it; as I rather, with Chrysostom,
and Theophylact, by similitude. Those that follow the first sense, thus render
and interpret: Before God that is in the sight of God, or, in Gods esteem: the
sense is, Not so much by carnal generation, which has place with men; as by
spiritual cognation, wherein faith combines us, which God principally respects:
Chrysostom and Theophylact follow the other interpretation; (...) that is, ad
instar Dei, or as the word natively signifies, Ex adverso Dei, that is, after
the example of God: Exemplar enim ex adverso opponimus, says Sasbout. Abraham's
faith, that in respect thereof, he has made him like himself, a father, not of
this or that nation; but universally of all, amongst all nations, believing
after his example.

The scope of which particle is thus conceived by Theophylact: The Jews seemed
zealous of Abraham's honor and prerogatives, and thought them much impeached,
if his works were excluded from his justification, etc. but in the mean time,
denying his fatherhood to be the reward of believing, Theoph. ad loc.
and respective to faith in his posterity, they impaired much that honor, that
God vouchsafed him, in making him like himself, a father of many nations; which
honor he could not preserve, if it accrewed from the natural nexus, and tie
of blood, and not rather from the propinquity of faith.

The second point of illustration, is the means, whereby Abraham became father
of nations; and that is, by believing: like him whom he believed: take the
addition causally, and that faith of Abraham is explicated by the ground of it.
The power of God intimated in that description of God, by his powerful
effects, annexed; Which raises the dead etc.

Abraham by believing, or in respect of faith, became father of the nations, as
Theophylact pro praestita fide; for the faith which he showed, he received this
as a reward, to be father of Nations.

The inferences thence are these: First, That the Jews carnal descent from
Abraham, severed from faith, made them not the seed of Abraham; I mean that
seed, to which the promises of Abraham belonged: compare Ioh. 8.39, 40. and
Romans 9.7, 8. etc.

The second this; That Gentiles believing, are that seed of Abraham, though
they descended not out of his loins: Know ye, says the Apostle, That they
which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham; and again, They which
be of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham; Gal. 3.7, 9.

That this may the better appear; Let us consider the relation, wherein Abraham
and the Nations stand: The Relative, is Abraham; The Correlative, the Nations,
or his seed. What is here the foundation of the relation between them? Namely
faith; that is it, that makes Abraham Father of nations; that it therefore,
that makes the nations his children: Abraham by believing, became Father unto
the Nations; we therefore by believing, become Children of Abraham: Where faith
has place, there is place for this relation to Abraham; where that is wanting,
the relation cease; for that is in this relation, the fundamentum.

So that vainly do unbelieving Jews, lay claim to Abraham's Covenant, in
respect of the natural bond of blood between them: and on the other side;
soundly do Gentiles believing, make title to Abraham's Covenant, in respect of
the propinquity faith has founded betwixt them.

Abraham's faith; that was the power of God, which he considered in the
wonderful effects whereto it extends: And let us note it, as a pillar for
faith to rest on; the infinite, and unresistable power of the promiser: It it
well observed by Zanchius, that in great prudence, the penmen of the Apostles
creed, prefixed the article of Gods omnipotency, as a staff to support our
frail faith, when ever the strange and supernatural works of God, after
mentioned, should come into question: It is a point of faith, that God made all
things of nothing; consult with nature, she has this principle, ex nihilo
nihil fit; but hold this ground, God is omnipotent, the article is easily
credited: It is a point of faith, that the body dissolved into the first
principles shall live again; natural principles are against it: A privatione
ad habitum impossibilis est regressus; but consider, that the promisers power
can quicken the dead; the point easily admits credence.

Let us (frail creatures) when ever we feel faith wavering, as touching Gods
promise, cast our eyes to the transcendent power of the promiser; able, as Ephesians.
3.20.
Paul speaks, to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we can ask, or think:
To particularize a little, for help of the simple: We have a promise, that hell
gates, that is, Satan's policy, and power, Mat. 16.18.
shall not prevail against us, to overthrow our faith; Let a weak man consider
his natural constitution of flesh, and blood, the small measure of faith given
him, together with the might of spiritual enemies, principalities, and powers,
as Ephesians. 6.12. How impossible seems perseverance to a man exercised with
temptations? But if a man would remember the comfort, in like case ministered to
the Apostle, 2 Cor. 12.9. From the power of God, perfected in our weakness,
herein has the weakest amongst Gods little ones, cause of confidence, and
insulting over the malice of Satan: This wisdom learn we in our weakness.

One Caveat by the way must be remembered: That in reasoning from Gods power to
any event, for the stablishing of faith, there must be evidence also of Gods
(will,) to perform it: It has been in all ages, an usual sophisme of
Heretics, to fly from Scriptures to the power of God, for confirmation of
their absurdities.

Praxeas, Tertullian, advers. Prax.
in Tertullian, maintains this heresy, That God the Father is also the Son,
and was incarnate: How proves he it? Nihil Deo difficile, nothing is hard to
God; and those things that are impossible to men, are possible to God:
Therefore it was not hard for God, to make himself the same person, both Father
and Son: To whom Tertullian well answers, That this sentence is of undoubted
truth, Nothing at all is hard unto God; but yet, if we shall thus abruptly use
this sentence, in our presumptuous and ground less conceits we may feign any
thing of God, as if he had wrought it, because he had power to work it: Non
autem quia omnia potest facere, ideo credendum est illum fecisse etiam quod non
fecerit sed an fecerit requirendum: God could have furnished man with wings to
fly; he has done it to kites; follows it thence, that he has done it? yea,
or that ever it shall be done? In a word; Dei posse, velle est; and non posse,
nolle: Quod autem voluit, and potuit, and ostendit, etc. Psalm. 115.3.
Gods power must be considered with his will and significations thereof: what
he will do, he can do; what he has signified he will do, let us build upon it,
that it shall be effected; but where we want evidence of his will, we shall but
absurdly expect the event, in respect of his power: for he can do more then
ever shall come to pass.

With like frand do our Transubstantiatours, and their of spring Ubiquitaries,
delude the simple, persuading the real presence of Christ's body; some, in
many; some, in all places; by this as one argument, God is omnipotent: Quis hoc
nesciat? To vield, that it is possible for God to make real communication of
immensity (part of his incommunicable glory) to Christ's Humanity; and to grant,
that God can uphold a body in its essence, without that essential property of
a body, Circumscription: What Divinity teaches to believe (that) as actually
true, which God has power to effect, where is no evidence of his will, to work
it? Abraham rested on Gods power, and therewith supported his faith; but it was
for things whereof he had a promise; as after follows, (...). And of the
generalis thus far. Let us now view the words.

Who quickneth the dead, and calls things that be not, as though they were]
These effects subject to Gods power Abraham considered fittingly for support of
his faith, in the particular promised him.

Sasbout, Cajetan, and alii.
Many Interpreters take them particularly; and thus interpret: Who quickens
the dead] That is, that gives generative virtue, to men disabled for
generation, so putting (as it were) a new life into them. And calls the
things that are not as if they were] That is, that makes eximious, things
contemptible: the Gentiles that were no people, a people of God.

I rather think, they are to be taken in their largest sense, according to the
immediate purport of the words; though I confess, Abraham from them inferred
the particulars of his promise: and thus conceive Abraham to have reasoned, for
the establishing of his faith. His first conclusion is this; My body now as
dead, in respect of the act of generation, God will quicken, and make vigorous.
His argument; God by his power can quicken the dead; therefore, he can give
generative vigor to my dead body.

His second Conclusion: The seed promised, though it yet subsist not; yet shall
have being. His argument, God by his word makes things to be, that are not:
Ergo.

The question here moved by some seems to me impertinent: Whether it be Gods
property only to raise the dead? inasmuch as the Apostles purpose here is, not
to deliver these, as effects peculiar to Gods power; but rather to show, that
they are things subject to his power; Which was that, that Abraham considered,
for establishment of his faith. In the mean time, I join with them in the
conclusion; That these effects fall not under the compass of any created power:
for howsoever we read of some Prophets, and Apostles, that raised up the dead;
yet was not the virtue that quickened them inherent in them; they being but
instruments, if so much; rather signifiers of Gods will to effect such
miracles. In a word, in all miraculous effects, three sorts of causes must be
distinguished. 1. The principal efficient, that is, Gods power. 2. The
instrument, or mean cause; which sometimes are creatures, and their actions;
not so much elevated above their natural ability; as chosen of God to be
attended with his divine virtue. 3. The cause dispositive, which is fides
miraculosa. Gregor. Dial. lib. 2. cap. 30.
Gregory goes far, yet stays within these bounds; Sancti aliquando, ex
potestate miracula exhibent, aliquando and postulatione; utrolibet tamen modo.
Deus principaliter operatur, etc. says Thomas. If therefore at any time, this
effect be ascribed to Saints, it is to them only as instruments or means by
faith obtaining the miracle to be wrought, by the power of God.

Sive sit Elizaeus, sive ille magnus Elias, mortuorum utique suscitatores, ipsi
quidem suo non imperio sed ministerio for is exhibent nobis nova, and insueta;
Deus vero in ipsis manens ipse facit opera: Bern. super Cantic. Sermon. 13.

God quickneth the dead, and calls the things that be not, as if they were,
that is, by his word gives things being, that erst had no being in nature. When
there was no light, he only said, Let there be light, and there was light;
when no firmament, he called for a firmament, and there was a firmament. These
and the like effects of Gods power Abraham meditated; and thereby assured
himself of obtaining the promises, that had no help of performance in nature.

As comfortable and great promises God has made us, as he did to Abraham; as,
to raise our bodies out of the dust of the earth, and to make them like to the
glorious body of the Lord, his Son Christ, Phil. 3.21. Why should it seem
encredible to any, as Paul speaks, that the Lord should raise the dead? Acts
26.8. He could, at first, build the body in that excellent figure, out of the
dust; why not again repair the ruins death has wrought in it? He quickneth
the dead.

He has promised to Isa. 5 7.15.
revive the spirit of the humble, and to bring them up from the gates of hell:
Why are our souls so disquieted with our present apprehension of Gods wrath, as
if our state were remediless: He quickens the dead.

Promised to work faith knowledge, sanctification in the hearts of all, that
conscionably seek them in the means. What now, if we feel nothing but
infidelity? Let him but call for faith, by his word he works it in the most
incredulous: and as he caused the light to shine out of darkness, so can he
cause the light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, to shine in the hearts,
that yet sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death.

In these spiritual effects of his power instances we have daily. How many
dead in trespasses and sins, has he quickened by his spirit, to newness of
life? How many incredulous, yea opposites to faith, has he by his word,
brought to the obedience of the faith? His hand is not shortened; it is ever
true of him, He can quicken the dead; and still by his word give being to
things, that erst had no subsistence. This may serve to direct us, in use of
these mavelous effects of Gods power, for stablishing of faith. And of the
first member of this Chapter, thus far. The second follows, from the 18th
verse, to the 23.

VERSE. 18. Who against hope believed in hope; that he might become the father
of many nations: according to that which was spoken, so shall thy seed be.


IN this verse, and the four that follow, the Apostle digresseth a little from
his principal conclusion, to a commendation of Abraham's faith: The scope
whereof seems this: To prescribe us a form of Believing, and to direct us a
course for the establishing of our faith, required of us to justification; both
which we may learn from the example of Abraham, the father, and pattern of
Believers.

The specialties commendable in Abraham's faith expressed in this verse, are
two. 1. His courage. 2. His prudence in Believing. His courage, in that against
hope, he believed in hope.



Though he kill me, says Job, I will trust in him, Job 13.15.

To their practice, let us add the consideration of defects in this kind
severely punished; in Moses, Number. 11.13, 20, 21, 22. The incredulous Prince, 2
King. 7.1, 2, 17. Zachary, Luke 1.18, 20, 22.

In a word; In Believing there are four degrees, one more excellent then
another. 1. That which is exercised in sufficiency of means. 2. Where the means
are weak, and improportionate to the promise. 3. In the want of means. 4. Where
are means strongly opposing the accomplishment of the promise; this the highest
degree of faith, so commendable in Abraham.

Gal. 3.29. His children we are, if we walk in the steps of his faith, John
8.39. and labor therein to resemble: Let us be exhorted, not only in
believing, but in the very measure of faith, to hold correspondence; above
hope, yea, against hope, to believe in hope; above sense, yea against sense, to
believe what the Lord has promised.

There fall out times with Gods children, when if we shall make sense, or
natural causes the measure of faith; a thousand to one, but we are swallowed
up of despair: The Lord sometimes writes bitter things against us, and makes us
possess the sins of our youth; seems to surcharge Conscience with imputation
of those sins, the pardon whereof he commands us to believe: What shall a
poor soul do, in this case, to keep it self to the task of faith? Surely, what
thou feel God to impute, believe he will pardon to thy repentance, for so
runs the promise.

There are times, when we may feel decays of grace, and declinings in
obedience; yet, since it is his promise to give perseverence, without
interruption, believe thou shall stand, even while thou think, thou art
falling, etc.

Helps to stablish faith, in this kind, are these. 1. To rest on the naked
promise of God. 2. Consideration of the transcendency of Gods power, able to
work without, above, yea against nature, Ephesians. 3.20.
to do (as * Paul speaks) exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or
think. 3. Observation of the Lords dealing with others, or our selves,
accomplishing his promises, beyond all expectation.

The second commendable specialty in Abraham's faith here mentioned, is his
prudence in believing: according to that which was spoken.

Veritas prima; and the adaequatum objectum of faith, is the Word of God: But
that word, say they, is of two sorts: Scriptum, and Traditum; Written and
Traditionary: Both these together make us a perfect rule of faith; Scripture
without Tradition, is regula, but partialis. Bellarm. de verb. Dei non scripto
lib. 4. cap. 12.


That which is taught for Gods truth, in our Church, is this; That the
Scripture contains doctrine, and direction all-sufficient for faith and
practice, necessary to salvation; so that there is no more to be believed, or
done, upon pain of damnation, then what is contained in the written word of
God: For explanation; the contents of Scripture we conceive to be not only what
is here immediately, and in express terms taught; but all whatsoever may thence
be diduced, by just and necessary consequence; out of generals, causes,
equals, etc. Our arguments are these; 2 Timothy 3.14.15. The Scriptures, says
Paul to Timothy, are able to make thee wise to salvation; to make the man of
God perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work: Afford they us wisdom
sufficient to salvation? Bellarm. lib. 4. cap. 11. ubi supra.
therefore they contain doctrine sufficient for faith, and practice: And that
there may be no place for that idle evasion of our adversaries; limitting the
sufficiency of written doctrine, to what is necessary for Laiques: Both Timothy
was a Bishop, and him they they were able to make wise to salvation; and
generally, says the Apostle, they completely furnish the man of God, that is,
the Minister, to every good work of his calling.

Our Second argument is this; The written rule of practice, we are sure is
perfect; both for that the Lord gives so strait charge, to add nothing thereto,
Deuteronomy. 4.2. Prove. 30.6. Rev. 22.18. and because there cannot the duty be named,
which the Law of God prescribes not; nor the sin thought of, which it forbids
not: May we think to evade this testimony, with that Nicety of Bellarmine; add
not by depraving the sense; nay, as appears by the Lords own often reproof of
doctrins of men, in matter of his worship, Isai. 29.13. and his heavy judgments
on those that altered but circumstances of his prescripts, Levit. 10.
additions, as well by new prescripts, as by false glosses, are here forbidden.

May we think, the rule of faith is left more at random, and uncertain: How
then does Paul so resolutely denounce Anathema to him, that shall teach any
other thing, then what they taught, and the people received, Gal. 1.8. Perhaps,
they will say, under their doctrine of faith comes chiefly, what they delivered
in Preaching, by word of mouth. Irenaeus, advers. Haeres. lib. 3. cap. 1.
Answ. Hear Iraenaeus: Evangelium quidem tunc praeconiaverunt, postea vero per
dei voluntatem in in scripturis nobis tradiderunt fundamentum, and columnam
fidei nostrae futurum: yea, and for their own rule of preaching, it is Paul's
protestation; It was no other, then the Scriptures of Moses, and the Prophet,
Act. 26.22.

Lastly, If there be, and have been ever so necessary use of tradition, to
direct us in matter of faith, and practice; I wonder much, that our Savior,
and his Apostles, never in any point of faith, aledg tradition, but Scripture
for evidence: It is written in the Prophets, Psalms, Moses, etc. I find
often: It is come to us, by tradition from Elders; I find never for allegation
of Christ, or his Apostles.

To these Reasons, Let us add the consent of some Ancients: Tertullian. advers.
Hermogen.
Tertullian; Adoro scripturae plenitudinem, quae mihi and factorem manifestat,
and facta: In Evangelio vero amplius and Ministrum, atque arbitrum, rectoris
invenio sermonem: An autem de aliqua subjacenti materia facta sint omnia,
nusquam adhuc legi: Scriptum esse doceat Hermogenis officina; si non est
scriptum, timeat vae illud adjicientibus, aut detrahentibus destinatum.

Augustinus; Austust. de Doctr. Christia. lib. 2. cap. 9. Contra litem.
Petilian lib. 3. cap. 6.
In his quae aperte in scripturis posita sunt, inveniuntur illa omnia, quae
continent fidem, moresque vivendi.

Idem, sive de Christo, sive de ejus Ecclesia, sive de quacunque aliare, quae
pertinet ad fidem, vitamque nostram, non dicam, si nos, nequaquam comparandi
ei, qui dixit, licet si nos; sed omnio quod secutus adjecet, Si Angelus de
caelo vobis annuncianerit, paeterquam quod in scripturis legalibus, and
Evangelicis accepistis, Anathema sit: Heaps of such like testimonies of
Fathers, are every were occurrent amongst our Divines.

It were strange, that in their own School, this doctrine should be taught, yet
Scotus, and those that follow him, Scotus, and Nic. prolegom. in sent. q. 2.
maintain this position: That cognitio supernaturalis, necessaria viatori,
tradita est sufficienter in sacra Scriptura; Their Reasons; Sacra scriptura
tradit, quid sit finis hominis, puta visio, and fruitio dei; and determinat
quae sunt necessaria ad illum finem consequendum, scil. Mandata: declarat etiam
proprietates substantiarum separatarum, quantum est utile viatori nosse. Igitur.

Dico illa omnia scripta esse ab Apostolis, quae sunt omnibus necessaria.
Bellarm. de verbo dei non scripto, lib. 4. cap. 11.

Some chief of their arguments shall be propounded: If Scriptures be
sufficient, either the whole Canon of Scriptures jointly taken, or the several
parts: but neither the whole, because some parts are lost; nor the several
books. Ergo. Answers are given to the minor; that both the whole is sufficient,
and perfect, according to perfection requisite for the whole; and the parts
also perfect, according to perfection of parts: That some parts of the Canon
are lost they are not able to prove; their instances being all, either of
writings not canonical, as some of Solomon's Songs, and Proverbs; or else parts
of Scripture extant, though not under the names of those, to whom they are
assigned; as those ascribed to Nathan, Ahia, and Iddo: For fuller answer, Let
us consider that the question is, touching Scriptures now extant: Whether the
Scriptures we have, be a sufficient rule of faith and practice?

How impertinent is it, to tell us that part of the ancient Canon is lost;
which though it were yielded, impeacheth nothing of the truth of what we hold,
concerning full perfection of Scripture now extant, for the Church that now is,
and shall be to the end of the world.

Our conclusion is this; Since the days of Moses, there never was wanting to
the Church, a written Canon completely sufficient for the times of the Church;
sometimes it was more narrow; sometimes more large: ever perfect, secundum
tempus, as Lumbard distinguishes; never defective in any necessary point of
faith, or practice.

Their Second argument, is from induction of particulars, necessary to be
believed, or done, which yet are not contained in Scriptures; as that there are
some books of Divine inspiration; that these now bearing that credit are they,
that they have such Authors, as they pretend, etc. None whereof are taught in
Scripture: Answ. For this last, of the certainty of Penmen, whose names they
carry, this that we answer: First, That many of them give testimony to their
Authors. Secondly, That the ignorance of the Penmen, impeacheth nothing of the
fullness of necessary knowledge: It suffices, that we know, they have God for
their Author, though his secretary, or scribe be to us unknown.

As for their other particulars; That we know not the Scriptures to have
proceeded from God, Scotus, in Prolegom. ad Magistum.
but only by tradition: Hear their own Scotus, and his followers, convincing
all that question of the Heavenly Author of them, or any part of them, by
Scriptures themselves: His arguments these. 1. Prophetical prenunciations all
verified by events. 2. Perfect concord, and consent of scriptures. 3. Credit,
and candor of the penmen. 4, The reasonableness of the things therein
contained. 5. The unreasonableness of errors, and heresies in things, wherein
they oppose the doctrins of scripture. 6. The stableness of the Church,
professing doctrine of Scriptures, and punishments of those opposing it. 7.
Clarity of miracles, etc. These and the like has Scotus, as arguments, in his
judgment, sufficient to stop the mouths of any Atheist, or Heretic, that
shall question their inspiration from God.

And I will boldly say, The Scriptures carry as express characters of a divine
author; as the creatures, of the power, or wisdom of the Creator: The Doctrine
so holy, so majesticall, so divinely powerful to humble, to comfort, to
convert the soul, that it is as absurdly questioned, whether God be the
inspirer of Scripture, as he is the maker of Heaven, and Earth: There is no
creature so high, or low, but carries this inscription, Deus me fecit; No
Scripture, nor sentence of it, wherein a man, not blind, may not read this
Title, Deus me inspiravit.

It is vain to object, that sundry have questioned this principle; For so have
many done Gods Creation of the world: such quaere's arise out men's blindness to
which, the clearest things are questionable.

For other particulars, they are either expressly, or by implication, taught
in the Scripture, if necessary; or else, are such points of faith, or practice,
as in the conclusion are inquireable; For that of infants Baptism, Scripture
prescribes in Generals Principles equivalent; For that of the blessed Mary's
perpetual Virginity, post partum; a point that we piously believe, according
to some probabilities of Scripture; No matter of such weight, as that the
doubting, or denial thereof should shut us up under condemnation.

To leave these men, to their vain faith, and conversation, taught by their
fathers traditions, from which Christ with his blood has ransomed us, 1 Pet.
1.18. Let us in matter of faith learn Abraham's prudence, believe according to
that we know the Lord has spoken: And this rule let us remember; it is
partial infidelity to deny credence to any thing delivered in Scriptures;
Fancy, not Faith, to believe as Gods truth, what he has not in Scriptures
revealed unto us.

And here, I cannot but take notice of the folly of many amongst us, Wise, it
may be, in their generation, wiser in their own conceit; Their profession is
this, in the point of believing; They had rather believe too much, then too
little: and, in that sottish resolution, how many gross errors drink they in,
almost to the bane of their souls? It calls to mind that fable should I call it,
or story rather; of a woman in the days of Popish darkness, accused to her
Confessor, for denying Christ's carnal presence in the Sacrament; that being
charged by the Priest with that point of heresy, made answer for her self,
That she never made question of any such matter: And believe thou indeed,
says her Confessor, that Christ is there present, Flesh, Blood and Bone, as
he was born of the Virgin? Not He only, says the woman but his blessed
Mother also: O woman, replies this Seraphicall Doctor, great is thy faith: or
rather, O man, great is thy impious folly to approve as points of faith, such
sottish dreams: a just parallel for our men so superfluous, and supererogatory
in matter of believing.

But now proceed we in the Text.

VERSE. 19, 20, 21. And being not weak in faith, he considered not his own body
now dead, when he was about an hundred years old, neither yet the deadness of
Sarahs Womb.

He staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief: but was strong in
faith, giving glory to God:

And being fully persuaded, that what he had promised he was able also to
perform.


THe next commendable property of Abraham's faith, is the strength of it; set
out in an Antithesis, and heap of words; Not weak, but strong, and fully
assured. 2. By removing certain effects of weak faith from Abraham; as, 1.
Consideration, and looking down upon things that opposed the promise, and might
hinder faith. 2. Doubting, or debating of the promise. 3. By the means
supporting, and strengthening faith; the truth, and power of the promiser: This
is the sum; these the particulars, of this passage.



First, was Abraham's faith so perfect, that in it was no weakness, no
doubtfulness at all?

Answ. So Origin; so Papists often, in question, touching perfection of
righteousness: The truth is, great things are here given to Abraham, in this
point of believing. Now, whether this strength of faith should be conceived
comparatively; or limited to the particular Article now in hand, may be some
question. This once is evident in the story of Abraham; that however firm his
faith was, touching this particular, at some time; yet in other things,
Cajetan. ad loc.
he bewrayed some incredulity: and at other times, as Cajetane conjectures, was
not without some doubtfulness of this promise. Now, what, when it is yielded,
Abraham's faith was, at sometime, perfect, in respect of this particular
promised? The Law to justification requires an universal perfection of all
virtues as well as of faith; and in faith, perfection not only in respect of
some particulars; but of all truths revealed; and that, not at sometimes only,
but perpetually, without interruption, Gal. 3.10.

A second quaere: How says Paul, Abraham considered not his body dead, etc.
When as Moses brings him laughing at the promise, Genesis 17.17. and enquiring,
as it should seem, of the likelihood of it; Shall a child be born to him that
is an hundred years old? and shall Sarah that is ninty years old, bear?

Answ. Cajetane answers, That the quaeres of Abraham recorded by Moses, were
made, whiles yet the Revelation was not so clear unto him; and issued, not so
much from doubtfulness of the thing, as from desire to be informed, whether the
words bear the sense, that their sound purported; Paul's speech is to be
referred to the time, when the Revelation was complete, and the sense thereof
distinctly understood; confer, Genesis 17.17, 18.

What if we say, Paul's meaning is this? He considered not these impediments,
out of doubtfulness of the promise; but as admiring the power, and great grace
of the Promiser, intending him a favor, that must be accomplished, against the
course of nature: says Augustine, Riserat pater quando ei promissus est,
Augustine. de Civ. dei lib. 16. cap. 31. and super Genesis qu. 36.
admirans in gaudio; riserat and matter, quando iterum promissus est, dubitans
in gaudio. The same Augustine, to like purpose, enquires, Why the Lord reproves
Sarahs, and not Abraham's laughter? and thus answers; Quia illius risus
admirationis, and laetitiae fuit; Sarae autem dubitationis: So much force is
there in the (grounds) of our actions, to determine them, either to good, or
evil.

The third quaere; How says Paul of Abraham's body, it was dead, that is,
destitute of generative vigor; when as so many years after, he had many
children by Keturah, Genesis 25.1, August. qu. 35. super Genesis and de Civ. Dei,
lib. 16. c. 28. and contra Julian. Pelag. l. 3. c. 11
2. his second wife after Sarahs death? Answ. Augustine in many places
propounds this doubt, and assoyls it: The sum of his solution is this, First,
that it was dead in respect of Sarahs body decayed by age; not so in respect of
a younger woman, alleging to that purpose the judgment of Physicians.
Emortuum corpus non ita intelligendum est, ac si omnino nullam vim generandi
habere posset, si mulier juvenilis aetatis esset; sed secundum hoc emortuum, ut
etiam de provectioris aetatis muliere non posset. His second answer this: That
Abraham's body was dead, until such time as the Lord was pleased to put new
vigor into it; as he did for the begetting of Isaac; and that the same gift of
generation continued, after the death of Sarah, for begetting of other children
of Keturah: we have both in sum; Abraham's body was dead through age, ut ex
illius aetatis foemina gignere non valeret, qui tamen and ipse de adolescentula
valeret, sicut postea de Cethura valuit; quamvis and illic dici possit,
foecunditatis munus in eodem perseverasse, quod acceperat ut nasceretur Isaac.

Abraham, Matt. 14.31. O thou of little faith, says Christ to Peter: Matthew.
15.28. O woman, great is thy faith, says our Savior to the Canaanitish woman:
Christ found not so great faith in Israel, as in the Centurion; some in Israel,
not so great as in an alien.

The greatness or smalness of faith, is three ways considered: 1. In respect
of the things to be believed; so, it is more or less, according as things
believed are more or less in number. 2. According as things believed are more
or less distinctly conceived; the more implicit faith is, the less it is; the
more explicit, the greater. 3. According as the assent to things believed, is
more or less firm; more or less free from doubting: and in this last sense we
must conceive the Apostle; Abraham strong in faith, because he doubts not of
the promise.

Questions here offering themselves are these: First, whether weak faith have
in it justifying virtue? or, Whether a man weakly believing, have title to
justification, according to the Covenant? Answ. Weak faith, if true, gives
title to justification: our Savior speaking of faith miraculous, says; The
least degree of it, even the grain of mustard seed, Luke 17.6.
is available to miracles, even of greatest nature; it holds proportionally of
faith justifying, to the uses whereto it serves; the least measure is of force
to justification. 2. Add hereunto, that it is not the greatness of faith that
justifies: Faith as it is a virtue, or gift in us has not justifying virtue;
but as it apprehends the righteousness of Christ, whereby we are justified;
which apprehension may be as true in him, that believes weakly, as in him,
whose faith is more firm. 3. It is not to be forgotten, that as the defects of
other gifts, and parts of obedience are covered with Christ's perfection, so
that they hinder not justification; so is also the imperfection of faith.

Secondly, it may be demanded; How we may discern our faith to be true, while
it is weak? Answ. It is true, if 1. It strive against doubting, and
infidelity. 2. If it be careful to get strength by means that God has
sanctified, Luc. 17.5. Mar. 9.24. 3. If that weak persuasion we have of Gods
love, and pardon of our sins, breed care to purify our hearts, and to please
God, Act. 15.9,

The next point in the text is, the signs of strength in Abraham's faith, two
in number: First this, That he considered not the opposition in course of
nature made against the promise. 2. That he doubted not of the promise, nor
debated the matter, how it could have accomplishment. For the first, Whether we
consider it as a sign, or as a means of Abraham's firmness in believing, is not
much material. It is no small sign of stable faith, to pass by notice of
things that oppose Gods promise; and a great means to stablish faith, the
withdrawing of our minds from beholding the things, that may hinder the
accomplishment of Gods promise. This once is clear, that the first step to
incredulity, is the loosing of our thoughts, to rove toward things opposing
Gods promise; and demitting our minds to behold the impediments of second
causes: Thus fell Zachary incredulously to question the promise of God, whiles
he considered his own. and his wifes old age, disabled (as he thought) for
procreation, Luc. 1.18. Thus Sarah in like sort, Genesis 18.12. thus Moses, Number.
11.21. Thus Gods children, at this day; Their sins great, therefore not capable
of pardon: Corruptions strong and settled by evil custom, therefore not
possible to be mortified: Grace small, temptations many and violent; therefore
perseverance impossible.

Abraham; where we have Gods promise, seem it never so incredible, rest in it;
and that thou may so do, beware how thou give way to flesh and blood,
drawing down thy thoughts to the course of nature. To many, yea most, of the
promises made to us in Christ, gainsaying we shall find in nature; reasons of
believing, only in the power, truth, and goodness of God; and in the merit and
obedience of Christ, the ratifier of the promises 2. Cor. 1.20.

The second sign of Abraham's strength in faith is, That he doubted not of the
promise; where also the general cause of doubting is expressed, that is,
unbelief. Touching the sense see the former explanation.

The points we have here observable: 1. A difference betwixt faithlesness and
doubtfulness; such as is betwixt the Cause and the Effect: Not every one that
doubts, is faithless, though doubting argue some measure of unbelief: A man
merely faithless denies all assent to truth propounded; in doubtfulness is some
assent, though not without fear, that the contrary may be true.

I observe it the rather, respecting the weakness of some amongst Gods
Children, that perplexed with doubtings pass censure of mere faithlesness upon
themselves: Says our Savior to Peter doubting, Mat. 14.31.
oh thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt? Doubtings argues weakness
of faith, not a nullity of believing.

A Second point observable is the fountain of doubtfulness, and that is
unbelief; doubting is a fruit of unbelief; so far as we are doubtful, so far
are we faithless: from faith proceeds nothing but certainty; wavering therefore
issues from want of faith.

If any demand, whether such as doubt may be presumed to have faith? Answ.
Doubtfulness, though it agree not to the nature of faith, yet may meet with
faith in the same subject. Why not, as well as other corruption with grace?
Flesh with spirit, knowledge with ignorance, rebellion with obedience
hard-heartedness, with remorsefulness, etc. So has God tempted all gifts of
the spirit in us, that their contraries are abated, not abolished: Whence issue
in Gods Children acts not of grace only, but of corruption also; yea, in the
same act of Gods Saints, a spice of corruption, as well as a relish of grace,
see Romans 7.23. Gal. 5.17. And, as the argument is ill, there is (some)
rebellion, therefore (no) inclination to obedience; some corruption, therefore
no grace: so as ill follows it; there is some doubtfulnes, therefore no faith:
But, though this be true, yet doubtfulness has no other fountain, then
unbelief.

And it serves, first, to show the vain contentment, and self-pleasing, many
through misprision, conceive from their doubtings; even hence concluding the
sincerity of faith, from the sense of doubtings.

Their error I would gladly reform, and it springs from hence: We say, truly
it is presumption, not faith, that is never encountered with doubtings; and they
have no faith at all, that never had conflict with infidelity: though this be
true, yet in doubtfulness simply none has comfort because it is a fruit of
infidelity. The sense of unbelief is occasionally comfortably; and striving
against doubting; is a sign of faith; in this thou have no comfort, that thou
doubtest; but this is the comfort, that thou see thine unbelief, bewailest
it, and strivest against it, Mar. 9.24.

Secondly, It serves to admonish us, to strive against doubtings, and to pray
with the Disciples, Lord help our unbelief, Luke 17.6. The root is bitter, out
of which it grows; the vice, most dishonorable to God, most discomfortable to
our selves, unbelief. 2. This banes our prayers, and makes them return empty
from our God, Iam. 1.7.3. Breeds wavering in Christian profession, and
practice. verse. 8.4. In a word, makes all duties flow coldly from us, whilst
we question Gods power, or will, to reward them. 5. Dishonours the promiser, by
questioning his ability, or readiness to perform what he has promised: And,
that is it, which in the contrary comes next to be treated.

From the signs of strength in Abraham's faith; the Apostle passes to the
effect thereof, He gave glory to God, by such his believing.

Giving glory to God] We may not so conceive, as if any real access of glory
came to God, by Abraham's believing; he is for gloriousness (...); and no real
addition, or diminution comes to his glory from the creatures of himself, and
in himself he has all perfection of glory; before the worlds were; his wisdom
and power, the truth were in him, in the same infinite measure, as now by his
works he procures not glory; but either manifests, or communicates it to his
Creatures: But we are said to give him glory, in way, either of
acknowledgement, or publication: so Abraham, by believing, gave glory to God,
inasmuch as thereby he acknowledged the power, and truth of the Promiser.

The point to be observed, is; How glorious a thing it is to God, firmly to
believe, and rest upon his word: I know not, whether by any one Duty, God reap
more honor, then from this of believing; His power, his truth, his goodness,
his mercy. Attributes that the Lord counts most gloririous to himself, and
desires ratherest to be acknowledged amongst men, by believing we acknowledge:
Yea, if there be any other office, and duty, whereby Gods glory is published,
and occasionally acknowledged by others, from faith it issues; Profession,
Patience, Love, Mercy, or if there be any other virtue, by exercise whereof men
are excited to glorify God; From Faith they all flow, as from their fountain:
And I marvel not at the Lords so sore indignation against Moses his friend,
for not sanctifying him, by believing; read Deuteronomy. 32.51. Number. 20.12. and,
27.14. and, 11.21, 22, 23. a greater dishonor he could scarcely have done to
the majesty of God: Faith thinks highly of God, Incredulity abaseth him.

By this we may take occasion to judge of that doctrine of Doubting so much
commended by adversaries to Gods people, as more honorable unto God, then is
ours of assurance: That we may not seem to wrong them, let us understand, that
General faith they allow to be undoubtfull; Faith special they make the
Lutherans dream, having no ground at all in the word of God: their meaning is,
that what is in general taught, touching the power, and truth of God, in
fulfilling his promises, must and may be believed with undoubtfull faith; For
our particular, to believe, that to (us) he will give Remission of sins,
perseverance, and life eternal; they teach the performance to be to the
ordinary rate of Gods children, impossible, and groundless; the attempt
arrogant and presumptuous: Hope it we may out of a probable conjecture; believe
it we may not, as out of infallible evidence: Hence are those often
commendations given to a course holden betwixt doubtful Hope, and slavish,
Fear, in our passage toward Gods kingdom. Where, First, I demand.; Whether
there may not, or ought to be special Faith of Gods Power? my meaning is,
whether a man be not bound to believe, that God can pardon his personal
sins, and give him life eternal? and whether the doubting thereof, in
respect of our Persons, be not censurable of unbelief? It is truly said, Cain
sinned more, by despairing of Gods mercy, and denying his power to forgive his
sin, then in embruing his hands in his brothers blood, special Faith then
there may, and ought to be touching Gods power to perform his promise. Let us
see, whether like faith ought not to be concerning Gods truth, and Will to
perform it. 1. Commandment is given to pray for pardon of our own sins, to
pray for perseverance, and life eternal; and a requisite condition in
available prayer, to believe, not only that God can, but that he will give
what we pray for; see Mark 11.23. Matthew. 21.21. Jam. 1.6, 7. How then is it a
point of arrogance, to endeavor special faith? 2. Besides this, What
dishonor is this to the spirit of God, not to believe his testimony given in
our hearts, Romans Bern. de Annunciat. Ser. 1. Augustine. Mannal. c. 24.
8.16. shall we say, It is of Generals only? Hear Bernard; Si credis peccata
tua non posse deleri, nisi ab eo cui soli peccasti, hene facis: sed add adhuc,
ut and hoc credas, quia per ipsum (tibi) peccata donantur; hoc est Testimonium
quod perhibet in cord nostro Spiritus Sanctus, dicens; Dimissa sunt tibi
peccata tua: More I add not, upon this occasion; only I say, If to rest on
Gods word be a thing so Honorable to the Promiser; to doubt of his promise, is
to derogate from his glory: whether the doubt be of his Power, or of his Will;
of the General, or for our own Particular.

Let all Gods children, to whom God has given repentance, take notice of their
doubtings, as things dishonorable to God, and derogatory from the glory of his
power, and truth, and mercy: What, when God proclaims pardon even to bloody
sins repented. Isa. 1.18. shall we question, whether in mercy he can or will
forgive the sins we have forsaken? when he has ratified all his promises in
the blood of his Son, 2 Cor. 1.20. shall we question, whether he mean sooth,
in promising his children pardon, protection, perseverance, or life eternal?
God forbid! I say not, we can at all times, free our selves of doubtings: only
I advise to take notice of them, as of sins, not of lightest nature;
detracting so much from the glory of the power, or truth, or goodness of the
promiser. It follows now in the Text.

And being fully assured, or perswaded] The strength of Abraham's faith the
Apostle has before declared, by removing from him the effects, and signs of
weakness in believing; the same he here shows positively, setting down the
property, and nature of faith in her strength, and ascribing it to Abraham.

In the words are two things. 1. The measure of Abraham's persuasion; He was
fully assured. 2. The matter subject of his persuasion; or, the Proposition to
which Abraham thus fully assented; That what God had promised, he was able to
perform: where we may also conceive to be employed the grounds of Abraham's so
firm believing. The promise, and power of God.

Beza. Paraeus ad loc. Calvin. Instit.
and perfection has firmness, yea fullness of assurance: others otherwise
conceive the note, and thus collect, That fullness of persuasion is of the
nature, and essence of Faith: That none of Gods children err to their
discomfort, thinking they have no truth of believing, because they want fullness
of persuasion thus much understand: That in exact defining, the custom is, to
consider virtues, etc. Abstractly from their subjects. 2. In such abstraction,
to express their nature in terms, importing their greatest excellency, and
perfection. 3. Virtues moral, and Theological they describe, not as they are
in our practice, but as they ought to be, by Gods prescript: What now, if faith
in (us) be doubtful? yet in it self, and according to its own nature, it is a
full persuasion? What, though in the disposition, and beginnings it be
wavering? yet in the excellency, and perfection it is of infallible certainty:
What if our practice of faith be weak? yet God requires perfection of it, and
our striving must be to perfection prescribed.

Augustine. Epist. 29. ad Hieron.
for that which Augustine says of charity, is as true of faith; profecto illud
quod minus est quam debt, ex vitio est: yet thus much withal, Let us not so
far deject our selves, as to think we have no truth of faith, because we want
perfection and fullness of assurance; yet may faith be in truth where that
measure is not attained: See Annot. ad verse. 20. as the truth of humane nature
in an infant, wanting the strength of grown men.

The matter of Abraham's persuasion follows: That what he had promised, he was
able also to perform:] The points observable are, 1. That faith even justifying
is an assent rather then affiance; having for his object terminum complexum;
whereof see Annot. ad verse. 3.

2. Take notice of two special grounds for faith to rest on; the promise, and
power of God; both jointly considered establish faith; sever either from other,
thou make faith either fantastical or wavering. Hereof see Annot. ad ver.
17.

VERSE. 22. And therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness.


THe fruit of Abraham's faith is here expressed that is his justification: The
depravations of this Scripture by Adversaries are many. Let us briefly take
view of them: The first is from the illation; Therefore it was imputed, etc.
Hence they collect, that faith avails to justification virtuously, and by way
of merit: Man is justified by faith, not because it apprehends the promise but
because it obteins remission of sins, and suo quodam modo etiam mereatur: how
infer they the conclusion out of this Scripture? The Apostle in this place,
says Bellarmine, Bellar. de just. lib. 1. cap. 17.
sets down the cause why Abraham's faith was reputed justice, to wit, because by
believing, he gave glory to God; therefore for the merit of that faith, he
justified Abraham.

Where, first, let us weigh how they utterly cross the intention of the
Apostle in his whole discourse; which is to exclude all merits of men from
justification: can we imagine he excludes the merit of other works, to
substitute the merit of faith? 2. Besides that, it is easily observable, that
the Apostle maintains a continual opposition betwixt faith and merit; as ver.
4.

To their argument thus we answer; That the Apostles illation indeed implies a
sequel of justification, upon the performance of faith; yet none such as is
caused by the merit, and excellency of the gifs or work of faith, above other
works: and this is that deceives them; that they can conceive no connection
betwixt our offices, and Gods benefits, but what the worth and merit of our
performances causes.

Know we therefore, 1. That there is an infallible connection betwixt faith and
justification, so that every one believing, is without faith justified. But 2.
If the reason of this connection be demanded, it is apparently Gods covenant and
promise; therefore shall every believer receive remission of sins; because so
runs the promise in the covenant of grace, Believe, and thy sins shall be
forgiven: August. de verb. Apost. Sermon. 16.
Augustines speech for the general, let be remembered; Debtor factus est Deus,
non aliquid a nobis accipiendo, sed quod ei placuit promittendo: Abraham
believed, and was therefore justified: the cause if we seek, is the promise of
God, not the worth of his faith; which 1. Is a duty. 2. Gods gift. 3. In us
imperfect.

And if Abraham's faith were the meritorious cause of his justification; I
demand, whether as faith, or as such faith? that is, whether in respect that he
believed; or in respect that he believed in this full measure, was he
justified? If in respect of his measure, then methinks it will follow, that
only such measure of faith suffices to justification; and so the disciples of
Christ so doubtful and wavering in many main articles till after Christ's
ascension, must be reputed, for that time, unjustified: if faith simply, in
what measure soever, then can it not be meritorious; since in the beginnings, it
is so full of imperfection: Thus I conclude. Faith is an antecedent, no cause
properly of justification; justification a consequent of believing; no effect
issuing out of the virtue, and merit of faith; Trelcat. Instit. de justific.
the particle ((...) therefore) notes not the cause of the consequent, but of
the sequel, or consequence, says a learned Divine.

Their second collection is this; Rhemens. ad loc.
That faith justifying is a general faith, whereby we assent to the truth of
Gods speeches in general, Bellarm. de justif. lib. 1. cap. 11.
and no such special faith or affiance, as Protestants require to
justification. Their reason: The faith whereby Abraham was justified, was no
other then this, A general persuasion of Gods faithfulness and power at large.
Ergo. Answ. The question has been largely handled, ad verse. 3. whither I refer
the Reader.

To their argument thus I answer; their antecedent is untrue: Abraham's faith
was not of Gods truth and power in general only; but of both applied to the
particular promised. From these generals he concluded the particular touching
the seed, in whom all nations should be blessed. In his believing, and the
matter of it, we must conceive something propounded, and considered as a
conclusion; something as an argument, or premises inferring the conclusion; to
both which Abraham assented: To the conclusion, by virtue of the premises; The
conclusion was particular, I shall have a seed, in whom all nations, and my
self also shall be blessed. The premises these; God that has promised is
faithful and able to give it. In respect of the premises, his faith is
general: In respect of the conclusion, particular, as we see.

In like sort, we conceive the faith of every justified man to proceed; from
generals to their own particular, and to the particular, by virtue of the
generals: Assent they yield to generals, but with reference still to
particulars. For example; That which for comfort of conscience cast down by the
Law, they believe, is this particular conclusion; My sins are, or shall be
forgiven me: How come they to believe this particular? Answ. By belief of
generals: The sins of all that believe in Christ, are for Christ's sake forgiven
according to Gods promises in the Evangelical Covenant; therefore my sins are
forgiven me, since I have received by grace to rest on Christ, for the pardon
of my sins: so is faith justifying, General in respect of the premises,
Particular in respect of the conclusion.

Their third deduction: Faith concurrs to justification, not as an instrument,
but as the formal cause of our righteousness; For, Abraham's faith was imputed
justice, etc. Bellarm. de justif. l. 1. c. 2.
Ipsa fides censetur esse justitia? Answ. Whether whole justice or justice in
part? They answer, justice in part; for, it is only Initium justitiae,
according to their conceit: The sense then must be this, absurdly: Faith is
counted justice, that is, the beginning of justice: And Abraham's faith must be
his justice, in part only; whereas the Apostle ascribes to Abraham whole
justification in respect of his faith; or else, forgets the state of the
question. For this Scripture, the sense is this; Abraham's faith was imputed to
righteousness, that is, set on his score, or taken notice of so far, that the
Lord in respect of it, allowed him the esteem of righteousness; See supra, ad
verse. 3, 4, 5.

The substance of Doctrine conceived in this verse, has been already handled,
ad verse. 3.

Pass we from it therefore, to the third member of the Chapter; the applying of
all that has been said, of Abraham's justification to us.

VERSE. 23, 24, 25. Now, it was not written for his sake alone, that it was
imputed to him.

But for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him, that
raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead.

Who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our justification.


THe passage to this last member, we may thus conceive: The Apostle supposes
some weakling thus to enquire: It is true, Theophylact. ad loc. quid nostra
interest.
thou have taught of Abraham that his faith was to him imputed to
righteousness; But what is that to us? Answ. It was not written for him only,
as matter of his glory, and privilege; but for us also, for our profit, and
comfort.

The points of the text are three.

First, The use and comfort arising to us, from the records of Abraham's
justification.

Secondly, The condition required of us, to the end we may share with Abraham,
in the blessing of justification.

Thirdly, The Reason brought to assure us of like favor, in like faith, etc.
for better confirming the comfort unto us.

It was not written for him only, etc. but for us also. Where first observe we,
The method of conversing in the histories of the Saints; let it still be with
reference to our selves, and our use, They were written for us; see Romans 15.4.
Heb. 11. and 12. Their favors, for our comfort; their chastisements, for our
terror; their virtues, to our patterns; their falls, for our caution.

And it is idle to conceit them, as encomiasticall narrations of their glory
only; Gods Spirit intended their records to our benefit.

A Second general here observable, is, That Gods merciful proceedings with
his children are exemplary; he justified Abraham believing, he shall justify
us also, performing like faith: He pardons Paul repenting his blasphemies,
and made him a pattern to all that shall believe in him, to eternal life, 1 Timothy 1.16. He saved Noah from the deluge; delivered Lot from the fire of
Sodom: Peter's inference, from these particulars, is this general; God knows
to deliver his, out of temptation, 2 Pet. 2.9.

It is therefore a discomfortable misprision of Gods Children in temptations,
to conceive Gods favor, as the privileges of some eminent amongst his Saints,
and their great weakness, to study differences, betwixt themselves, and others,
in points of necessary comforts: For, to yield that there were, that had their
special prerogatives in some particulars; as Prophets to be taught by dreams,
and visions, and immediate inspirations, etc. Yet in matter generally necessary
for comfort of conscience, and eternal salvation, what was vouchsafed one, may
be expected of all. 1. The Covenant is made with all, without difference, with
the least, as well as with the greatest, Ier. 32.40. 2. The mediation of Christ
available for all 1 Timothy 2.4. of all sorts, sexes, nations, and ranks of men:
God, is he the God of Abraham only? nay, even of his seed also: Christ, is he
the Mediator for Apostles only? nay, even for all, that the Lord has given
him out of the world, Ioh. 17.9. Their is neither male, nor female bond nor
free, weak, nor strong, but all are one in Christ Jesus: The same blood of
Christ redeemed all; the same love of God embraced all; the same spirit seals
all, to the day of redemption; the impression in some is more evident, then in
others; the image all one, wherewith all are stamped and thereby sealed unto
the day of redemption: The only thing that concerns us, is, to provide we
resemble in our behavior; the Lord we shall find impartial in his favors,
if we be not dissonant in our demeanure; and that is the next thing the text
leads unto: To us it shall be imputed, as to Abraham, believing as Abraham, in
him that raised up Jesus from the dead.

Abraham? believe as Abraham; pardoned as Paul? repent as Paul; delivered as
Lot? be righteous as Lot: The same God is a like to all in his blessings, that
are alike to him, in their obedience.

There is a generation of men, enviously emulous of the privileges of Gods
Children, dissolutely careless of their behavior: Let my soul dye the death of
the righteous, says Balaam; but the hellish wretch cares not to live the life
of the righteous: Bernard. in Psalm. qui Habitat. Ser. 7.
life of the righteous: Tantus est pietatis fructus, (says Bernard) tanta
justitiae merces, ut ne ab ipsis quidem non desiderari queat impiis, and
injustis. I would the conditions might seem as reasonable, as the reward is
glorious: But the complaint of that Father, who sees it not fitting the times?
quam pauci post te, o domine Jesus, ire volunt, cum tamen ad te pervenire Nemo
sit, qui nolit: Lord Jesu; How few are they, that are willing to go after thee,
when as yet, there is no man but desires to come unto thee; as knowing, that at
thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore: Et propterea volunt omnes te
frui at non ita and imitari; conregnare cupiunt, sed non compati: Hence is it,
that all men would enjoy thee, but they like not so well to resemble thee; fain
they would reign with thee, loath they are to suffer with thee: Et mox mortem
spiritualium optant sibi etiam carnales, quorum tamen vitam abhorrent:
Brethren, like rewards, require like labors; like favors, like duties: They
fail not of Abraham's blessing, that follow Abraham's faith; and let them never
expect his comforts, that refuse to resemble his virtues.

That for the General.

View we now the Words, wherein are two things.

First, The duty it self required of us, to the end we may share with Abraham,
in the blessing of justification, believing in God.

Secondly, The object thereof, God set out here by a periphrasis, who raised up
Jesus from the dead.

Believing in God] The words thought not delivered in that form, yet import the
condition required of us to justification, and are therefore well rendered,
according to the sense, by some translatours; If we believe, or, so that we
believe.

Some here conceive the Apostle to deliver us, the nature of justifying faith;
and to resolve us, that it is rather an affiance, or putting trust in God, then
an assent, or giving credit to the truth of his promise. The question has been
largely discussed, ad verse. 3. Whether I remit the Reader.

We may better hence collect the necessity, of putting trust in God for
righteousness to justification, then a description of the faith that
justifies: And that is it the Apostle directly teaches; that to
justification, is necessary a relying upon God, through Christ, and putting
confidence in him, for justification; and withal, the infallible sequel of
justification, upon our confidence, placed in God for that blessing.

As touching the nature of faith justifying, the Apostle intends not here to
teach us; yet shall it not be amiss, on this occasion, to propound some
arguments brought for that conclusion; as I heard them lately in conference
with a friend, reverend for learning, and piety: Mr. J.D.
His judgment was, that faith justifying was rather an affiance, and resting on
Christ for righteousness, then a persuasion of Gods love in Christ, or an
assent to the promises of the Gospel: His arguments these. First, Faith that
justifies, (be it what it will be) must needs go before justification it self;
so does affiance, so not particular faith: For it must first be true, that God
justifies me, before I can believe it; and in order of nature, there is truth
in the proposition, before the assent is given to the truth of it. Answ. The
propositions of the Gospel we may conceive, to offer themselves to our mind,
either in terms of the future tense; or, sub verbis de praesenti, or
praeterito: As thus; God (will) pardon my sins, and accept me to his favor for
Christ; or thus, God (has) pardoned my sins, and does accept me as righteous
in Christ; accordingly, the assent thereto, is either as to a thing that shall
be, or as to a thing already done: In the first obtaining of justification, the
assent of faith is to the proposition, De futuro; and that we are sure had
actual truth from everlasting, concerning all those that shall be heirs of
salvation: The assent to the proposition, de praesenti, or praeterito, is, in
order of nature, after justification: In time, for all that, they are simul;
the proposition, de futuro, is in nature before it: so soon as I believe that
God (will) pardon, he pardons: Before I believe that he (has) pardoned, he
has pardoned: And that I think may suffice to assoyl that doubt, so expertly
and acutely contrived.

Besides this, they should attend, that the affiance they speak of, issues out
of the persuasion, we have of Gods love to us in Christ; for who can rely on
God for righteousness and salvation, that has not some persuasion, that God is
a father to him in Christ? So that what argument concludes the precedence of
confidence to justification, concluds much more a precedence of particular
assent, out of which, as out of a fountain, that affiance issues: And
howsoever it be true, that such assent as is spoken of, receives strength from
our affiance; yet from it, no otherwise, then from other gifts of
sanctification; namely, as from evidences, and signs, and, as I may term them,
qualifications of our persons, and dispositions as it were, to entitle us to
the Promises; or rather, to evidence the title we have (according to the
Covenant) unto the merits, and benefits of Christ.

The second argument was, as I conceived it, on this manner; To faith
justifying all men are bound: To particular persuasion, of Gods will to pardon
sins, all are not bound: For, God binds no man to believe an untruth: there are
some of whom it never was, nor shall be true, that God will pardon their sins
as Reprobates: Ergo. Answ. Zanch. de natura Dei, lib. 5. c. 2.
That which is ground of his Argument I confess I find amongst our Divines,
more resolutely determined, then distinctly explained: Their conclusion is,
that all men, even Reprobates, are bound to believe, that they are in Christ
Elected to Salvation: These reasons seem to make against it: First, for that
there are, and ever have been many, to whom the name of Christ, or the benefits
in him conveyed unto us, were never known: And Paul seems to say of such, Romans
2.12.
as sin without the Law, they shall perish without the Law, By proportion we
may say, They that sin without the Gospel, shall perish without the Gospel; The
not giving credit thereto shall not be imputed to their condemnation, in as
much as it was never revealed unto them: By consequence therefore, there was no
bond upon their conscience to believe it: Moreover, particular assent rises
from that particular Testimony of Gods spirit with ours, Romans 8.16. Which who
can say to be vouchsafed to Reprobates? But yield, ex abundanti, that
Reprobates at least in the Church are bound to believe it; What then? It
follows thence, that God binds them to believe an untruth. Answ. An untruth in
the thing, No untruth to them, except by their own default; because, that
howsoever God has revealed that there are some Reprobates; Yet reveals he to
no man, in this life, his own Reprobation: And as the rule of our actions is
not Gods secret, but revealed will; so the rule, and measure of Faith is not
truth secretted, but truth revealed: St. August. Enchirid. ad Laurent.
Augustine sticks not to say, that a man may will what is contrary to the will
of God, He means his secret will, and yet in so willing Not sin. For Example,
A child in the mortal disease of his father, may desire the life of his
father; such desire the event proves contrary to the will of God; yet is no
sin; because Gods will revealed warrants such desire to us: Let us see,
whether we may not find some semblance in the point of Believing: In Hezekiah
his sickness, Isa. 38.
the Lord sends Isaiah with that message: Thou must die. An untruth in the
event, and according to Gods secret purpose; yet can we doubt, but Hezekiah
therein was bound to give credit to the Prophet? Similiter, To make full the
answer: Thus let us conceive; Look as Gods promises are propound to be believed
of particulars; so, and no otherwise are we bound to believe them: how are they
propounded? Hypothetically, rather, then Categorically; with limitation, rather
then Absolutely; For Example, How am I bound my sins shall be forgiven? To
wit, Hypothetically, If I believe in Christ, and repent my sins: How to
believe, I shall be saved? To wit, Hypothetically; if I keep precisely the way
that leads unto life: separate the Hypothesis, either in mine understanding,
or practice, I am not bound to believe the Remission of my sins; nay, I am
bound not to believe it: For, there is no mandate in the word, that ties an
impenitent sinner, so continuing, to believe, that his sins are forgiven;
nay, there is something equivalent to a mandate, enjoining, in such case, to
believe the contrary; inasmuch as God has revealed, that he will not be
merciful to such an one, as goes on still in his wickedness. The sum is
this; Reprobates are bound to particular faith Hypothetically; Absolutely they
are not bound: shall we say now, their binding to such belief binds them to
believe an untruth? Nothing less: For, it is true, of every particular, If he
repent, His sins shall be forgiven him: this is ever true, and thus only are
the promises propounded to faith of particulars: And it is never true, that God
will pardon any man's sins, except he repent, and believe the Gospel: Thus
far by the way, in answer to these Arguments; rather wittily couched, then
soundly concluding the purpose: Let us now return to the Apostle, and from him
learn. 1. That Confidence in God for righteousness through Christ, is necessary
to justification. 2. That justification belongs to all relying upon God in
Christ for righteousness: What should I belong? it is the testimony of all the
Prophets, says Peter, given unto Christ, that through his name, whosoever
believes in him, shall receive remission of sins, Acts 10.41. and it is
Christ's own assertion: that, As, Whosoever believes on the son of God has
everlasting life: So, Whosoever believes not in him, shall never see life, but
the wrath of God abides on him, See John 3.15, 16, 18.36. Item, 1 John 5.13.
Where fitly falls in the question, Whether any confidence may be placed in our
works, or gifts of righteousness, for justification and salvation? For better
conceiving the truth in this kind, know we, that there is a main odds betwixt
these two questions. 1. Whether our confidence, and settled hope of salvation
rise from our works? and 2. Whether confidence may be placed in our works?

The one for my part, I yield to them, in a sense, professing my self herein of
Lumbards mind; Lumbard l. 3. did. 26. and Bonavent. ad Loc. Magist.
that our hope arises, partly, from precedent works, though the term of merit
I abhor: Thus conceive it, In hope and confidence, we must consider. 1. The
habit, 2. The act, or exercise of it: The habit is merely of Gods grace
infused; the act arises in part, from presence and view of our obedience:
Bellarm. de justifil. 5. c. 7.
The places are pregnant, 2 Timothy 4. 1 Ioh. 3.3. And Bellarmines reason is not
to be condemned; the obtaining of falvation, depends chiefly on Gods fidelity;
but in part also on our works of obedience: therefore, as hope were not
certain, if we should do good works, and God were not faithful; so neither can
it be certain, if God be faithful, and we neglect good works: And from this
doctrine our best Divines are not abhorrent; all good works which are done in
true faith, Zanch. in praecept. 1. cap. 13, De Spe.
avail to confirm faith of the glory that shall be revealed; says Zanchius,
Non inficiamur, etc. We deny not, but that by the gifts of God bestowed on us,
our hope of obtaining the good things to come, and of having eternal life, is
confirmed: And it is a truth, that Thomas has (his term being mollified) Spes
dicitur ex operibus provenire, quantum ad ipsam rem exspectatam: For I demand,
from what evidence conclude we, that we shall be saved, but from our obedience?
In all the discourses tending to confirm our assurance, whether of faith, or
hope; see if the minor must not be framed, out of presence of inherent
righteousness: For instance, How conclude I, that Christ is to me Author of
salvation? The proposition we have in Paul; Christ is Author of salvation to
all that obey him. Heb. 5.9. The minor, my conscience must yield me, I obey
him, else, can I not rightly conclude, that to me Christ is author of
salvation: Nullus recte sperat beatitudinem, nisi qui deo servivit, vel
proponit deo servire, says Bonaventure truly.

The difficulty is only, how our hope respects our obedience, whether as a
cause of salvation, or as an evidence, and sign only of our having title to
salvation. Lumbard qua supra.
Thus I think, we may truly resolve; though obedience be a partial cause of
hope, as has now been said; yet it is an evidence, rather then, in property of
speech, a cause of salvation. And in that sense, we may yield to Lumbard his
description of Hope, mitigating one term only: Hope is a certain expectation
of future blessedness, arising from Gods grace, and works precedent: and, sine
operibus bonis aliquid sperare non spes sed praesumptio dici potest. Bern. fol.
31.
It is infidelis fiducia, says Bernard, cum videlicet in spe peccamus.

The other question nearly concerns the place; Whether confidence for salvation
may be placed in our works? Here our Adversaries thus mince it: Bellarm. de
justific. lib. 5. cap. 7.
The chiefety of our hope, and confidence must be placed in God; yet in bonis
meritis, quae vere talia esse compertum sit, fiducia aliqua collocari potest,
modo superbia caveatur: and again, sithence hope may be placed in our merits,
if they be true merits, and sobrie id fiat: handsome cautions, and limits put
to such a conclusion. 1. If they be true merits. 2. If it be done without
pride, and with moderation: With such impossible, and incompatible Hypotheses,
what conclusion so absurd, but may be holden for true? Yield we, that Adams
fall has not hurt his posterity, by depraving nature, I would easily infer
Pelagius his conclusion, That by the power of nature, it were possible to
fulfill the Law. But, 1. The Hypothesis is improbable there being no true
merits of any mere creature. 2. Yield there were some works of some men
perfect; yet so will not the conclusion follow in respect of that frequent
intervenience of sins, destroying the value of other works; says Hilary truly,
Spes in misericordia Dei in seculum, Hillar. ennarr. in Psalm. 51.
and in seculum seculi est: Non enim ipsa illa justitiae opera sufficient ad
perfectae Beatitudinis meritum, nisi misericordia Dei, etiam in hac justitiae
voluntate humanarum demutationum, and motuum vitia non reputet.

Let us see their other limitation; so that pride in such confidence be
avoided. There is then belike, an humble kind of confidence in our own works,
as if we should say, an humble pride. There be some, says Bernard, Bernard de
Quadrages. sermon. 5.
that seek life eternal. Non in humilitate, sed tanquam in fiducia suorum
meritorum. In his opinion very confidence in our works is a shrewd spice of
pride. But let us see what that pride is, that in such confidence they
prescribe to be avoided: It is this, When a man thinks he has his merits of
himself, not of Gods grace: In case then a man thankfully acknowledge his good
works to proceed from Gods grace, it is lawful to put confidence in them. Hear
Bernard, Bern. in Annunciat. Ser. 3.
Si quis gratus est, si quis devotus si quis solicitus, si quis spiritu
fervens, caveat sibi ne suis fidat meritis, ne suis operibus innitatur:
alioquin nec hujusmodi quidem animum intrat gratia. I thank God, says the
Pharisee, I am not as others; to Gods grace he ascribes his righteousness, and
yet returns empty of justification.

To come briefly to the point, our conclusion is this; No confidence at all for
righteousness, or salvation ought to be placed in any our works, be they never
so good, or seemingly perfect.

Our first reason is, for that we find the most eminent amongst Gods Saints
renouncing all their own works, not only natural, but gracious also, and
relying themselves only on Gods mercy in Christ; see Psalm. 143. Phil. 3.9, 10.
Dan. 9.18. We do not present our supplications before thee, for our
righteousness, but for thy great mercies. Shall we say, as they, he speaks as
one conceiving it as a matter of best safety, Bellarm. de justif. lib. 5. cap.
7.
not of necessity? What then means that so plentiful, and humble confession of
sins, in the former part of the prayer? In any reasonable construction, he
speaks as a man pressed with conscience of sin so far, as that he acknowledges
confusion to be their only due portion, if mercy succor and relieve him not.

To this we add these reasons, weighty for the purpose, howsoever slightly
passed over by Adversaries; as, 1. That our best works are defiled by our
concupiscence, Gal. 5.17. 2. Are defective, and imperfect, according to the
rule of the Law of God. 3. Lose their worth, through interruption, and the
frequent intercurrence of sins of ignorance, and weakness; would God not too
often, by some falls almost presumptuous.

Hereto we adjoyn the consent of Fathers: August. manual. c. 22.
Tota spes mea (says Augustine) est in monte Domini mei; mors ejus meritum
meum, refugium meum, saelus, vita and resurrectio mea; meritum meum miseratio
Domini; non sum meriti inops, quamdiu ille miserationum Dominus non defuerit;
and si misericordiae Domini multae, multus ego sum in meritis. Shall we say, he
remits of his right, and speaks only out of humility, or as one choosing the
sole mercy of God for his safest refuge: Hear him in another place; Vae etiam
laudabili vitae hominum, August. Confess. l. 9. c. 13.
si remota misericordia discutias eam: Non est quod jam quaeras, quibus meritis
speremus bona, praesertim cum audies apud Prophetam; Non propter vos, Bern. in
Cant. Ser. 67, and 68.
sed propter me ego faciam, dicit Dominus: sufficit ad meritum scire, quod non
sufficiant merita. Idem, Deest gratiae quicquid meritis deputas: nolo meritum
quod gratiam excludat: Horreo quicquid de meo est, ut sim meus, etc.

The same Bernard noting the faults that sometimes insinuate themselves into
our prayers, Bern. de Quadrages. Sermon. 5. ad calcem.
in those that are made for eternal life, pride sometimes uses to creep upon
us: Vitam aeternam fortassis aliqui non in humilitate quaerunt, sed tanquam in
fiducia suorum meritorum. Nec hoc dico, quin accepta gratia fiduciam donet
orandi; sed non oportet, ut in ea constituat quisquam fiduciam impetrandi: Hoc
solum conferunt haec praemissa dona, ut ab ea misericordia quae tribuit haec,
sperentur etiam ampliora. Sit ergo oration -- quae fit pro aeterna vita, in omni
humilitate praesumens de sola (ut dignum est) miseratione divina.

Propter incertitudinem propriae justitiae, and periculum amittendae aeternae
gloriae; [tutissimum] est, Bellarm. qua supra.
fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia, and benignitate reponere.

Thus rather, Propter imperfectionem propriae justitiae, and periculum
amittendae aeternae gloriae, [necessarium] est fiduciam totam in sola Dei
misericordia, and benignitate reponere.

Let us briefly view the reasons they allege for their purpose. They produce
Nehemiah, praying remembrance of his good deeds, Neh. 13.22. Ezekias also
alleging his sincerity, Isa. 38.3. David promising himself retribution
(because) he had kept Gods ways, Psalm. 18.20, 21. Many the like might have
been heaped up: but how follows the conclusion? Therefore they put confidence
in their works? Nay, see Nehemiah in the same place, praying to be spared,
according to the greatness of Gods mercy; think we he puts confidence in his
works, as true (causes) of salvation, that prays pardon of his imperfections?
Thus briefly let us conceive, that the Saints of God alleging their
righteousness in prayers, respect not their works, as (matter) of their
confidence; see Dan. 9.18. but as inferior helps of their hope, quatenus they
are evidences of their being in the Covenant, and partakers of the promises.
That they put confidence in, is Gods mercy, and truth in his promise; the
reason of that confidence is their obedience, in respect of presence, not of
efficiency: Take one inftance for many, Neh. 1.8. the servant of God prays for
restoring the people out of captivity; what lays he for ground of his prayer?
The word that he spoke by Moses, If they turn unto me; I will gather them: Now
Lord (says Nehemiah) we desire to fear thy Name, therefore gather us. Can any
think the holy man alleges their fear of God, as (matter) of confidence? See
how diminutively he speaks of it; it is rather a (desire) to fear, then actual
fearing; and therefore needs mercy to accept it, has no merit to procure so
great a blessing from God. August. de verb. Apost. Ser. 16.
To like purpose Augustine; In his quae jam habemus, landemus Deum largitorem;
in his quae nondum habemus, tenemus debitorem: Debtor enim factus est non
aliquid a nobis accipiendo, sed quod ei placuit promittendo: -- Illo ergo modo
possumus exigere Dominum nostrum, ut dicamus, Read quod promifisti, quia
fecimus quod jussisti, and hoc tu fecisti, quia laborantes juvisti.

Their second argument, because our works are vera salutis causa: we may put
confidence in any true cause, which is known fit to bring us to the end wished,
and hoped for; such are our works; Ergo. To this argument the answers are
diverse, amongst our Divines: The Apology of the Augustane confession seems not
to deny, that there is some virtue in the works of the faithful, procuring
unto us eternal life. But that virtue they imagine to be extrinsecall, issuing
from the merit of Christ imputed to us; whereby it comes to pass, that the
blemishes of our obedience are covered, and our works presented as pure, and
without spot before God. And sundry others, eminent in the Church of God, think
it no heresy to say; that our good works tincta sanguine Christi, make us
worthy of eternal life. In which and many the like speeches, I must needs
profes^e I see nothing derogatory to the glory of Gods grace or Christ's
Mediation, nor worthy the tragical exclamations of many, if they be duly
considered: Our Sacrifices, says Peter are acceptable to God through Jesus
Christ, 1. Pet. 2.5. See Reynolds contra Heart. cap. 8.
pure and clean, says Malachy, though not by inherence, yet by acceptance,
and by that tincture they receive from Christ's blood and intercession, Rev. 8.

But will it not hence follow, that they are true causes of salvation? Answ. In
no wise, as Papists conceive it; namely, that ex propria dignitate, and because
they satisfy the Law of God: such dignity we acknowledge none inherent in
them, nor such perfection as satisfies the Law: The worth they have, is from
their die and tincture in Christ's blood; and that is it alone, that makes them
capable of reward: so that the term of our confidence is Christ's blood, not our
works; into which the whole causality, as I may term it of salvation, in
respect of us, is to be resolved.

Others there are, that choose simply and without distinction, to deny the
assumption; least peradventure the proud heart of man should swell with opinion
of its own conferring any thing to its own salvation. They are via regni, says
Bernard, non causa regnandi: Causes, if ye will, sine quibus non; necessary
antecedents to salvation, no virtuall efficients or procurers thereof unto us:
most truly and fitliest to the Popish opinion, according whereto they are made
so exactly answerable to the justice of the Law, that they need no mercy to
cover their defects, no imputation of Christ's merits, to hide their blemishes
from Gods justice: yea, have a worth in them, proportional to the transcendent
weight of glory.

The Apostle otherwise: Romans 8.18.
The sufferings of this life are not worthy of the glory that shall be
revealed: Non si unus omnes sustineat, says Bernard. Totis licet animae, Bern.
de Annun. Ser. 1. Eusebius. Emess. Hom l. 3. ad Monach
and corporis laboribus desudemus, totis licet obedientiae viribus exerceamur,
nihil tamen condignum merito pro coelestibus bonis compensare, and offerre
valebimus, says Eusebius Emissenus.

We conclude therefore, That no confidence may be placed in our works of
righteousness: The whole must rely upon the mercy, and truth of the promiser,
and on his Christ, in whom the promises have their accomplishment, 2. Cor. 1.20.

And of the duty, and object thereof, thus far. His Periphrasis follows.

Who raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead.] For the sense of the words: It
may be enquired, how the resurrection of Christ is ascribed to the Father,
whereas it is said, The Son has power to lay down his life, and to take it
up again? Joh. 2.19. and 10.18. Answ. The answer rests in that old rule of
Augustine; The external works of the Trinity are undivided, in them all the
whole three persons work jointly, in regard that the same divine virtue is
equally residing in all. If it be yet demanded, why most usually the
resurrection of Christ is assigned to the Father? Answ. Thus we may conceive,
that Christ in state of humiliation emptyed himself, Phil. 2.7. Not as loving
his glory, but as forbearing for the time, the ordinary manifestation of his
Divine power; inasmuch, that howsoever there was no work of the father, wherein
he did not equally communicate, quod ad substantiam operis; yet so little show
thereof was there, in the infirmity of his flesh, that they might seem to be
wholly from the father, without any concurrence of Christ incarnate.

Again, It may be demanded, What the reason is, that the Apostle singles out
this effect of raising Christ from the dead, to describe the father by? Answ.
Some think, to maintain the proportion betwixt the faith of Abraham, and the
faith of his seed; that as he respected the power of God raising the dead, in
like sort should ours: This is somewhat; but, if I be not deceived, there is
some farther aim of the Apostle; he speaks (methinks) as if he thought, there
were some special reason, and ground for confidence in God for justification,
in this act of God raising Jesus from the dead: And weigh it well, we shall
find, there is scace any thing more fit to stablish faith, in persuasion of
justification, then this: For, when the Lord losed the sorrows of death, and
delivered our surety from bond age thereunto; does he not give (evidence) that
his justice is fully satisfied for our sins, he fully reconciled unto us? Had
not our surety Christ Jesus, paid the utmost farthing due for our sins, he had
yet continued under the dominion of death, the wages of our sins: Hence, says
Peter, 1 Pet. 1.3.
that the Lord has begotten us to a lively hope, by the resurrection of Christ
from the dead; there being no greater, or more effectual means to persuade us,
of pardon of sins, reconciliation with God, acceptance to life eternal; then
that Christ our surety, and undertaker, is risen from the dead.

There is a kind of wisdom, and prudence in believing; the Apostle seems here
to give us an hint, for the nature and use of it; thus conceives it, It is,
when a man fits the consideration of the attributes and actions of God, to the
particulars most necessary, and fit for faith to respect, according to several
occasions: as here, The Apostle prescribing confidence in God for
justification, fits us with a description of him, by an action best available
for confidence, in that respect to rely upon; namely, His raising of Jesus
from the dead: The like in sundry other places, is observable. Would they
humble themselves for their sins? they consider God as terrible, and dreadful
in his judgments: would they raise up themselves with comfort? they consider
him as a God, that heepeth Covenant and promise as a father of mercies, and God
of all consolation: would they stablish hope, in expectation of things passing
the course of nature? they consider his endless power able to do exceeding
abundantly above all that we can ask, or think.

There is a confused apprehension of the deity, for the most part liveless and
ineffectuall; when men ingross only, and indistinctly mediate the Divine
nature, without reference to particulars, concerning the present occasion.

And another as preposterous, unseasonable, and no less uncomfortable, when men
fit their faith, with meditation of that, that is most unseasonable for their
present state: God is merciful, says the presumer; he is just, says the
desperate distressed: Both true; he is just and merciful, says the Psalmist;
but should not faith in wisdom, contemplate what is fittest for the present
necessity? This wisdom pray we for.

The last thing in this period remains; The Reason brought to assure us of like
favor in like faith, for better confirming the comfort unto us.

Who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our
justification] The force of the argument thus conceive; God the Father has
delivered his Son to death, for expiation of our sins; he has raised him which
was our surety, to assure us of our justification; doubt not therefore, but he
will justify thee, believing on him through Christ.

In the words, the Apostle sends us to consider two things, as pillars for
faith to rest on for justification. First is, The cause meritorious, Christ
death. Secondly, The evidence of the value, and worth of his humiliation; His
resurrection from the dead.

This text, says one, is Brevis and largus; short in words, large in sense:
Let us view the particulars: In the first member are these, 1. Who delivered.
2. Who was delivered. 3. Whereto. 4. For what.

For the First: Who delivered: Pater filium; Christus seipsum; Judas Dominum,
says Austin. The fact one; the motives different: which made Judas his treason
criminous, Christ's tradition of himself meritorious: I point only at the heads.
Who was delivered? Jesus our Lord: A less price, say some, might have sufficed;
yea, none at all, had God been so pleased: I think not, considering the endless
justice violated, which God in our ransom, intended to preserve and manifest,
Romans 3.

Delivered] why says he, delivered, rather then crucified? To lead us by the
hand to the first cause thereof, the determinate counsels of the Blessed
Trinity, Act. 4.27, 28. I could command Legions of Angels for deliverance,
Mat. 26.35.
says our Savior to Peter; but how then should the Scripture be fulfilled?
how the Fathers purpose, and councels accomplished?

VVhereto?] To death, even the shameful and cursed death of the cross, Phil.
2.8. That so we might be delivered from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13.
Incomparable Benignity of the Father; unmatcheable compassion, and humility of
our blessed Savior.

For what?] For sins; for our sins; whether we conceive sin as the efficient
cause, procuring these things unto our Savior: or tropically intepret; For
sins, that is, for expiation of sins, it is not greatly material: This latter
has some Ancients approving it, however Socinus laugh at the strangeness of
it: Theodoret, He underwent his passion, Theodoret. ad loc.
Vt nostrum debitum exsolveret; not much unlike Ambrose: And that of the
Prophet cannot better be expounded, Isai. 53.10. His soul an offering for sin,
that is, to expiate sin: The senses are subordinate; sins procured it; by it
sins were expiated, and to expiated them, Christ was delivered; see Isai. 53. 1
Pet. 2.24.

For our sins] Our in this case, 2 Cor. 5.21.
has a threefold Antithesis. 1. To Christ. 2. To Angels. 3. To Unbelievers.

For ours not his own: He was holy, harmeless, separate from sinners knew not
sin; per experimentum, as Augustine interprets; see 1 Pet. 2.22, 23, 24. Heb.
7.26. Isai. 53. Augustine. de peccat. Merit, and Remiss. lib. 2. cap. 35.
Sine peccato natus est in similitudine carnis peccati; sine peceato vixit
inter aliena peccata; sine proccato mortuus est, propter nostra peccata; as
Saint Augustine.

Ours, not Angels; Heb. 2.16. In no place he assumes the Angels, but the seed
of Abraham: It may be, there was something eminent in their sin, that excludes
them; but let us take heed, whiles we seek the reason of our pre-eminence in
the quality of the sinners; we forget the Lords (...), the specialty of his
love to man, that only caused it: Nunquid Angelo? Bernard de Passione Domini.
sed ille non eguit; Nunquid Diabolo? sed ille non resurget, as Bernard.

Ours, that believe; Ioh, 3.16. Not for sins of unbelievers; yes, say some,
sufficiently for theirs: that distinction I stand not to examine: The question
is this, Whether intentionally, for the sins of any but believers? They shall
never be able to prove, that the intention is larger then the efficacy: or,
that his death, was not effectual to procure remission for all, unto whose
benefit it was intended.

The heads of this first member we have seen; let us with like brevity, see to
what use they serve us.

Agnosce, o homo, quam gravia sunt vulnera, Bern. in Natal. Domin. Ser. 3.
pro quibus necesse est Dominum Christum vulnerari; si non essent haec ad
mortem, and mortem sempiternam, nunquam pro eorum remedio dei filius moreretur;
says Bernard sweetly.

Secondly, As they teach us compunction, so minister they unto us unspeakeable
consolation; sicut enim gravem agnosco morbum, cuitanta apponitur medicina; sic
and ex hoc ipso non incurabilem esse conjecto: They know not the excellency of
Christ person, nor the worth of his blood, that question the availableness
thereof to purchase redemption: Let strictest justice balance our sins, with
Christ's satisfaction, this shall be found infinitely to preponderate.

Some weakly, perhaps will say; of the value he doubts not, but of the avail
for him: Hear the Apostle assuring us, that for (our) sins, not for his (own)
he was delivered; even for the sins of all that believe in his name, Act. 10.
For (us) he was born, (our) sins he bear, the chastisement of (our) peace was
laid upon him: It is no blasphemy to say, he is more ours, then his own; our
benefit we are fure more by him, then his own by himself, says Bernard; Bern.
in Epiphan. Ser. 1.
Vtamur nostro in nostram utilitatem: If we lack what to give for our sins, we
have Christ's body to give; it is of ours, and it is ours: And as Bernard, so
may every believer say; De Te, Domine, suppleo quod minus habe^ in me.

And of the first member, the cause meritorious of our justification, thus far.

Proceed we to the Second, containing the evidence of the value, that was in
his humiliation for righteousness; to wit, his resurrection from death,
amplified by the end thereof, our justification.

And was vaised for our Iustification] How for our justification? To work it,
say some; to apply it, say others; to preserve us in it, says a third; To
declare and assure us of it, say the most Judicious.

It is good advise a Learned Interpreter here gives, Not auxiously to dispute,
or enquire, how the Apostle distinguishes the effects of Christ's Death, and
Resurrection, ascribing to his death the expiation of sins, to his
resurrection, our justification: Touching the thing, I will not be inquisitive;
but of the sense, it will not be amise a little to enquire.

The first exposition is commonly received amongst our adversaries; and thus
they explain themselves: Bellarm de Iustific. l. 2. c. 6.
Justification they here understand our internal renovation, and regeneration,
by which we walk in newness of life; and that they ascribe to Christ's
resurrection, not as to a cause meritorious; for Christ by his Resurrection
merited nothing, being then extra statum merendi: How then? say some, As causa
exemplaris, Thomas par. 3a. quest. 56. Art. 2. Bellarm. qua supra Cajetane ad
loc.
quatenus he has given us therein a form of rising in our souls, to newness
of life, as he in his flesh, rose to the life of glory.

Say others, His resurrection avails to our justification, rather as an
occasion, and help, or motive to faith; for had he not risen from the dead, who
would have believed in him, as Author of life? These interpretations, both of
them contain truths: It is true, that Christ's Resurrection is a pattern for us
to follow, Romans 6. True also, that it is an enducement to believe in him, as
able to save us; but impertinent to this place: For, 1. In what Scripture find
they Renovation, to be called Justification? And, 2. The Apostle is not yet
come to treat the point of sanctification. And, 3. How fits the Reason to the
Apostles conclusion? Faith shall be imputed to us for righteousness; for Christ
rose, to give us a pattern of rising to new life; dissolutae scopae.

To apply it, ^rsin. Kemnitius.
and to confer it upon us, say others: For, it behoved the Mediator, not only
to merit, but also to confer what he had merited upon us: that also is a truth;
but these in explaining themselves, make his resurrection availeable only as a
cause sine qua non, to our justification; except he had risen, he could not
have conferred his benesits upon us.

To preserve it unto us, says a third; some such thing we find, after a sort
ascribed to Christ's Resurrection, Romans 8.34. But if we attend the place, to his
Resurrection it is assigned remotely; our continuance in grace, following
rather from his session at his Fathers right hand, and his intercession there
made for us.

The last I rathest rest in; conceiving Christ's resurrection to avail to our
justification, as an evidence assuring us of it; rather then as a cause in any
sort, procuring it unto us: By raising Christ from the dead, God the Father
showed, that he accepted the obedience, Keumit. part. 1. de Justificat. U^sin.
and satisfaction of his Son Christ, for our reconciliation and atonement:
Christ was thrust into such a prison, as out of which he could never have come
forth, except he had paid the utmost farthing: The least sin unsatisfied had
for ever detained him, under the dominion of death; but God raised him: Ergo,
He has satisfied: or thus you may conceive it, As when Christ (our surety) was
condemned, we in him, and together with him, were condemned: So, when he was
discharged, we in him, and together with him, received our discharge from the
guilt, and punishment of sin: So that, the point we have here is this, That
Christ's Resurrection, is to us a pledge of our Justification.

(...). Amen.

FINIS.
Texts of Scripture explained in this Commentary.
Genesis 17.17. p. 155.156. Levit. 18.5. compared with Romans 10.5. p. 106, 107,
112, 113. Number. 23.10. P. 170. Nehem. 1.8. p. 180. Nehem. 13.22. p. 179.180.
Psalm. 2.7. p. 92. Psalm. 32.1. p. 48, 49, 57. Psalm. 143.2. p. 38, 39, 40, 41.
Isa. 38.3. p. 104. Isa. 64.6. p. 123.124. Dan. 9.18. p. 178, 179. Matthew. 5.45.
p. 92. Matthew. 10.3. p. 44. and verse 37. p. 126. and verse. 38. p. 125. Matthew.
11.30. compared with 1 John 3.5. p. 125, 126. Matthew. 16.18. p. 142. Matthew.
19.1^. p. 128. Mar. 16.16. p. 70, 89, 97. Luke 1.6. p. 126. Luke 10.28. p. 115.
Luke 17.6. p. 157. Joh. 2.19. compared with Joh. 10.18. p. 182. Joh. 3.5. p.
72. Joh. 8.36, 39. p. 97, 98, 99, 141. Act. 13.39. p. 62, 63. Romans 5.19. p. 52.
Romans 6.23. p. 122. Romans 7.14. p. 122. Verse 18. p. 120. Romans 9.32. p. 51, 52.
Romans 10.5. p. 106, 107, 112, 113. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. p. 104, 105. 1 Cor. 10. p.
90. Gal. 1.8. p. 150. Gal. 3.10. p. 121, 122. verse. 18. p. 103. Gal. 4.1. p.
104, 105. verse. 30. p. 115. Gal. 5, 4. p. 116. Ephesians. 2.12. p. 96. 1 Timothy 4.8. p.
106, 107. Heb. 8.6. p. 134. 1 Pet. 1.3. p. 183. verse. 18. p. 153. 1 John 2.2.
p. 100. 1 John 3.9. p. 127. 1 John 5.3. p. 125, 126.

