ORNATISSIMO VIRO EDVARDO ONLEY AGRI NORTHAMTONIENSIS VICECOMITI, ET
LECTISSIMAE EJUS CONJUGI MARGARETAE, ANTONIUS SCATTERGOOD HANC OPELLAM D. D. D.

JETHRO's CHARACTER OF Worthy Judges.

AN Assise-Sermon PREACHED AT NORTHAMPTON MARCH 22. 1663.

By Antonie Scattergood D. D.

LONDON: Printed by J. G. for Richard Marriott, and are to be sold at his Shop
under St. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street. 1664.

IMPRIMATUR:

Joh: Hall R. P. D. Humfr: Episc. Land. a Sac. Domest.
April 5. 1664.
JETHRO'S Character of Worthy JUGDES.
EXODUS 18.21. -- able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness.


IN this Chapter is set down how it came to pass, that Moses, who hitherto had
born the burden of six hundred thousand men himself alone, hearing, examining,
and deciding even their lesser causes, was persuaded, for his own ease, and the
benefit of all Israel, to make choice of some worthy persons to be his helps in
government, and to give commission and charge unto them to judge the people at
all seasons. v 22.
It was the counsel of Jethro that put him upon this course of erecting and
constituting as it were a new polity. v. 1-6.
For he being come out of Midian to congratulate the Israelites deliverance out
of Egypt, and to give his Son-in-law a visit in the wilderness, and observing
the pains he took in judging and determining of controversies from morning till
evening, ver. 13.
like a prudent and experienced Prince, and like a faithful friend, he blames
him for it, as being a burden too heavy for the shoulders of any single
person, and advises him to select and ordain Judges and inferior Magistrates,
who would greatly lessen the trouble he underwent, by bearing each of them his
share of it. Sage counsel this! But what need had Moses that Jethro should give
it him? He having the Divine Oracle to consult upon all occasions, and God
vouchsafing so to honor and befriend him as to speak with him mouth to mouth,
Numb. 12 8.
even apparently, and not in dark speeches, one would think it had been
altogether superfluous for this King in Jesurun to receive instructions from
the Priest or Prince of Midian how to menage his Office, Deuteronomy. 33.5. Exodus 18.1.
how to rule God's people. But thus it pleased God to exercise and increase the
humility and meekness of his servant by putting him to learn prudence and
policy from one who was in many respects his inferior.

Thus the great Doctor of the Gentiles was by Christ's own appointment, Acts
9, and 22.
who appeared unto him, sent into Damascus, that there Ananias might cure him
as well of his spiritual as of his bodily blindness, that from him he might
hear the first lessons of Christianity, and know what he was to do and to
suffer for Christ's sake. And the Angel's business with Cornelius was, Acts 10.
not to preach the Gospel to him, but to give him directions to find and send
for Simon Peter, whose office it was to do it. Thus it is the good pleasure of
God now, that we should all ordinarily be taught our duty, not by a messenger
from the dead, nor by an Angel from heaven, nor by God's immediate voice or
revelation, but by men like ourselves. The precious treasure of knowledge is
conveyed unto us through earthen vessels: And it is our duty to be content, yea
glad, thus to receive it; to look upon Truth, whoever speaks it, as a ray of
Divine light, and to embrace wholesome counsel from the mouth of the meanest.
And there is none indeed so mean and simple but the greatest and wisest upon
earth may happily one time or other learn something from him. The Wisdom and
Bounty of Heaven has so disposed things below, so dispensed the blessings we
enjoy, that no man has all, and that every one has some; none is absolute and
perfect, none quite empty and deficient; and this, to the end that both the
sense of our wants may keep us humble, and the mutual dependency that there is
amongst us may make us love and not contemn one another; that the Head may not
say to the Feet, 1 Cor. 12 21.
I have no need of you.

This lesson meek Moses here had well learnt; and he may teach us all by his
example. He was questionless the wisest and most excellent person then in the
world: He had been bred up in Pharaoh's Court, Acts 7.22.
and so became learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians: He was mighty in
words and deeds; he bore in his hand a rod far more potent then any scepter, by
which he darkened the air, dried the sea, broched the rocks, ruled the creature
at his pleasure: He was the Guide and Judge of a mighty nation, the then only
visible Church of God: And (which was his greatest dignity) he was the Servant
of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 34 5. Exodus 33.11.
and familiarly conversed with him as one friend does with another. Yet this
mighty and worthy Personage patiently hears himself taxed for seeming to be
ignorant of that which almost every body knows by common experience, Exodus
18.17, 18.
That overmuch pains will assuredly wear and wast the pains-taker; and to be
plainly told he did not well in taking upon him the sole administration of
justice to so vast a multitude, and that both himself and the people under his
charge and conduct would sorely rue it if he did not assume some able and
well-qualified persons to be his assistants in that weighty affair. This he
hears quietly from one who was a stranger from the Commonwealth of Israel,
and whom some hold to have been an idolater and ignorant of the true God: But
this is too harsh a censure, and very improbable, as appears both from many
passages in this Chapter, and from Moses's so long living with him, and at
length marrying of his daughter. Whatever Jethro was, Moses meekly gave him the
hearing, and neither justified himself, nor blamed his reprover for seeming too
curious and busy in aliena republica, and meddling with that which nothing
concerned him; But, instead of that, he hearkened to the voice of his
Father-in-law, and did all that he had said, as ye read ver. 24. and may see
further in the end of this Chapter, and in the first of Deuteronomie.

Let us all, Beloved, of what degree or calling soever, imitate this great
Mirror of meekness, and be willing to be told of the error of our ways, and
of the way how to amend them, though it be by the meanest of God's meffengers.
Hitherto ye have had only a Preface to the Text; but, if ye please, let it
serve for a Preface to the Sermon also.

In the words I have made choice to treat of at this time, are contained
certain Characters or Notes which Jethro held requisite to be in those whom
Moses should employ in Courts of Judicature, and make Ministers of justice
under him: They must be able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating
covetousness. In the handling of which points there is no better method then to
take the words as they lie in order.

I. ABLE MEN. There is a threefold Ability requisite in Magistrates. They
should have 1. able Heads, 2. able Hearts, 3. able Hands. They ought to be 1.
men of Wisdom and Discretion, 2. men of Courage and Activity, 3. men of Power
and good Estate.

1. Wisdom, says the Wiseman, Prove. 4.7.
is the principal thing. Therefore he exhorts us to get wisdom, and with all
our getting to get understanding. Whatever our profession or employment be,
Eccl. 10.10.
wisdom is profitable to direct. This will teach us to follow our callings and
to order all our affairs with discretion. Through this is the house builded,
and furnished too, Prove. 24.3, 4. This instructs the plowman to sow and order
his corn, Isa. 28. And this teaches the artificer how to handle his tools. In
this book of Exodus they are often said to have been wise-hearted and filled
with wisdom that wrought about the Tabernacle. And if those lower trades cannot
be rightly menaged without Wisdom, how necessary an ornament and accomplishment
will it be to those whose art it is, as the Prince of Poets speaks, -- regere
imperio populos, -- Virg. Aen. 6.851.

-- paciq imponere morem,
Parcere subjectis, and debellare superbos,
to maintain Justice and Peace amongst the people, to protect the innocent, and
to suppress the oppressor! Certainly Wisdom is needful either here, or
nowhere. The word KING, which in our language signifies the supreme
Magistrate, is derived, they say, from cyning, which in the Saxon tongue
signifies Cunning, Skill, Knowledge; Wherein Kings especially should abound.
This will be unto them an ornament better then rubies, and a defense better
then strength or then weapons of war. Prove. 8.11. Eccl. 7.11. and 9.16, 18.
It was therefore one of the wisest acts that we find recorded of the wisest of
Kings, that being put to his choice what he would receive of the Giver of every
good and perfect gift, he said, Give thy servant an understanding heart, to
judge thy people, that I may discern between good and bad, 1 King. 3.9. But
because, as Jethro tells Moses, the administering of justice to a whole nation
is a task too heavy for any one man to perform himself alone, ( Who is able to
judge, says Solomon there, this thy so great a people?) therefore it is an
especial point of Kingly prudence to substitute, as Moses is here advised,
well-qualified and worthy Persons to dischage that office under him.

And, blessed be God, our Moses, who has been wonderfully hid (by the care of
females too) and graciously preserved from bloodthirsty Tyrant, who has
escaped (as Moses did) perils by water and perils by land, and who has been
brought out of exile (as Moses out of Midian) to rule and govern this our
Israel; This our Moses, I say, has shown his Princely wisdom and care over his
people in providing able men to judge them at all seasons; Men well versed in
the Law of God, men well learned in the Laws of the Land, men of mature age and
deep experience; who have fresh in their memories the Reports of ancient Sages,
responsa prudentum, and sententias judicum; who having been acquainted with
trials of all sorts, know how to receive informations, examine witnesses, sift
out the truth, put a quick end to suits without unnecessary demurrers and
protractions; who can pluck off the fair disguise that is sometimes put upon a
foul cause, lay open the falsehood of subtle and cunning men, and so defeat the
crafty and clear the innocent; who have the Balance of Justice in one hand as
well as the Sword in the other, and having exactly weighed what is brought
before them, can tell when to use the rigor of the Law, and when mitigation
and equity should be exercised.

Such able men are the reverend Judges of this land. Such, I am sure, all
Judges ought to be; And not only they, but also all others proportionally who
have any thing to do in Courts of Justice, all that be Assessours on the Bench,
or Pleaders at the Bar, or empannelled for the Jury; they should be all able
men in this first sense, men of good skill and judgment in such matters as they
take in hand, men of wit and dexterity to expedite and dispatch them. Then they
may be able to promote justice: But otherwise they cannot but be perverters or
hinderers of it. For none can be competent judges of what they understand not.
(...), says the Philosopher. Arist. Eth. 1.
Knowledge is a necessary help to Judgment. They must be able men that judge.

To blame then are they who having empty heads, but ambitious or covetous
hearts, say with Absalom, 2 Samuel 15.4.
Oh that I were made judge in the land, that every man which has any suit or
cause might come unto me, and I would do him justice. They would have the
credit and profit of the place, but are void both of care and ability to
discharge it. Vain men! that gape after Honor, which is but a bubble, Prove.
23.5.
and catch at Riches, which are nothing, and consider not what a fearful Woe
would hang over their heads if they had their wish, namely that in the Prophet,
Isa. 5^.20.
Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light,
and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. A
gross mistake. But thus undoubtedly would these men mistake, if once set in the
seat of judgment, being destitute of the main qualification of a Judge, the
spirit of judgment and discerning. (...) 23.
They would justify the wicked, and take away the righteousness of the
righteous from him.

Beloved, the right way to Honor is Virtue: And it is better far to deserve
preferment, and yet not have it, then to have it, and not deserve it. Labor
then for real worth, and wait for reward till he who is the fountain of honor
shall think fit to bestow it. To do otherwise, to look for advancement and
advantages without desert, is as absurd and preposterous as if a man should
exspect to reap when he has not sown, to receive wages without doing his work,
and to see a shadow where there is neither light nor substance. So much of the
first sort of Ability that is requisite in Magistrates; They must have able
Heads. Next, they must have

2. Able Hearts, that is, Hearts full of courage and resolution to do what they
know is their duty. A good Second this unto the former. Skill without Will,
Wisdom in the brain without Freedom in the breast, is altogether unactive and
to no purpose, like a good weapon that is never drawn out, but still rests
and rusteth in its scabbard; or, like a man who, having a journey to go, has
eyes to see his way, but no legs to walk in it. On the other side, Courage not
guided by Knowledge is like metal in a blind horse, carrying him on apace
toward blocks or downfalls; or, like a sharp sword in the hand of a fool or a
madman, wounding whom it should not. But si non prosunt singula juncta juvant.
These two, a good Head, and a great Heart, though when apart one from the other
they avail little or nothing, yea are often dangerous and hurtful both to
others and to them that have them, yet when they go together in a Magistrate,
they serve to make him almost complete: Like Castor and Pollux, who appearing
single were counted of old sad omens, portending ill luck to mariners, but when
they were seen both at once, simul and semel, they signified a successeful
voyage.

Beloved, the vessel wherein we are all embarked, the great Ship of this
Kingdom, is likely to sail on prosperously, so long as we see upon our sails or
masts those lucky Gemini, those twin-stars, the light of Knowledge, and the
fire of Zele; so long as those who sit at the helm, and see to the steerage of
our course, are both skilful in their Compass, and careful to observe it. Let
us therefore pray often to Him that sitttth upon the water-floud, Psalm 29.10.
Isa. 11.9 Am. 5.24.
that as our Land is full of Knowledge, as the waters cover the sea, so
Judgment may run down in it as waters, and Righteousness like a mighty stream;
And to this end, that he would bless all those whose office it is to execute
justice amongst us, especially the reverend and learned Judges; that as he has
given unto them the spirit of Counsel, Isa 11.2.
so he would also give unto them the spirit of Might, 1 Chr. 22.13.
that they may still be strong and of good courage, that they may not dread, 2
Chr. 19.11.
nor be dismayed, but deal courageously; that they may not respect the persons,
or letters, or promises, nor fear the faces, or frowns, or threats of men, but
with an undaunted courage do justice to all unpartially, maintaining the cause
of the innocent, Job 29.17.
though never so poor, and breaking the jaws of the oppressor, and plucking
the spoil out of his teeth, though he be never so great.

Thus doing they will do God, their Prince, their Country, yea and themselves
also, good service. By obeying the will and imitating the example of that Judge
of all the earth, Gen 18.25. Psalm. 9 4.
who sits in the throne judging right, they will deserve those high titles,
that are given them Psalm. 82.6. I have said, Ye are Gods, and all of you are
Children of the most High. Their Tribunals will prove stays and props unto the
King's Throne, Prove. 16.12.
which is established by righteousness. They will uphold the Commonwealth from
confusion and ruin, and procure the blessings of God upon it. They will have
the prayers and praises of good people here, and receive from the righteous
Judge the crown of righteousness hereafter. 2 Timothy 4.8.


But those who, being called to the office and dignity of a Judge, suffer base
unworthy fear to bear sway in them, and dare not go on, as they ought, in the
course of justice by reason of some lion they fancy to lie in their way;
Prove. 26.13.
Those who had rather wrong a poor innocent, then by doing him right forfeit
the favor and incur the displeasure of some great man; Those who, with Gallio,
Acts 18.17.
out of negligence or love of ease care for none of those things which by
virtue of their place they are bound to care for; or, with Festus, Acts 24.27.
to do the multitude a pleasure, can find in their hearts to leave a righteous
man bound; or, with Pilate, John 19.12, etc.
to avoid Cesar's frown and the loss of their place, can dispense with their
conscience for once, and doom a most innocent person to death; Such Judges as
these disgrace themselves and their honorable calling by their
faint-heartedness; and by using unlawful means to save their own stake and to
gain the favor of mortal men, Hebr. 10 31. and 12.29.
they fall into the hands of the living God, who is a consuming fi e.

Beloved, let us all, both Magistrates and people, banish pusillanimous fear
out of our bosoms. No passion so much disquieteth our minds, none so much
opposes Reason and Religion, as this. It betrayeth the succors which Reason
offers: Wisd. 17.12.
It makes a man choose iniquity rather then affliction, Job 36.21.
prefer a whole skin before a sound conscience, trust God with his soul rather
then men with his estate, as was lately said and practiced by too many. In a
word, he that is basely fearful and cowardly is so far from being a good
Magistrate that he cannot be a good man till that aguish distemper be well
driven out of him. Out with it then in God's name; and let us all in this sense
become able men, men of courage and action, Romans 12.11.
not slothful in business, fervent in spirit, serving the Lord with all our
might in the performance of those duties that either our general or our
particular calling obliges us unto, Jer. 48.10.
that so we may escape the curse that is threatened against those that do the
work of the Lord negligently, and be commended and rewarded with good and
faithful servants at our Master's coming. Matthew. 25.21, 23.
I come to the last kind of Ability that should be in Judges. They must not
only have able Heads, and able Hearts, but

3. Able Hands. I mean, They must be able in outward matters. The word in the
Original, besides that Ability of mind ye have heard of, signifies many other
things; as 1. Ability of body, 2. a Multitude of people, 3. Power and
Authority, 4. Riches and Estate; All of them fit accoustrements of a Judge. Of
the three first but a little, and of the fourth not much.

First, Judges have need of able Bodies. Otherwise, Exodus 18.13, 14.
how can they endure to sit day after day from morning till evening (as Moses
did) in Courts of judicature, carefully and heedfully attending every
transaction? Otherwise, how can they twice a year ride long circuits (as Samuel
did) and judge the people in several places? Otherwise, how can they, 1 Samuel
7.16.
when they are returned to their houses, take so great pains as they do in
their Studies, that by increasing their knowledge they may increase their
judgment, and by learning from the dead may be the better furnished to instruct
the living? This last is not the least of their labors, much reading, as well
as much riding, being a weariness to the flesh. Eccl. 12.12.


Secondly, the word signifies a Multitude, or great Assembly. And this it is
meet, more then meet, that my Lords the Judges, when they are upon the King's
and Countrey's service, should still see about them; that not only the Sheriff
with his train, and the Justices and other Gentlemen, but also a good part of
the body of the County should attend at the Assise, to the end they may honor
the persons of the Judges, credit and countenance the proceedings in the
Courts, and being present when Oppressors and Malefactors are justly
sentenced, may hear and fear, and learn not to do presumptuously.

Thirdly, the word signifies Power and Authority. And this ought all Judges to
be invested withal. Otherwise their Wisdom and Zele will avail but little for
the public good.

-- Vana est sine viribus ira. How sharp soever the edge of a weapon be, yet if
it have no back, it will flag, and give feeble and uncertain strokes. So if a
Judge want power, though he say what he ought, the people will do what they
list, and dispute and despise his sentence at pleasure. To prevent this, all
Magistrates ought to be armed and backed by their Master who employeth them.
And so our Judges are. They are Justitiarii Domini Regis, my Lord the King's
Justiciers: And where the word of a King is, Eccl. 8.4.
there is power. They are authorized by his Commission who, under God, has the
supreme power in the Nation; and they are assisted by him who, under the King,
has the Posse Comitatus, the supreme power in the County; whose office it is
to see that done which the Judge has said, and his words turned into works.

Fourthly, the word signifies Wealth and great Estate. In locum.
And this Grotius seems to conceive to be principally, if not only, meant
here. (...) (says he) opulentos significat. And he gives two reasons why none
but rich and wealthy persons should be chosen Judges; Tales enim and dignitatem
tuentur melius, and longius absunt ab inhonesti quaestus suspicione; Such as
have large and fair estates both are better able to maintain the dignity of
that high calling, and shall also be freer from the suspicion of corruption and
dishonest gain, whereas those who are known to be in a poor and needy condition
will still be supposed ready to embrace any offer, how unlawful soever, that
they may provide for their necessities, and get a livelihood. We may add a
third; That such is the judgment, or rather want of judgment, of the common
people, that wisdom and real worth will come short of its due esteem amongst
them, if it be overclouded with poverty: -- credidit ingens Horat. l. 2. sat. 3.

Pauperiem vitium --
On the contrary, -- qui divitias construxerit, ille
Clarus erit, fortis, justus, sapiens. --
Poverty they account the greatest vice, and no goods like to those of Fortune.
A fond and foolish conceit this. Jam 2.1
As we should not have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, so neither ought we
to have the Law of the Land, with respect of persons. There was not a jote more
reverence and obedience due to the decrees of the Roman Senate when the Court
shone with purple then there was when there sat there -- pelliti rustica corda
patres. Propert. l. 4. el. 1.
Senators taken from the sheepfolds, and clad with no better robes then the
skins of their cattle. Truth is Truth, and Law is Law, though a poor man speak
it; and wisdom is wisdom, though it lie under sordid raiment: Yet since the
Vulgar will not be brought to think so, Jam. 1 2, 3.
but the gay clothing and the gold-ring shall still find respect from them, and
the poor man's wisdom be despised, Eccl. 9.16.
and his words not heard, it will be prudence therefore in the supreme
Magistrate, 1 Pet 2.14.
when Governors are to be sent by him for the punishment of evildoers, and
for the praise of them that do well, to observe Jethro's advice here to Moses,
and to pitch upon such as, caeteris paribus, are the ablest men in this last
sense, men of great and plentiful estates, were it for no other reason but
this, that by thus indulging to that popular prejudice, which he cannot cure,
he may keep Tribunals from the disrespect and contempt they would be liable
unto if men of mean fortunes were set upon them.

I might here take occasion to speak also of men of another robe, the Pastors
of Christ's flock, the Ministers of the Gospel, who being Rulers too in their
proper sphere, besides their inward abilities, ought also to be able men of
estates, and that, amongst other reasons, upon the like account with
Magistrates, that their ruling and their laboring in the word and doctrine, 1 Timothy 5 17.
their pains and preaching, may be of more both esteem and efficacy. The
Apostle would have them accounted worthy of double honor, of Maintenance, and
of Reverence: But we have many amongst us, not of the populacy only, but (more
shame for them) even of higher rank, who look asquint at the Minister's
portion, and could like it far better if God were served as Jeroboam's Calves
were, 1 Kings 12.31.
by the meanest of the people. Let such men know (to say nothing else) that
they are enemies herein not so much to the Minister as to God's glory and to
their own souls. For if Sacrilege, as it has begun, once bring Poverty upon
the Clergy, that Poverty will straight usher-in Contempt and Scorn; and then
the Word of God, not being received with reverence, will be ineffectual; and so
a wide breach and floudgate will be opened for Heresy, Irreligion, Atheism,
and all Profaneness. No more of this, though the argument be too necessary,
because it is not so seasonable. I will keep within the compass of the Text,
that I may not exceed that of the Time. It follows,

II. SUCH AS FEAR GOD. It is a large field this to be surveyed as it ought; but
that neither the remainder of my sand nor your weighty occasions will permit. I
will therefore present you only with a small draught, and leave it to be
enlarged by your private meditations.

By the Fear of God in this place (as we may gather from the companions which
go along with it, Love of Truth, and Hatred of Covetousness) we are to
understand that genuine and kindly sort of Fear which is in the hearts of God's
children, and which makes them so solicitously careful not to offend him; an
awful Reverence of the Divine Majesty, proceeding from Love of him, and
producing Obedience to him; Much like unto that respect which virtuous Wives
bear unto their Husbands, or that which dutiful Children bear unto their
Parents: Whence it is called Chaste and Filial Fear.

There is also another sort of Fear, of a far different and baser allay, like
unto that dread whereby an ill-conditioned servant is forced to do his master's
will much against his own, (...). Do it he would not, if he durst do otherwise.
This by Divines is called Servile or Slavish Fear, by the Apostle the Spirit of
bondage; Romans 8.15.
because it puts a man into the posture of a bondslave, who has his mind
still tormented with the apprehension of his master's strictness and austerity,
and does all he does to escape the whip and the cudgel. This Fear has for its
object, not Sin, but Punishment; and for its cause, not Love of God, as the
former, but Self-love, and Love of the world, which make a man seek only after
ease, pleasure, profit, and whatsoever else the Flesh lusts after. As for
God, the man who is possessed only with this Fear, looking upon him, not as a
gracious Father, but as a stern Judge, 1 John 4.18.
not as a Friend, but as an Enemy, cannot choose but hate him. For as perfect
Love, according to S. John, casteth-out Fear, that is, tormenting Fear; so also
slavish and tormenting Fear excludes Love. These two are incompatible and
cannot stand together. (...) Cic. O^^. 2.
Quem metuunt, oderunt: quem quisque odit, periisse expetit. Ungodly wretches
are (...), Romans 1.30.
haters of God, and would therefore, if it were possible, pluck him out of his
throne; They could wish there were no God, Psalm. 94 7.
or that he could not see, or would not regard when they do amiss. They do what
they can to put God out of all their thoughts, Psalm. 10 4, 11, 13
that they may sin the more licentiously. But when they shall have done all
they can, God will not be quite put out of their thoughts, but ever and anon
the belief of his Presence, Knowledge, Justice, Power shall imbitter their
sinful pleasures, check them in their inordinate courses, Acts 24.25.
and make them tremble, with Felix, at the thought of a judgment to come. For
as true saving Faith is not in the power of man, Ephesians 2 8.
but a supernatural gift of God, so neither is Incredulity wholly in man's
power, the knowledge and belief of some points being as it were inbred by
Nature, and common unto all, especially of the Divine Essence and Attributes,
That God is, and, That he is wise, and just, and powerful, and, That he will
reward every man according to his works. Hence that propension, even in the
most savage and barbarous nations, to some religion and the worship of a Deity;
hence those gripes of conscience after wilful sinning, Heb. 10.26, 27.
and that fearful looking-for of judgment, a notable instance whereof we have
in the first sinners Genesis 3. These terrors of the Lord, being kindled in the
breasts of men by the light of Nature, may indeed be much increased by the
preaching of the Word making clearer and further discoveries unto them of their
own sins and of the wrath of God; but they cannot by any means be quite
extinguished. For let wicked men endeavor never so much to blind their own
eyes, to harden their hearts, and to benumme their consciences, yet still there
will be (...), a conscience accusing, an heart condemning, a worm gnawing, and
a fire glowing:

-- tacita sudant praecordia culpa, Juven. 1.167.
says the Satyrist: and in another place most excellently, -- diri conscia
facti
Men's habet attonitos, and surdo verbere caedit, Juven. 13.193.

Occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum.
A kind of hell, this, upon earth, and the greatest of all torments, Nocte
dieque suum gestare in pectore testem, -- 198.
to have the Conscience continually lashing us with the remembrance of sin and
with the fear of vengeance.

This slavish and tormenting Fear, though it be in evil men and hypocrites, yet
is not evil in itself, but of great use and benefit. For 1 seeing that not
only Nature teaches us to fear the evil of punishment, but the Scripture also
bids us, if we do evil, then to fear, Romans 13 4.
if we should do evil and not fear, we should make our sin exceeding sinful by
falling into it presumptuously, and lying in it securely. 2. Again, were it not
for this curb, men would run into all licentiousness like unbridled horses;
they would make their Will and their Power the only measure of then actions,
and hold nothing unlawful but what is unpossible: There would be no order nor
quiet upon earth, but Mankind would become like fishes of the sea; Hab. 1.14.
the greater still would devour the lesser, and all outrages and villainies
would be daily committed. But God puts this fear into the hearts of men,
that it may be a restraining grace, and hinder the perpetrating of a world of
wickedness. 3. Further yet, this servile Fear is an instrument not only of
God's Wisdom and Providence in ruling the affairs of the world, but also
oftentimes of his fatherly Mercy and loving Kindness to his children, whom he
is wont to lead toward heaven by the gates of hell, and after he has
affrighted and afflicted them by the Spirit of Bondage, to comfort and conduct
them by the Spirit of Adoption; This Fear, though not itself a sanctifying and
saving grace, yet making way for such; as Fire, though it gives not forms to
metalls, yet fitteth them for the reception of forms; and the Needle, though it
sew not the cloth itself, yet draws after it the thread, that does: This we
may see in those early Converts Acts 2. Acts 1 37, 38.
in whom Compunction of heart was the beginning of Conversion. God appears to
our souls for the most part as he did to Elijah on mount Horeb, 1 King. 19.11,
12.
making the Wind, the Earthquake, and the Fire usher-in the still small Voice.
Moses is our Schoolmaster to (...) unto Christ, Call. 3.24.
and under the terrors of the Law we are trained up to serve God acceptably
with reverence and godly fear. Hebr. 12.28.
First we learn to dread God as a Judge; and then, to reverence him as a
Father: first, to fear the Lord and his wrath; and then, Hos 3.5.
to fear the Lord and his goodness, as the Prophet speaks, and, as the
Psalmist, Psalm. 130.4.
to fear him because there is mercy and forgiveness with that is, (for such
sense those places may have) lest we should forfeit and come short of his
goodness and mercy. First we fear lest he should find us; and then we fear lest
we should lose him: first we fear lest he should smite us; and then we fear
lest he should not embrace us. Thus even this Servile Fear may be said to be
the beginning of wisdom. Psalm. 111.10. Pr. 1.7. and 9.10.


But David and Solomon his son (who both give that high elogium to the Fear of
the Lord) are to be understood to speak of that eminent and excellent Fear
which does not contract the heart, Isa. 60.5.
but enlarge it, as the Prophet speaks, does not drive us from God, but make
us cleave unto him. This Fear is not barely the beginning of wisdom, that is,
the first step unto it, but it is (as the Hebrew word (...) also signifies)
the head, the chief and principal point, of wisdom, the sum and complement
and perfection of it. Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, says God,
Job 28.28. wisdom (...), eminently, emphatically so. It is often put for the
whole worship and service of God, being the main root and foundation of
Religion. The Preacher says it is the whole duty of man, Eccl. 12.13. Let us
hear, says he, the conclusion of the whole matter; Fear God, and keep his
commandments: for this is the whole duty of man. Filial Fear, and sincere
Obedience, that the fountain, this the stream, is both totum Codicis, and totum
Hominis, the sum of God's book, and the sum of Man's duty, all that can be
said, all that ought to be done. Eschew evil, and do good, is the Brief of the
Bible. Now this Fear makes a man not only to depart from evil, Prove. 16 6.
(which the other Fear may do) but to hate evil, Prove. 8.13.
and that not so much because it is deadly as because it is ugly, not so much
because God will punish it as because he does dislike it and has forbidden it.
It makes a man also to do good, and that willingly and cheerfully. Psalm. 112.1.
Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, says the Psalmist: he has great
delight in his commandments. He who has his heart endued with this grace will
not dare to commit any sin, not to blaspheme God's name, not to profane his
day, not to neglect his service, but will with care and diligence perform the
duties that God requires of him: Levit. 20.30.
He will keep his Sabbaths, and reverence his Sanctuary; he will attend upon
his Ordinances, hearken to his word, receive the Sacrament, call upon his Name,
seek to inform himself in God's will, and endeavor to conform himself unto it.
This made Joseph, though shrewdly tempted, abstein from uncleanness. Genesis 39 9.
Exodus 1.17.
This kept the Midwives from murdering the Hebrew infants, contrary to the
express command of the bloody Tyrant. This withheld Nehemiah from oppressing
the people, Neh. 5 15.
when Oppression was now grown customary, and he might have pleaded precedent
and prescription for it. Other Governors before him were chargeable to the
people, exacting provision and money of them, and suffered also their servant's
to be insolent and to domineer over them: But so did not I, says he, because
of the fear of God. Though he was higher then the people, yet he forgot not
that there was One higher then he, who strictly observed his behavior, and
would call him to account for all his actions. And this held him within due
compass, and made him exercise his power to the people's advantage, and not his
own.

On the contrary, where this curb is wanting, men grow impudent in sinning, and
commit all wickedness even with greediness. When the Apostle would show the
fountain of all impiety and iniquity amongst men, he says, Romans 3.8.
There is no fear of God before their eyes. This reason Abraham allegeth to
Abimelech wherefore he was loath to own Sarah for his wife when he was come to
Gerar, Because I thought, Gen 20 11.
Surely the fear of God is not in this place, and they will slay me for my
wives sake. Where the fear of God is not, men will make no bones at all of
murdering a Prophet and ravishing his matrone.

From what has been said we may know what to judge of the men of this
generation. Concerning a great part thereof we may take-up the Psalmist's
words, Psalm 36.1.
The transgression of the wicked says within my heart, that there is no fear
of God before their eyes. The outrageous and unbridled sins of this age,
Atheism and Libertinism, Schism and Heresy, Oaths and Blasphemies, Sacrilege
and Profaneness, Sedition and Rebellion, Bloodshed and Cruelty, Oppression and
Injustice, Drunkenness and Gluttony, Pride and Uncleanness, Covetousness and
Uncharitableness, these notorious and horrible sins do openly show that there
is little fear of God amongst us. Those few who, making conscience of their
ways, Prove. 1.14.
will not cast-in their lot among the rest, 1 Pet. 4.4.
and runinto the same excess of riot, are made objects of wonder and subjects
of obloquy: The world accounts their courses strange, and speaks evil of
them. But let all ungodly wretches know, that, if they repent not, reform not,
1 Pet. 4.5.
they shall ere long give account to him that is ready to judge the quick and
the dead, and feel that Power which they now do not fear. And for us, Beloved,
let us labor to get this holy Fear into our inward parts; and, seeing it is an
heavenly and Divine grace, let us earnestly pray with David, that God would
unite our hearts unto him that we may fear his Name; Psalm. 86.11. Psalm. 4.4.
that we may stand in aw of him, and not sin against him; that we may set God
always before us, and having still a due belief and apprehension of his
presence with us, his knowledge of us, his power over us, and above all of his
goodness unto us, Acts 24.16.
we may exercise ourselves to have always a conscience void of offense toward
him, and to approve not our actions alone, but also our very affections unto
him. Prove 28.14.
Blessed is the man who thus fears always.

Before I close-up this point (which shall close-up my discourse at this time)
let me crave leave (though indeed my Text and my Calling give me leave) to tell
Judges and Magistrates and all that are in authority, that they ought to be
such as fear God.

This Qualification stands, me thinks, in the Text like the Sun in the
middle of the Planets, dispersing his beams all about, being the fountain of
light and life; or like the Heart in the midst of the body, which is primum
vivens, and sends blood and spirits to all the members; or like the Poise or
Spring in a clock, which is primum movens, and sets every wheel a-going:
Thus this Grace has influence upon all its fellows, which are still wont to
sprowt from it as branches from the root. That Magistrate who truly fears
God, will be also an able man both in head and heart, a man of truth, and an
hater of covetousness. 1. The Fear of the Lord will be unto him a principle
both of Wisdom and Courage. It will make him first pray and labor for a
competent measure of knowledge for the discharge of his duty, and then with an
undaunted vigor and resolution perform it, scorning to be drawn or driven from
it by the fawns or frowns of the world. For this noble Fear will banish, yea
quite extinguish all base relpects and carnal fears, as fear of loss, or
danger, or disgrace, or imprisonment, or death it self. None of these, nor all
these shall be able to deter a religious Magistrate from doing his duty. The
Lord of hosts being his fear and his dread, Isa. 2.13. Isa 51.12.
he will not be afraid of a Man that shall die, and of the Son of man, which
shall be made as grass; Not forgetting the Lord his Maker, he will not fear the
sury of the oppressor; -- 1^
Fearing Him who can cast both body and soul into hell, Matthew 10 2^
he will not fear them who can but kill the body, no nor that neither, not so
much as touch an hair of the head, Luke 12 4, ^
without leave and power from above. He will, with holy David, despise and
defy all opposition, and that upon David's account; Psalm 72.1.
The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? the Lord is the
strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid? Though an host should encamp
against me, my heart shall not fear. Psalm 23.4.
Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no
evil: for thou art with me. O the excellency of godly Fear! All other Fears
blind and besot a man, make him unreasonable, unjust, irreligious, ready to do
any evil, so that he may escape the evil he fears: But the fear of the Lord
is the beginning of wisdom; Psalm. 111.10.
and a good understanding have all they that do thereafter.

2. Again, that Magistrate who truly fears God cannot choose but be also a man
of truth, and that in respect both of belief and of life, of opinion and of
practice, of speculation and of judgment. He will love the Word of God, and
live accordingly; He will buy the Truth at any rate, Prove. 23.23.
and sell it at no rate: He will abhor all false doctrine, heresy and schism,
all fanatical and fond opinions, and make use of that power which God and his
Prince have given him to discountenance and suppress them. And as he will be a
man of truth in reference to the first Table, so will he also be in reference
to the second, being by his Office custos utriusque Tabulae. He will be a
friend to Justice, (which is especially meant here by Truth) and a so to
Falsehood and Wrong. He will neither offer injuries himself, nor suffer injuries
in others; but will truly and indifferently administer justice to the
punishment of wickedness and vice, and to the maintenance of true Religion and
virtue. He will put-on righteousness, Job 19.14
and it shall clothe him; and his judgment shall be as a robe and a diadem: He
will count exsecuting of judgment a greater ornament unto him then his purple
and scarlet, and glory no less in it then Kings do in their Crowns and
Sceptres. This it is for a Judge to be a man of truth. A copious and necessary
Theme, had we time to handle it. But being loath to make the Pulpit trespass
upon the Tribunal, I give you but a small view of it by the By, and speak of
this Qualification (as I shall also of the last) only as an inseparable
companion of the former, That the Judge who fears God will be sure to be a
man of truth. Considering that he sits in the seat of God, that he does the
work of God, that he judgeeth not for man, but for God, 2 Chronicles. 19.6.
who is with him in the judgment, that he bears the name of God and is a
petty God upon earth, Exodus 22.28. Psalm. 82.1, 6.
he will not dare to walk contrary to God's command and example, but will
follow God as a dear child, Ephesians. 5.1.
and as God is the God of truth, so will he be a man of truth: Deuteronomy. 32.4.
He will use all possible prudence and pains and patience in sifting and
bolting out of the truth: He will hear both parties, examine witnesses, scan
writings and evidences, weigh every information and circumstance; and after
that by diligent inquisition he has found out the truth, he will stoutly
maintain it by pronouncing sentence accordingly.

3. Lastly, from the Fear of God will assuredly flow an Hatred of Covetousness,
since these two cannot possibly stand together, Psalm. 111 13. 1 Timothy 6 1^.
the Beginning of Wisdom and the Root of all evil. That Judge, that Justice,
hat Advocate, that Jurour, that Witness, that Infor^^^, that person whatsoever
he be, who is greedy of filthy lucre, has no true fear of God before his eyes:
He makes Gold his God, he serves Mammon, he loves the World, (...) 2.15.
and therefore the love of the Father is not in him: (...) 44.
for the Love of the world is enmity with God. This is the bane of Courts, the
corruption of Justice, the enchantment of Magistrates: It transformeth them,
and makes them quite contrary to what they should be, so that of Patrones of
the oppressed themselves become the sorest Oppressors, of Shepherds they
become (...), Ezekiel. 22 27.
wolves ravening the prey, shedding blood, destroying souls, getting dishonest
gain: It makes them neither see, nor hear, nor speak, nor act as they ought,
but do all against both science and conscience: Deuteronomy. 16 19.
It blinds the eyes of the wise, and perverteth the words of the righteous.
An instance whereof we have in the young Judges of Beer-sheba, 1 Samuel 8.3. who
turning aside after lucre, and taking bribes, perverted judgment, contrary to
the good example their aged father Samuel had given them. We need not look so
far for an instance; Prove. 1.19.
for so are the ways of every one that is greedy of gain. And all this is
through want of of the Fear of God; Wherewith whosoever is endued, he will
infinitely prefer the serving of God and the preserving of his own soul before
the gaining of the whole world. This Grace (as has already been noted) moved
that good Governor Nehemiah to choose rather to part with his allowance and
customary provision then to seem a griping oppressor of a necessitous people.
Neh. 5.15.
This King Jehoshaphat, in that excellent Charge he gives to his Judges, 2 Chronicles. 19.7.
recommendeth as a sovereign (...) and Preservative against Bribery,
Partiality, and all Injustice; Wherefore now, says he, let the fear of the
Lord be upon you; take heed, and do it: for there is no iniquity with the Lord
our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts. None of these are with
God; neither are any of these with the godly, who sincerely fear him. But if
this Fear be wanting, we may come to the place of judgment, Eccl 3.16.
and wickedness will be there; and to the place of righteousness, and iniquity
will be there: we may look for judgment, but behold oppression; I a. 5.7.
for righteousness, but behold a cry. This that great Fountain of Poetry, and
indeed of all Learning, though they say he was blind, yet saw clearly, that
Contempt of God is the sourse of all Injustice; (...), Ilia. (...). 388.

(...).
Thus he. And to the same sense speaks that excellent Roman who so happily
emulated the Greek, some say outwent him; Discite justitiam moniti, and non
temnere Divos. AEN. 6.620.
Would to God that all Magistrates, and others who have to do in Courts of
judicature, would follow the counsel of this heathen Monitour, and learn to
fear God above, and to exercise and exsecute righteousness here below. This
duty not only the Scripture (as ye have heard) commands, but even natural
Reason also requires, as might further be made to appear by many other
passages of sober Ethnic writers. Surely then if Christians prove guilty of
the nonperformance hereof, and be like the Judge in the Gospel, Luke 12 2.
which feared not God, neither regarded man, their sin will be sorely
aggravated and their condemnation exceedingly increased by their enjoyment of
clearer light and greater means to have done better.

Let me therefore earnestly entreat and beseech you, Honorable, Worshipful,
Beloved, that ye will fear the Lord God of heaven and earth, and order all your
ways accordingly: And that to this end ye will carry still in your breasts a
serious apprehension of God's Presence, his Knowledge, his Justice, his Power,
and his Goodness.

1. For the first; Epist. 11.
Seneca says truly, Magna pars peccatorum tollitur, si peccaturis testis
adsistat. Privacy and solitude is a great temptation to wickedness; and the
presence of witnesses is often an hindrance and prevention. In this regard, as
much as in any, Gen 2.18.
we may say, It is not good for a man to be alone, Eccl. 4.10.
and, We be to him that is so. Therefore the Stoic well advises his friend
Lucilius to observe the precept of Epicurus, Epist. 25.
Sic fac omnia, tanquam spectet aliquis; Still to fancy some grave personage,
such as Cato, or Scipio, or Lelius, standing by him, and observing his
carriage. Without phansying, we have really and in good earnest a far more
severe Arbiter then Cato continually present. For we say of every place,
whether sacred or profane, whether public or private, as Jacob did of Bethel,
Genesis 28.16.
Surely the Lord is in this place, though we were not aware. The Psalmist
tells us that, which way soever we bend our course, Psalm. 139.7.
we cannot go from God's Spirit, nor flee from his presence. But though he be
present everywhere, yet is he especially present in his own Courts, and in
yours. Rev. 2.1.
He walks in the midst of the seven golden candle sticks; and he stands in
the congregation of the mighty, Psalm. 82 1. 2 Chronicles. 19 6. De Legib. 6.
and is with them in the judgment. Plato says it was a custom amongst the
ancients to build their Judges Court close by the Temple of the Gods, that the
neighborhood of that sacred place might strike reverence into the Magistrate,
and make him take the better heed what he did. And the Ethiopian Judges, they
say, were wont still to leave their highest seats empty for the Angels to come
down and sit in. They thought so great matters as the Lives and Livelihoods of
Men might not be decided unless the Gods themselves were of the Quorum; and
therefore they reserved places for them. But be ye assured, that how full
soever your Hall anon be thwacked and thronged, the God of Angels and Men will
find room amongst you. He will be in every place, in every corner, on the
Judge's bench, at the Lawyer's bar, in the Jurour's chamber or meeting place.
Therefore let every man stand in aw of him, and none dare to misbehave himself
in so dreadful a presence.

2. But some happily may conceit, like that foolish bird, that because they see
not, they are not seen, and consequently need not fear; Let such therefore, in
the second place, know and consider, that God is not only present with them,
but privy to them; and though none see him, yet he sees all thoroughly:

-- (...). He is acquainted with all our ways; Psalm. 139.2, 3, 4.
There is not a word in our tongue, but he knows it altogether; Yea, 1 S m.
16 7.
he understands our thoughts afar off. He sees not as Man sees: for Man
looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart. Man,
whose eye can pierce no further then the outside, may easily be deceived and
cousened by the fair shows that crafty companions can cloak themselves and
disguise their falsehood withal: But God tries the reins, Jer 11.20. Prove.
16.2. Psalm 44 21.
and weighs the spirits, and knows the very secrets of the heart:
Impossible therefore it will be for any to delude and mock him, or to hide his
very inmost purposes and intentions from him. Oh who can choose but fear to
commit sin, that considers he stands before such an Ephor us as this! It
would be prodigious boldness for a man to cut a purse, much more to cut a
throat, before the eye of an earthly Judge: What high and horrid presumption
then is it for Christians, who profess a belief of God's Omniscience, to go
about by malicious and fraudulent practices to deprive their innocent brethren
of life, or liberty, or goods, or good-name? That all-seeing Eye, one would
think, might suffice to restrain us not only from acting, but even from
thinking, such mischief. And so it would, were it well thought of. It would
quench the sparks of sin ere they raise a flame; It would nip those cursed
buds, and not suffer them to ripen; It would crush the cockatrice-egs, that
they never should be hatched into serpents. But alas! it is to be feared, few
there are who set God continually before them, and therefore few there are who
walk uprightly before him. Psalm 10 11.13. and 73 11.
This reason the Psalmist gives more then once of the Fraud and Cruelty of the
ungodly; They say, says he, The Lord shall not see, Psalm. 94.7.
neither shall the God of Jacob regard it. Let me answer and silence such men
(if there be any thing of Man left in them) with the words that follow;
Understand, ye brutish among the people: and, ye fools, -- 8. -- 9.
when will ye be wise? He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? and he that
formed the eye, shall he not see? He does see thee, though thou think he
does not, from the height of heaven, Job 22.^2.13.
and through the dark cloud. His eyes, says the son of Sirach, Eccl. 23.19.
are ten thousand times brighter then the Sun, beholding all the ways of men,
and considering the most secret parts. He sees, and hears, and understands
infinitely more then all the world, and discerns that which none else can;
that being true of him which the Delphick Devil said falsely of himself, (...)
(...). Herdot. Ci^^.

He counts the Sands on the shore, and the Drops of the deep; and, which is
much more, he is (...), and knows what is in man. Acts 1.24. John 2.25.
He takes exact notice not only of that which comes from thee, but of that
also which is contrived within thee, of all the plots and projects that thou
art forging in thy brain or breast. Since God's Eye therefore does so narrowly
watch thee, let it be thy care to set a strict watch over thyself, not over thy
Tongue and Hands alone, but also over thy Heart, and suffer not evil thoughts
to lodge within thee.

3. But again, some there are who, notwithstanding all this, bless themselves
in their own hearts, and hold it folly for a man to amuze and amaze his mind
with the conceit of Gods Omniscience, since though he sees and knows never
so much, he neither does nor says any thing; Nec been promeritis capitur,
L^^c. et. 3.
nec tangitur ir a. His favor is neither won with good services, nor lost with
bad; but he stands an indifferent and unconcerned spectatour of humane
actions. They consent with thieves, Psalm 50.18.
and are partakers with adulterers; They give their mouths to evil, -- 19.
and their tongues frame deceit; -- 20.
They sit and speak against their brother, -- 21.
and slander their own mothers son: These things they do; and God keeps
silence, and therefore they think that he is altogether such a one as
themselves; They take his silence for consent: And because sentence against
their evil works is not exsecuted speedily, Eccl ^^ 11.
therefore their heart is fully set in them to do evil. They see not gross
offenders laid hold on by Divine Justice (...), in the very act; They see not
Knights of the post, false Witnesses and forsworn Jurymen, Acts 5 ^, 10.
served as Ananias and Sapphira were, struck dead with the lie in their mouths;
They see not unconscionable Lawyers struck dumb at the bar for misemploying
that excellent gift of Eloquence in gilding-over causes manifestly rotten, --
non hos quaesitum mun us in usus; (...) 4 647.
They see not corrupt and unjust Judges suddenly plucked from the Bench below
to the Bar above; They find that by wronging and ruining of others themselves
prosper in the world, Psalm. 73.12.
and increase in riches: And hence they conclude, that, though God see their
courses, he disliketh them not; hence they embolden, and harden, and streng
then themselves in their wickedness, despise the threatenings of God, and abuse
his goodness, Romans 2.4.
and forbearance, and long-suffering, which should lead them to repentance.
Prove. 1.32.
Thus ease and prosperity destroy silly ones. O that these men would believe
the Scriptures! Thence they might learn that God is infinite in Justice as well
as in Knowledge; Psalm. 5 4.
that he is not a God that has pleasure in wickedness, -- 5.
but hates all workers of iniquity, -- 6.
and abhors the bloody and deceitful man; Genesis 18 25.
that he is the Judge of all the earth, and will do right; Exodus 34.7.
that he will by no means clear the guilty, but though at present he endure
with much long-sussering the vessels of wrath, Romans ^.21.
he will in due time make himself known by exsecuting judgment: Psalm. 9.16.
Though he now keep silence, Psalm. 50.2^.
yet presumptuous sinners shall one day find, if in the mean while they repent
not, he will reprove them, Eccl. 12.14.
and set all their sins in order before their eyes: Every work will he bring
into judgment, with every secret thing, whether good or evil. Then impenitent
wretches shall feel the patience they abused turned into fury, and the blow
they feared not fall the heavier by how much it was the longer in fetching.
Psalm 50 22.
Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there
be none to deliver.

4. But still perhaps some there are who love to flatter and feed themselves
with vain hopes of scaping well enough at that dreadful day of doom, great men
especially, such as here upon earth have had both the face and fortune to
overbear right by might, to baffle Magistrates, to elude the Laws of the Land,
to break all bands asunder, Psalm. 2 3.
to cast away all cords from them, and to pass through every obstacle with as
much ease and sport as Wasps and Hornets brush through the nets of Spiders.
Such sights as these the late times have presented us with more then a good
many. We have seen Folly set in great dignity, Eccl 10 6.
and the rich sit in low place: -- 7.
We have seen servants on horses, and princes walking as servants on the earth:
And Asperius nihil est humili, cum surgit in altum. We have seen the very dung
and dust of the earth fly in the face of Authority and Majesty it self. We
have seen men well worthy to have been advanced to the gibbet, sitting gravely
on the Bench, and not only trussing-up far lesser offenders then themselves,
but also oftentimes sentencing honest and loyal snbjects, yea, (which is the
height of villainy) their liege Sovereign, unto death. Certainly these bold
wretches feared not the fury and force of the Almighty. But if there be any of
those (...), of that brood of Titans, yet above ground, Psalm 2.4.
let them know that He who sits in the heavens will laugh them to scorn, the
Lord will have them in derision; And that what power soever they either have
had, or still have, over men, they can have none at all over God, who is
omnipotent, and regards neither the persons, nor power, nor number of his
enemies; But though they be never so many, Lake 19.42.
never so mighty, unless in this their day they know the things which belong
unto their peace, He will in that day of his break them with a rod of iron,
Psalm 2.9.
and dash them in pieces like a potters vessel. Psalm. 9 17.
By one word of his mouth all the wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the
people that forget God! Thy present wealth shall not be able to purchase thy
pardon, nor thy present dignity to procure any exemption. Thou shall fare no
better then the meanest sinner: Nay, much worse: for, Potentes potenter; Wisd.
6.6.
Mighty sinners shall be mightily tormented, Wisd. 6. a Chapter worthy to be
seriously perused by all great men, that they may become good as well as great.
I will shut up this point with the words of the Psalmist; Be wise now
therefore, O ye Magistrates; be instructed, ye Judges of the earth. Psalm. 2.10.
Learn this lesson, That God's Presence cannot be avoided, his Knowledge cannot
be deluded, his Justice cannot be corrupted, his Power cannot be resisted;
Learn this, and ye will be wise indeed: for then ye will serve the Lord in
fear. -- 11.


These Notes happily may seem harsh and unpleasant: But they should not do so,
since they are very profitable, and may (with the concent and concurrence of
God's grace) like the strokes of David's harp, serve to allay and charm the
evil spirit that is in us, and to settle and compass our minds in a right tune
and harmony. But though the Strings be good, I will touch them no more at
present, but slip over them to another, with which I will endeavor to close
sweetly.

5. In the last place, let all Magistrates, for the ingendring and increasing
the Fear of God in their hearts, often remember and consider the Goodness of
God unto them and his Favors bestowed upon them; How he has placed them in
the noblest rank of his earthly creatures, and endued them with rational and
immortal souls, capable of grace and glory; How he has called them to
knowledge of him, to faith in him, to hopes of living for ever with him; How he
has raised them alost, and set them above their brethren; has put Wisdom into
their heads, and the Sword into their hands; made them Oracles of justice,
Living Laws, Pillars and Props of the Commonwealth, Eyes to the blind, Feet to
the lame, Fathers to the Poor, Job 29.15, 16.
a Refuge to the oppressed, and a Terror to oppressors, in a word, his own
Ministers and Vicegerents and Representatives upon earth. Gods they are all,
and Children of the Most high: He himself styles them so Psalm. 82.6. Such
honor have all Christian Magistrates. Now let every Magistrate seriously
consider this, and in stead of being proud of God's gifts, as if he had not
received them, 1 Cor. 4.7.
he will bethink and bespeak himself with the Psalmist, Psalm. 116.12.
What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? and finding
himself to be the Child of God in so many respects, by Creation, by Adoption,
by Office and Authority, as a Man, as a Christian, as a Magistrate, he will
hold himself bound as it were by a threefold cord to serve his heavenly Father
with filial Fear and Reverence.

I have done with the second Qualification of Judges; but have insisted on it
so long, that the time will not now suffer me to speak, as I once intended, of
those two that remain. Neither indeed will it be necessary that I should, if
what has been spoken concerning the Fear of God be believed and practiced as
it ought, seeing those other Qualifications, as I told you, naturally flow from
this, and constantly attend upon it, like handmaids upon their mistress. Those
Judges who fear God, will be also Men of truth, and Haters of covetousness.
Which that all of us, not only Magistrates, but Subjects, may be, the God of
all grace grant through Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom with the Father and the
holy Ghost be all honor and glory for evermore.

FINIS.

