Papisto-Mastix, OR DEBORAHS Prayer against Gods Enemies, Judge. 5.31.
Explicated and Applied, In the Cathedral of Saint Peter in Exon, November the
fifth, 1641.

By WILLIAM SCLATER, Batchelar in Divinity, Prebend of that Church.

Psalm. 68.1. Let God arise, and let his Enemies be scattered: Let them also
that hate him, fly before him, etc.

LONDON, Printed by Ric. Hodgkinsonne for Daniel Friar, and are to be sold at
his shop at the sign of the red-Bull in little-Britaine, 1642.

TO The truly Noble, and eminent Example of the best worth, Mr. HENRY MURRAY
Esquire, one of the Grooms of his Mties. Bedchamber, The Happiness of both
Worlds.
Noble Sir,
AFTER much agitation of thoughts, where (in these dismembered times) this poor
piece of my worthless endeavors might best find shelter; at length it was
directed, as Noah's Dove unto the Arc, to seek your Patronage; as in whose
breast so many lines of piety, drawn from a large circumference meet as in the
proper Center; as who have, by a sacred kind of Chemistry, extracted the best
spirits, and quintessence of the choicest virtues; which virtues, like some
rich Carbuncles that shine best in varied lights, are by so much more glorious
and full of luster, by how much the predominant and most enchanting vices of
this vile age can no way damp or sully them: nor does it, indeed, a little glad
me, to see that early sanctity, which dyed you (to my known experience) in
grain, in the woull of your youth, now you have been woven in the loomes of
Time into more years, still to keep its color: Besides this, it is your
excellence (nor can it be consisted) that though some other Courtiers have
sometime been known, like some fair colored silks, by too much ayring to
have lost their gloss; yet your retiring Holiness (which is the Diamond set
in the Ring of your merited commendations) has preserved you still, as Sic
tibi cum fluctus subterlabere sicanos, Doris amara suam non intermisceat undam:
Vargil. Eclog. 10.
Alpheus gliding silently under the brackish Doris, untainted and unst yned by
the worst of times: and (which I cannot but add) your rare: kill in Arts, and
various literature, is that which does enamell and embellish all the rest: so
that whilst the tottering of the times has rocked many asleep in secure
vanity, the very mention of your name, like a box of spikenard broken, has
filled us with a sweet perfume, and the savor thereof drawn me, thus far,
to shroud this naked issue of my thoughts under the wings of your favor; some
few cast feathers whereof may so ympe and fledge it, that it shall adventure
with more alacrit, to fly abroad.

Daigne then, Honored Sir, (being a known Patron of goodness) to bestow a look
upon this importunate suitor, and to spread your protection over it, and him;
who, as Ruffinus, in Symbol. Apost. inter opera Cypriant, initio.
Ruffinus apologized for the edition of his Comment on the Apostles Creed,
cannot (chiefly in so great insufficiency) but know, Non esse absque periculo,
multorum judiciis ingenium tenue and exile committere; how full of jeopardy it
is, in so slender a schallop, to adventure on the deepes of so many greater
judgments; or, as S. S Hierom. in proaem. ad Obad.
Hierome said unto Pammachius, of some things written in the beat of his youth;
Infans sum nec dum scribere nosco; nunc ut nihil aliud profecerim, saltem
Socra. icum illud habeo, Scio, quod nescio. But since I was willing to let you
^ee, on this occasion, how much I value your Patronage, Let it be your
Nobleness to stoup to the entertainment of this bearty Testimonial of my
respects; and wi^hall, to cast some few strictures of favor upon him, the
thirst of whose ambition could not be quenched, till be had declared himself
to be,

Your true honourer, devoted to do you service, WILLIAM SCLATER.
Febr: 7. 1641.
DEBORAH'S Prayer against GODS Enemies, explaned and applied.
JUDGE. 5.31. So let all thine Enemies perish, O Lord: but let them that love
him, be as the sun, when be goes forth in his might, And the land had rest
forty years.


THE Text is the close of good Deborah and Barak, The occasion of the words.
their Epinicion or Triumphall Song; sung by them, in Prayer, unto the Lord,
who had, now, victoriously made bare his own arm: in granting, by their
(though but impotent) hands, a mighty deliverance, from the potent forces of
Johin, King of Canaan; in the shameful discomfiting of Sisera, his chief
Captain; and by the watery bosom of the river Kishon, (that ancient river,
the river Kishon) sweeping his numerous Army, as so many grassehoppers, from
the Earth: It was I say, the close of their song, upon that occasion; and may
now seasonably be resumed into our mouths ^his day; which (as of old, the days
of Purim, that in the time of Mordecai and Queen Ester were turned unto the
Jews, from sorrow to joy, and from mourning into good days, Est. 9.22.26.) we
justly solemnize and make festival: For as then to quench the thirst of a
cruel ambition, rivers full of blood streaming from the gashed veins of
innumerable Innocents, were designed to be cut out through the very flesh and
throats of Gods peculiar people: so was there as up n this day, a Tophet
ordained and prepared for us and for our King, it was (to borrow the expression
of the Prophet Is. 30.33.) mad deep and large, the pile thereof was fire and
much wood: only, the breath of the Lord (which had tofore blown upon the
cursed project of that Luciferian Haman) would not, as a stream of brimstone
enkindle it: so that, that very mischievous devise which they indeed (to speak
with the Psalm. 21.11.
Psalmist) [imagined] and intended against us, but were not able to [perform,]
was then returned on their own pates: and, as the story tells us of Mixentius,
who was first drowned himself, from that bridge of mouldring, leaking boats,
from which he hoped the Christian Emperor Constantine should have miscarried;
Lo! in the very Psalm. 9.15, 16.
same net, was their own foot taken.

Who doubts, but, as of old, the too-unwary Benjimites, looking back behind
them to their City Gibeab, Jud. 20.40. those cruel Pioners meant to feed
t^eir eyes with the joyful spectacle of those flames, which with a pillar of
smoke, ascended up to Heaven, from our great Metropolis yea, to surfeit on the
goodly prospect of those mangled carcasses of Heretics, who, as that Angel of
Manoah, Judge. 13.20. in the flame of the altar, were by a crack of Hellish
thunder, mounted up to Heaven before the Resurrection; and preferred thither, as
some new companions to Elias, in a 2 King. 2.11.
fiery Chariot?

But, as Deborah observed, in an Irony of the impatience of the braving mother
of Sisera, that looked before the victory, out at a window, to view the pomp
of his approach, Judge. 5.28. saying, Why is his Chariot so long in coming? Why
tarry the wheels of his Chariots? have they not sped? have they not divided the
prey? to every man, a Damsel or two? to Sisera, a prey of diverse colors; a
prey of diverse colors of needle work, of diverse colors of needle work, on
both sides, meet for the necks of them that take the spoil? Alas, alas! Fond
Atheists, what Castles of crazy hopes had they now set up in the air? What
silly Nimrods were these, to build up Towers of expectation, that cannot but
(being against God) prove Genesis 11.5 9.
Babels and their sure confusion? besotted Hamans, mounting up gibbets no less
than fifty cubits high, to break their Ester. 7.9, 10.
own necks! Behold, Sisera that great terror of Israel, who brought so many
hundred thousands into the field, had (ere this vain brag of theirs) quit his
Chariot, and betaken him to his heels; and those heels posted him to the Tent
of Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite; and at her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay
down; at the feet of a woman, (a weak instrument) he bowed, he fell; where he
bowed, there he fell down dead: Lo! there lay this proud wormesmeat sprawling
with his head fastened to the ground, as if it had been now listening what was
become of the Soul: against the hammer of a feeble woman, was this gilded
pot-sheard of the earth not cracked, but broken: In short, he who was pleased to
style himself, the mighty Psalm. 24.6.
God of Jacob, that God of Israel, who neither Psalm 121.4.
slumbered nor slept in the dangers of his chosen Psalm. 135.4.
treasure; this Lord of Hoasts, sitting above in Heaven, Psalm. 2.4.
laughed all his enemies to scorn; and when their hopes, like ^o the sins of
the Amorite, were ripe and Genesis 15.16.
full, the Lord, he had them in derision, and by the hands of the weaker sex,
levelled the magnificence of a daring Champion with the dust: Then Jael (says
the Text, Judge 4.21.) Hebers wife took a nail of the tent, an took an hammer
in her hand, and went softly unto him, and smote the nail into his temples,
and fastened it into the ground; (for he was fast asleep and weary.) See here,
no ^ne circumstance about his overthrow is left ^ut, So he died: And even so,
says good Deborah the Proph^tesse in my Text, So let all thine Enemies perish,
O Lord: but let them that leve him, be as the sun, when he goes forth in his
might.

And thus have ye seen the occasion of these words, in which (as to my
observation they occur) we have two principal parts, commended to our
notice. The division.
I. An Imprecation upon Gods Enemies; So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord.
II. An Apprecation, or an obtestation of good, upon his friends; But let them
that love him, be as the sun, etc.


In the former, we have these particulars. 1. The person employed, thus praying
against Gods enemies, Deborah a Prophetess, verse the first. 2. The person
unto whom she directs her Prayer, The Lord. 3. The form of her imprecation,
Let. 4. The title she gives those, against whom she prays, God Enemies. 5. The
universality or extent of her devotion, [all] thine enemies. 6. The matter of
her Imprecation, Let them all (perish.) 7. The manner, after which she desires
they may all perish, So.


So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord.

In the second General, her Apprecation of good, we have. I. The Perip^rasis
of those she prays for, such as love the Lord. II. The Assimilation, or
resemblance, whereto she suits their happiness, he sun; and to that sun,
going forth and going forth in his might.


These are the parts and heads of my discourse: of as many of them, in their
cue order, as the time shall allow: and first, by way of explication; and then
of Application, by Gods assistance, and the wonted favor of your Christian
patience.

THE first particular, is the person, that here makes this Imprecation upon
Gods enemies; Part. I.
and she is Deborah, a Prophetess and a Mother in Israel, Judge. 4.4. and 5.7.
A circumstance remarkable, if we meditate the deplored estate of the Church in
those times; which (as we find by the story) were most forlorn and desperate;
For, nothing but Anarchy and Tumult now prevailed: And indeed in the whole face
of that age, naught but botches and blains and ulcers could be discovered;
which so universally became contagious, that all degrees of men were tainted;
and the issue of them proved so dangerous, that from that one people then, is
made good that Maxim in Policy; Its better to live, where nothing, hen where
all things are lawful: for now were those days, Judge. 21.^. in which there
was no King in Israel, but every man did that, which was [right] in his own
eye: And what was that, which was then so [right] in their own eyes? Read but
the story, you shall dye your cheeks in grain and blush: Then it seemed right
in the eyes of Micah, to make himself Gods, or puppets of his own; and to keep
a Levite to adore them, within his own private walls, Judge. 17. And if this
seemed right to Micah, why not also unto others? ita, quot B. Andrews p. 52.
inter opera posthuma; concion. Lat. in psalm. 144.10.
familiae, tot Idolorum portenta nova, so that there were not more families,
then new monsters of Idolatry: Then it seemed right in the eyes of the Danites,
not only to pilfer from the private closets of Micah; but to depopulate and
waste whole Cities, as they did Laish, Judge. 18. Then the shameless
ravishments of women as of the Levites Concubine, seemed right in the eyes of
the men of Gibeah, Ju. 19. The story abounds with particulars: all showing the
state of those days to be most loathsome and rufull: Lo yet and see, even in
those loose and forlorn times there was a Deborah found out in Israel; a grave
and godly matrone, fit to make a Prophetess, even Deborah the wife of
Lapidoth: My note from hence is this; Observe.
That in the barrenest times of the Church, the Lord has ever had some to
fear him, and to stand up for his Truth. And this has been found true, Proof.
in the experience of all ages: In the old World when a Deluge of iniquity,
foregoing that of water, had overflowen the earth, and [all] flesh had
corrupted his way, Genesis 6.12. yet even then, God saw a righteous Noah before
him; and that [emphatically] even in so vile a generation, Genesis 7.1. In the
very Court of Pharaoh (that peerles prodigy of impenitence and obduration)
there was found a fervant, who feared the word of the Lord, Exodus 9.20. so
likewise, even in Nero's household there was a Church, Phil. 4.22.. After this
when Idolatry had like Naamans Leprosy overspread the whole body of the
Church; yet even then, God had left him seven thousand in Israel, whose knees
never bowed to Baal, and whose mourn near kissed him 1 King. 19.18. In farther
process of time, in the days of Herod the King of Judea (that leach which
sucked the blood of so many tender Innocents) there were found Zechary and
E^izabeth, both righteous before God, Luke 1.6. In short, even under the rage
of that wild bore of the forest, Antichrist himself, Recel. 11.3. God had (as
here in this story Deborah and Barack) two witnesses to stand up in his cause:
And in those first times of but blooming Christianity, when the Heresy of
Arriu, in those days, as that of the accursed Socinians in these now,
(overthrowing, blasphemously, the divinity of Christ) like to that Pestilence
in King David's time, spreading from Dan to Beersheba, had infected the whole
Christian world, as S. Hierome acquaints us: yet then, God raised up the spirit
of an undaunted Athanasius; whose learned zeal backed by the countenance and
favor of the Christian Emperor Constantine; as the 2 King. 2.21.
salt of Elisha, healing the sickly waters about Jericho; both affronted and
put to silence the abettors of that horrid blasphemy; and by his tears, as by
the bleeding of a chaste vine, cured the Leprosy of that tainted age: In a
word, though Gildas, apud Episc. Usher p. 68 c. 7. of the Irish Religion.
Gildas (the ancientest and most authentic Historian, that we have)
complained that the number of good men were so exceeding short among the
Britons in his time, in comparison of the exorbitant sons of Belial, who (as
the Caterpillars sometimes over Egypt) prevailed sofarre upon the Nation, that
their Mother the Church, in a manner, did not [see] them, lying in her own lap;
albeit they were the only [true] sons, which she then had: yet sons she had
still some, notwithstanding, who, as some few solid grains of corn, were
fanned from a world of chafe, and esteemed by the Lord, as the costliest Mal.
3.17.
Jewels and treasure of hat age: Even as here in the corruptest condition of
Israel, there was found out a godly Deborah to deliver the Church, and to sing
praises to the Lord Jehovah.

Nor need we wonder at the observation: Jer. 32.40. and that, he had so founded
her upon a Rock, as the gates of Hell should never be able to prevail against
her, Math. 16.18. The phrase of speech is borrowed from the customs of those
days, when the Counselors of a State or City, were wont to treat of the
affairs of the Nation in the [gates] of their Cities; as we see, Ruth. 4.1.
and the Periphrasis of such a Counselor, Pro. 31.23. and so of a simple man,
on the contrary, it is said, Pro. 24.7. He opens not his mouth in the [gate]:
so that by the gates of Hell, are meant the policies and subtle stratagems of
Satan; though they were such as had been by him and his agents, plotted and
consulted of in the priviest Counsell-chamber (if so I may speak) of Hell it
self; yet shall they never be able to prevail, Matthew. 7.25.
irrecoverably to hurt the Church; no more then those billows in the Ocean do
upon the Rocks, which return them back in froth without annoyance: yea, says
that famous Champion of it, the great Athanasius orat. (...): confer. Arch B.
Usher, c. 6, s. 6.7, 8, etc.p. 147. De success. Eccles. Christ.
Athanasius, (...). etc. The Church of Christ shall remain, as mount Sion
Psalm. 1.25.1.
, immovable; though hell her self and all the powers thereof be moved against
it: Behold, as soon shall the smoke be able (though it make a deally smother
in the chimney-top) to blot out the Sun, and to stifle up the air, for ever;
as all the violence of Hell, universally to extinguish the truth or Church;
Psalm. 89.33. and John 10.29.

And this meditation should me thinks, Job says God does to the Sea, set Job.
38.10.
doors and bars to the furious Luk 6.11.
madness of the Enemies of Gods Church; in whose heart it is, as Esaias says of
Ashur, to Isa 10.7.
destroy and to cut off Nations, not a few: When, alas! as soon shall the Earth
become a Star, and darkness light, as Gods 2 Timothy 2.19.
foundation be overthrown: We read in the second Psalm, that the Heathen made
a mighty tumult, raged furiously: and as that fly (in the Fable) upon the
Axle-tree imagined, that they had raised a smothering dust, enough to put out
the very eyes of Christ's Kingdom; and as for the bonds of subjection to his
Gospel; look, as Sampson did his Judge. 16.9.
withs, they will break them all, forsooth, in sunder, and cast away the cords
thereof from them: compare also, Psalm. 83. But what of all this? alas! says
David, all this was but to imagine a Psalm 2.7.
[vaine] thing; 'twas but as if the Isa. 64.8.
Clay had contended with the Potter; or a Pigmy strugled with a Crane: For
behold! maugre all opposition, yet have I set up Christ my King, says God,
upon my holy hill of Sion.

Those Neroes, Domitians, Diocletians, and Maximians (the bloody tyrants of the
Primitive times) can witness this; who having made ready the Psalm. 11.2.
arrow upon the string and prepared the Psalm. 7.13.
instruments of cr^ell death; yea even beforehand sounded the Triumph and
engraven the Victory over the very [ As of old Psalm. 83.4.
(...)] of Christianity, upon pillars of Marble with this inscription; Nomine
Christianorum deleto, qui Rempuhl. evertebant: but all this brag of theirs
was but as a blaze, before their last light went out, (...) some bulging wall,
that was swollen immediately before it fell; For, what was all that innocent
blood of Martyrs, which they so violently spilt, but as Tertul. in Apo (...)
banguis est s^^nen Christianoram
Tertullian says the very seed to sow Gods Psalm. 80.15.
Vinyard, the Church, withal? in which for one true Catholic Saint cut off,
many hundred sprang up afresh: this Palm Tree, the more it was pressed, the
higher it grew; that Israel, the more oppressed, the more they Exodus 1.12.
multiplied; and this Arc, the more 'twas tossed on the billows, the nigher
it was advanced up to the Genesis 8.4.
Ararat of Heaven: In sum, when in the very last age of all, Pope Sleidan.
Comment. lib. 1.
Leo, that tenth Lion of Rome, roared upon the Church of God; and thought by
his Anathema's thundered from his simonia call Consistories, to have devoured it
up as his Prey: or else as sometimes those Lions did upon Daniel, to have Dan.
6.22.
fawned, by his abused indulgencies, upon simple ignorants; and so to have
lurched the Patrimony of deluded souls into his own Checquer; When now the
Church was (as the Can. 6.10.
Moon enveloped in a Cloud) seemingly invisible, being all overgrown by the
weeds of superstition; yet even then, God raised up a Luther, a man of an
heroike spirit to muzle the jaws of that rampant Antichrist; and to rectify
the seduced judgments and consciences of wel-meaning, but mis-guided
Christians: And he so far prevailed against the errors of the Church of Rome,
that (when nothing else would serve) he made a [Protestation] against them.

In the year 1529, April the sixteenth (as Calvisius sets it down in his
Chronicle) there was a meeting of the States at Spira; when and where a Decree
was made, by the (then) Popes Agents; that a late Edict at Worms against the
Innovators, (so they styled Luthers fraternity) the effect whereof was, that
there should be no such Reformation at all made, as the Lutherans called for;
but omnia in integrum restituerentur, every thing should stand entire, as it
did before; A decree, I say, was made, that that Edict should be served; Contra
hoc edictum solennis fuit Protestatio, but against this Edict, there was a
solemn Protestation: and from hence it was, that we of the Reformed Churches,
first took the name of Protestants; protesting against those abominable
corruptions and superstitions; which both in the ancient, and pure [doctrine]
of Christ, (contained in the writings of the Apostles) and also in that
Discipline, which was appointed by the same Apostles, and practiced in their
times, and ever after, in the universal settled Church of Christ; I say,
Protesting against those damnable corruptions which had overgrown, and almost
quite poisoned the world, and withal against the hinderance of that needful
Reformation intended; from hence we took the Original name of Protestants.

And hitherto we have (seemed) at least to own the title: now then go on and 1
Cor. 16.13.
quit your selves like men; withstand all the rotten doctrine of Popish
Innovators and Teachers, that boast much (as the Josh. 9.5.
Gibeonites sometime did of old shoes, and moldy bread) of Antiquity; and
dare obtrude upon the Consciences of Gods people, their own humane Traditions,
to be entertained (as themselves determine, in their Trent Conventicle) with
Concil-Trident. sess. 4 p. 8. vol. 8. [pari] pietatis affectu ac reverentia
suscipit, and veneratur.
equal Faith and Credit, as God own sacred and immediately inspired unerring
Scriptures are received; yea, not only so, but also introduce customs with a
direct, Non obstante, to Christ's Gospel: For so I find expressly in the
Council. Constantanno 1612. and Basil.
Councels of Constance and Basil; Licet Christus suis Discipulis
administraverit sub [utraque] panis, and vini specie, venerabile hoc
Sacramentum; tamen [hoc non obstante] consuetudo communionis, sub [una] tantum
specie, nunc pro Lege habenda est: That is, although Christ administered unto
his Disciples the Sacrament of his Body and Blood, under [both] kinds, of Bread
and Wine; yet [this notwithstanding,] now the custom of receiving it only
under [one] kind, is to be had for a Law. In opposing them therefore, ye
oppose errors damnable in their nature; and surely damning also in the issue,
without amendment; yea, ye protest against the very 1 Timothy 4.1.
doctrine of Devils: Now then, be for Zeph. 1.5.
God, or for Baal; abhor a Samaritan mongrell disposition; a Laodicean Rev.
3.16.
lukewarmnes; this 1 King. 18.21.
halting twixt two opinions; this swearing by God, and by Zeph. 1.5.
Malcham too; this Exodus 12.39.
dowbak'd lukewarm temper, God threatens to Rev. 3.16.
spue out as loathsome and with nauseation from his presence: In short, is a
man a Minister? and is his aim in Preaching, only by a vainglorious
ostentation of wit to please 1 Thessalonians. 2.4.
man; or to tickle the 1 Timothy 4.3.
itch of the wavering times; and not (without envy, without ^ Thessalonians 2.5.
soothing partiality) to declare the pure doctrine of Christ Jesus, in 2 Cor.
2.17.
syncerity; if this alone be his scope, let him go on, dissemble and rail;
but know the time shall come, when upon such hollow, empty declamers, the Lord
from out of Heaven shall power scorn, 2 Timothy 3.9. and make them, even as the 1
Cor. 4.13.
filth of the World, as the off-scowring of all things: such rotten bottoms
cannot long hold water. Is a man a Magistrate? art thou a common Christian?
deal Prove. 10.9.
uprightly, do not play and dally with thy Conscience in any of thine actions:
Be the times never so vicious, never so various; be not thou like a reed
Matthew. 11.7.
shaken with the wind; be rather like to a Cube, firm to that station, fixed
to thy right refolutions, which way soever thou art cast; imitating the pious
example of Deborah in my text; who in the midst of raging anarchy, of
prevailing enormities, remained as a nail Ezra. 9.8.
fastened in a sure place, steadfast to the Lord.

It is hard I confess (though indeed it be a more noble Act of Christianity)
to uphold our selves in integrity, when the current of the times is against us:
The Patriarchs themselves were transported by the times in the business of their
Polygamie; and Joseph by long conversing in Pharaohs Court had learnt to swear
at length by Pharaohs life, Genesis 42.16. And when all Asia and the world shall
worship the great goddess Diana of the Ephesians; who but a Paul, durst to cry
down the Idolatry? Act. 19.27.

Beloved Christians, we now live in the midst of a Act. 3.40.
crooked and perverse generation; and may daily discover some, of whom we may
say, as S. Paul did of Elymas the sorcerer, Act. 13.10. they are full of all
subtilty and all mischief, enemies of all Righteousness, by their wrangling, and
contentions, time-serving disturbance, never ceasing to pervert the ancient,
right, and established ways of the Lord; Now therefore, under this so great a
trial show your selves; now Matthew. 5.16.
shine as Lights, furnish your Lamps with oil, and Matthew. 25.7.
trim them up, that the light of your lives may so shine in the faces of the
world, that it may dazzle them whom it shall not guide: and since we have a copy
so Peerles to write by (the very mirror of Christian Princes,) who in a Letter
(dated but the 18. day of the last month of October, 1641.) written with his
own Hand, has commanded it to be made known; that he will live and dye (by the
grace of God) in the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England; as it
was established in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and his pious Father of
blessed memory: we have his word for it, and as David to Mephibosheth, I have 2 Samuel 19.29.
said it, says the King, it is enough: Blessed Princel whom no Torrent of
novelty can carry from the ancient ways of truth: Let us all, as loyal
Subjects, dye our practice into the same color of Resolution and Sanctity: God
shall still raise up friends unto us and prosper us; Act. 2.40.
and even in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, we shall save
our selves; like as good Deborah, in the midst of a tumultuous people, (even
when there was [no Judge. 21.25.
King] in Israel) was found out, (as some rich Diamond, or as some orient Ruby
lying amongst a thousand peble stones, a fit Matron to make a worthy
Prophetess in Israel.

And thus far of the first particular circumstance, in the text; The person
implied, that here makes this Prayer against Gods enemies, saying, So let all
thine enemies perish, O Lord.

THE second particular, Part. II.
is the Person unto whom she prays, To the Lord Jehovah; and this notes the
Character of a gracious disposition, Observe.
in the height of the Churches oppession by tyranny, still to look up unto the
Lord, for refuge and Protection, see Hos. 5.15. Proof.
Ten thousands of people had set themselves round about King David; Read D.
King, page 53, 54, 55, etc. Lect. 4. on Jonah.
now mark his behavior; Arise O Lord, says he, save me O my God; the reason
is annexed, Salvation belongs unto the Lord: see Psalm. 17.13, 14. So Deuteronomy.
32.99. See now, that I, even I am he, and there is no God with me; I kill and I
make alive, I wound and I heal, neither is there any that can deliver out of
my hand: and Isa. 43.11. I, even I am the Lord, and besides me there is no
Savior: upon which meditation the Psalmist said, that some put their trust in
Chariots and some in Horses; but we will put our trust in the Lord, Psalm. 20.7.
The Horse indeed is a See Bp. Hall serm-styled the Impresse of God, ser. 1.
^nitio.
warlike creature, full of terror; so swift in service that the Persians (as
Pausanias has it) dedicated him unto their God, the Sun, (...), as the
swiftest creature, to the swiftest Heliodor. Aethiopic. Hist. lib. 10. conser.
Seldom, de diis Syris, syntag. 2. ^ Scimus solemn adoratum fuisse a Persis.
Calvin. lib. 1. c. 11. sect. 1.
God; out of his nostrils (to use Jobs expression, 41.20.) goes a smoke, as
out of a seething Pot or Cauldron, whose eyes are like the eye lids of the
morning, he laugheth at the shaking of a spear, in his neck remains
strength; he esteems iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood; But, alas!
says that great warrior of the Lord of Hoasts, Psalm. 33.17. an Horse is a
[vain] thing for safety, nor shall he deliver any by his great strength; yea
God himself says, that he delights not in the strength of an Horse, Psalm.
147.10. The Horse indeed may be prepared against the day of Battle, but safety
is of the Lord alone, Prove. 21.31. O our God, says distressed Jehoshaphat, we
know not what to do, but our eyes are upon thee, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. Through God
therefore only, we shall do valiantly; for he it is, that shall tread down
our Enemies, Psalm. 108.13. In short, it is [He] that gives Salvation unto
Kings, Psalm. 144.10. The Lord is their strength, and he is the [saving]
strength of his anointed, Psalm. 28.8. For, as that great Image in Daniel may
teach us, even all Empires themselves stand but upon feet of Clay, and must
soon totter, except the Lord support them, Dan. 2.33.

Now the ground, why the hearts of the Righteous trust in the Lord to be
helped, is this meditation; namely, for that he is as a man of War, thoroughly
accomplished and furnished with all things fit for a Victor; and one to be
with full assurance relied on.

There are four principal things, that are the motives of Confidence in any,
whom a discreet man would dare to trust, Four principal grounds of confidence
in God.
for the sure performance of any favor. 1. Wisdom. 2. Power. 3. Goodness. 4.
Faithfulness.


First, Wisdom to contrive ways and means, how to become a real Benefactor.
Secondly, Power to be able to perform, what is wisely projected. Thirdly, a
propension, and an inclination to make use of both the former, for the
advantage of him, that trusts in him. Fourthly, faithfulness, so that a man
may rest securely for the discharge of all the former, for his benefit. Now all
these are eminent in the Lord.

For the first, Wisdom, it is so in him, that all the policies in the world
are, in comparison, direct foolishnes and mere vanity, 1 Cor. 3.19, 20. yea, so
vain, that he takes the wise in their own craftiness, that is, such as are
wise either in their own conceits, or else wise, (...), in the esteem of
worldly-wise men; alas! says Job 5.11. The Lord disappointeth the devices of
the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise; and indeed
all worldly wisdom is rather craft and guile, or subtilty then true wisdom;
and when the Lord shall blow upon it, it is all soon blasted into sottish Romans
1.22.
infatuation. An example of this we have in Achitopbel; whose Counsel, in his
days was, says the Scripture, as if a man had enquired at the 2 Samuel 16.23.
Oracle of God; and yet the Lord defeated the Counsel even of Achitophel
himself, and turned it into folly, 2 Samuel 17.14. and 15.31. So also was the
plot of the Jews against Saint Paul disappointed, Act. 23.16, 23. For says
Solomon, there is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor Counsel against the Lord,
Prove. 21.30. And who indeed is able, by all his lines and plummers to fathom,
or found the bottom of Gods all-discerning Ey-sight, both to foresee the
danger of his people and to prevent it? His ways of deliverance are many Haber
Dominus m^lle^ aries, ^^^ns^^a^t as vias
yea innumerable; and all of them ^om. 11.33.
past findding out; and (till the event declares them) nor to ad suos
liberandos, Peter Martyr, Epist. Calvin. page 1124. be known by so shallow an
apprehension as man's is.

Secondly, For power he is such, as no creature is able to Romans 9.19.
resist; therefore says the Prophet, who is so Psalm. 77.13.
great a God as our God? even our God, who is mighty in Psalm. 24.8.
Battle; whose very Psalm. 29.5.
voice, in his thundering and lightnings, in storms and Tempests, shakes all
the Cedars in Lebanon; whose very looks dry up the depths, and whose
indignation makes the mountains to melt away: In short, he is [able] says the
great Apostle, Ephesians. 3.20. to do abundantly more then we can think; Nor is
this power momentany or flitting; no, says the Prophet, Isi. 26.4. In the Lord
Jehovah is [everlasting] strength: He is alone El-chaddai, the strong and
all-sufficient God: Examples are endless; see a few; some showing how the Lord
makes Isa. 52.10.
bare his own arm, and gets [ Psalm. 98.1.
himselfe] the victory [himselfe] as if he stood in need of none, no not of the
meanest aid; and therefore is Christ's victory expressed by treading of a
winepresse [alone], Isa. 63.1.6. When there are none to help; when the Church
is brought to sorest extremities and greatest improbabilities of being saved;
yet (says one) though multitudes meet against her, as many as Grapes in a
Vintage, they shall all be, but as so many clusters of Grapes; He shall squeeze
out their blood like Wine, and make his Church to thash them. And this he does
sometimes extraordinarily, to show himself the immediate author of the
deliverance; as when he discomfited the Host of the the Syrians by a noise of
Horses and Chariots of fire, 2 King. 6.17. and 7.6. as there was a Eusebius. l. 3.
c. 8.
voice heard in the Temple, before the destruction of Jerusalem; not more (in
likelihood) to warn the faithful to depart the City, than to terrify the lewd
inhabitants: The story of our own Henry the fifth, against the numerous
Frenchmen, (who thought to have even crowded them to death) is more known than
to need relation: Under the conduct of Germanus, (here in Britain) who came
over from France to subdue the Pelagian heresy, (which then prevailed amongst
us) against a mighty army of Saxons and Picts; the Britons prevailed only by
the three times pronouncing the word Hallelujah, which voice ecchoing and
redoubling from the Acclamation of his followers among the Mountains, nigh to
which the Enemy had encamped, frighted them and won the Conquest; upon which
it was called Vide Archiepis. Usserium, lib. de Britan. eccles. primordiis p.
332, 333. etc.
Victoria Hallelujatica; and the story tells us, Triumphant Pontifices,
bostibus fusis sine fanguine, triumphant victoria fide obtenta, non [viribus;]
The joy was in a victory gotten without bloodshed, and that by Faith, not by
force. Sometimes again, the senses of the Enemies are deluded; as the Moabites
seeing the sun shining upon the water flowing [happily] upon red earth, had
their eyes dazzled, and so ran upon their unthought-off destruction, 2 King.
3.22, 23. And so also he made way to his indignation upon Pharaoh and the
Egyptians, by rolling up the waters into an heap, till they were all run full
on, into the very gulf of destruction, Exodus 14.

Sometimes again ordinarily; but by [weake] means: Thus Zerah the Ethiopian,
with his Host of a thousand thousand, was overthrown by a handful of King
Asa; for it is nothing with the Lord, to help whether with many, or with them
that have no power 2 Chapter 14.11. And Gideon only with three hundred men, and a
with few empty pitchers and blinking Lamps, undid the Midianites; though they
lay as Grasse-hoppers, upon the valley of Morch Judge. 7.7.20. the reason is,
verse the second; Lest Israel vaunt themselves against me, says the Lord,
saying, Mine [own] hand has saved me: So David (a young stripling) goes forth
against the huge monster Goliath; and with naught but a sling and a smooth
stone, smote that dread of Israel, that he felldown like to an Pro. 7.22.
Ox fatted for the slaughter, at the feet even of a tender stripling, 1 Samuel
17. So the walls of Jericho were thrown down with the blast of Rams-horns, Josh.
6.20. to see walls that seemed to challenge by their height, an equipage with
the Stars of Heaven; a man would imagine, no warlike engine of the most
martial ostentation, enough to batter them; but behold! that God may have the
glory of so great a downfall, only a seven days walk about them, with the
sound not of any silver shrill trumpets, but only of Rams-horns; instruments
base for the matter, and not loud for the sound; this must do the business;
for the Lord, when he will compass an overthrow, makes B^. Hall, Contemplat.
of the siege of Jericho.
weakness no disadvantage; and very mean and homely are those means which God
commonly uses in his most glorious works, At other times again, by ordring
casualties and particular emergencies, for the deliverance of his Church; a
thing conspicuous in the Histories of Joseph and Eester; in which book of
Eester, though the name neither of [God] nor [Lord] be found at all; yet, in no
Scripture is there set down more wonderful, and remarkable passages, and acts
of Gods immediate providence for his calamitous people; So that as a man by a
Chain made up of several links some of Gold, others, of silvers; some of
Brass, Iron, or Tin, may be drawn out of a Pit: so the Lord, (says an Mr.
Edward Reynolds, on Ps. 110. ver. 5.6. p. 499.
eminent Divine, of this age) by the concurrence of several subordinate
things, which have no manner of dependence, or natural coincidency among
themselves, has oftentimes wrought the deliverance of his Church; that it
might appear to be the work of his own hand. In short, God partly by
defeating the devises of the crafty; partly by restrayning the power, or
overruling the malice of the wicked, Jud 6. confer. D. King p. 56. Lect. 4. on
Jonah.
chayning up even Satan himself; by these and a thousand other ways, the Lord
declares his power, to be more [for] his Church, then all the Enemies thereof
can be [against] it: and therefore after Deborahs example here, because of that
his [power,] he is chiefly to be sought unto, in the time of danger.

Thirdly, for Gods goodness and readiness to relieve the wants of his
children; it flows naturally from the bowels of his innate compassions and
most render loving kindness; therefore, Luke. 1.78. old Zachary calls them,
(...): thus when his embondaged people groaned under their Egyptian burdens,
the Lord [looked] upon them, and soon eased [them] of their sighings, and [
Isa. 1.24.
himselfe] of his adversaries; Exodus 2.23, 24, 25. see Psalm. 103.8, 9 Mic. 7.19.

Lastly, for fidelity and faithfulness; hear Truth it self to speak, Matthew.
5.48 the whole creation shall as soon fail, as the least iota of Gods word
fail of accomplishment: yea, in comparison of God, every even of the truest
men is a direct Liar, Romans 3.3. For, it is an impossibility, that God should
ly, Heb. 6.18. or deny himself, being truth it self, 2 Timothy 2.13. As for
[man] indeed, wherein is he to be Isa. 2.22.
accounted of? whose breath is in his Nostrils: whose fidelity and favor, like
to the reeds of Egypt may not fail us only, but run into our hands and hurt
us? 2 King. 18.21. see Psalm. 12.1. and Prove. 2^.19. Confidence in an
unfaithful friend in time of trouble is like a broken tooth, and a foot out of
joint: For, as there is no trusting to a broken tooth for feeding, nor to alame
leg for speedy journeying, no more firm confidence is there to be placed in a
wa^ering, yielding, unfaithful friendship: Now in God, his fidelity is like
himself. Man. 3.6. Jam. 1.17.
unchangeable; therefore, David in the experience of it, calls him so often,
his Rock, his fortress, his Tower of defense, etc. confer Psalm. 28.7, 8. and
Heb. 10.23. No marvel then is it, that good Deborah in the distress of the
Church, seeks to Jehovah, to undo its Enemies: she might happily, remember
[that] of the Lord to Moses; being now about to deliver by his hands, his
Israel from thraldom, Exodus 6.3. Note the place, I appeared unto Abraham,
(says God) unto Isaac and unto Jacob, by the name of God Al mighty, but by my
name Jehovah was I not known to them: Moses, by the name Jehovah? we find it
expressly mentioned, Genesis 157.28. and 13. and 26.25. Lyra and Junius ad Exodus
6 3. and Zanch. de Natura Dei, cap. 13. lib. 1. sect. 34. etc. and Estius, in
lib. 1. sent. Did. 8. sect. 2. Referendum hoc est, non ad significationem
vocabulorum; sed ad declarationem rerum significatarum, etc. id. ibid.
modern Divines do jointly resolve the meaning, to be understood of the actual
performance of those promises, by a real exhibition; which the Patriarchs and
faithful, did rest [before] in expectation of, touching Isreal's deliverance
from bondage out of Egypt; their faith and hope being grounded upon his Name,
(...), [almighty] Genesis 17.1. For both in the Creation of the world, and in the
destroying of the same again by water, and withal by bestowing many Gifts
upon them; he had showed himself to be God [all-sufficient] to do, whatsoever
he promised; but now he would manifest himself to be (...), Jehovah, in
giving a constant [being] unto the [performance] of of his old promise; even as
verily as he gave his own eternal, and immutable Essence and Subsistence unto
him else; therefore King David, after an actual overthrow of Gods Enemies,
cries out, Psalm. 68.4. Extol him that rides upon the Heavens, by his name
[Jah] and rejoice before him: And the Propheresse in this place, recounting
happily, the known acts of Jehovah, in the miraculous overthrow of his Enemies;
and in the wonderful rescues of his people, seen (even then) in the ruin of
the King of Canaan and of Sisera his chief Captain; she makes her address,
for the utter Consumption of all the rest of the Lords Enemies, (not as Baals
Priests, 1 King 18.28. See D. King, p. 73. Lect. 5. on Jonab.
cutting themselves with lancers and howling upon false gods, nor as some
doltish Romanists, chattering unto some Saint) she flies, I say, unto no arm
of flesh, or Idol; but only, and in the first place, unto the Lord Jehovah;
saying, So let all thine Enemies perish [O Lord.]

And what better use can we make of this passage, than to follow her steps
herein? for in vain, shall we imagine with Sueton. in Tiberio.
Tiberius, that Omnia fato, all things are swayed by inevitable fate and
destiny; or that Salvation is to be hoped for, from Psalm. 33.16.
multitude; or, from the Jer. 3.23.
Hills, if the Lord be against us: For, though we be as Noe, (that is, Junius
ad cap. 3. Nah ver. 8.
Alexandria in Egypt) a [populous] Nation, situate among the rivers, with
ramparts and walls from the Sea, as Nah. 8.9.
Nahum expresses it, and were our strength as infinite; yet if God say to us
now, as he did unto her then, Nah. 3.5. Behold, [I] am against thee, says the
Lord of Hosts; even we, as well as she, may be carried away, and go into
captivity, ver. 10, If God be [for Read Isa. 41.10.11, 12, etc. Horat.
] us, who can be [against] us? Rom 8.31. Fractus licet illabatur orbis,
impavidos ferient ruina; Psalm. 144.15.
Happy are the people, says the Psalmist, that are in such a case; yea happy
is that people whose God is the Lord, Psalm. 144.15. in [this] condition, we
will not fear what Psalm. 56.11.
Man can do unto us; But if God be [against] us, who can be for us? What
power, what strength avail us? I conclude this point therefore, with that
experienced Prophet, Psalm. 73.28. It is good for us, to draw near unto God,
etc. And thus far also of the second particular, namely, The Person unto whom
she, the Prophetess Deborah, in the text directs her Prayer against Gods
Enemies, unto the Lord Jehovah; saying, So let all thine Enemies perish [O
Lord.]

THE next particular is, the form of her Imprecation, Part. III.
Let; So [let] all thine Enemies perish O Lord: Where the quere falls in, Matthew.
5.43, 44. Ye have heard, that it has been said, says Christ, Thou shall love
thy neighbor, and [hate thine Enemy;] but I say unto you, love your Enemies,
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you; yea pray for them
that despightfully use you and persecute you? The resolution hereunto shall be
short; [Thou shall hate thine Enemy] are no where found in all the whole Law;
but were crept into the mouths of the vulgar, from some additionall and false
gloss of the Jews; who because the love of the brother or friend was comman
ded, concluded absurdly, therefore that the hatred of the Enemy was not
forbidden; But if ye observe it, Christ does not say, Ye have [known] that it
has been written but only, Ye have heard, that it has been said; for 't was a
mere Tradition of their corrupt Rabbis; no fundamental or sound warrant of
truth at all: And for answer to the question; we must as Durand. in lib. 3.
sent. Did 30. quest. in fine. H. -- and Bonavent. 3. sent. Did. 30. and
Nicol, de Orbellis in eund. lib. and Thom. 2. a. 2 ae. quest 25. Art. 8. and
Raynerius de Pisis, tom. 1. Pantheolog. cap. De Inimicis, p. 1160, 1161.
Durandus with the full Chorus of the Schoolmen advise us, distinguish of, and
consider an Enemy, two ways, first Formally, secondly Materially. First,
formally, as an Enemy; Secondly, materially, as a man made after the Image of
God: In the first sense, we are not bound to love an Enemy, [as] an Enemy; that
is, as one whose Evil of sin is both odious in it self, and also unto God;
and so by consequence should be unto us; for this [vice] of his, which
occasions enmity, is contrary unto right and divine Charity: But secondly, as
this Enemy has in him materially a compartnership of the same [nature] of
humanity with our selves; so we are bound, First, In Universally, in the
General, to wish him well; Secondly, Yea in particulari, in special also, in
case of (...) perfecti^^ (...) Articulo amare Alexander. Pesantius, comment in
Tho. 2 a. 2. c. qu. 25. Art. 8.
necessity, in temporal things to do him good, Romans 12.20, we may by so doing
heap up coals of fire upon his head, that is, as Aquinas interprets it,
enkindle some motions, or warmth of charity in him; his wickedness being won
to Piety, by the offices of love; Yea more yet, offices of good even in
Scilicetin praeparationeantum, Thomas, libi supra; in cers. and Pet. La ^^hard.
l. 3. did. 29. G. diligamus, inquit, mimices [lacrandus] reg^o Dei.
Spiritual things may not be denied; such as Mat. 5.44. pro omnibus immicis
quantum vis perversis orandum est, nisi constiterit cos esse in peccato mortali
[sinaliter] Alex. Hales part. 3. quaest. 59 mem. 5. Art. 7.
Prayer for his conversion, perswsiaons unto use of the means of grace, etc. he
having a nature capable, equally with our selves of happiness: Thus we find
Saint Stephen, the Proto-Martyr of the Gospel, praying for his persecutors,
Act. 7.60. saying, Lord lay not this sin to their charge; and by that
devotion he obtained, not their pardon only, but felicity; whence was
occasioned that known saying of the Father; si Martyr Stephanus non sic
orasset, Ecclesia Paulum non habuisset; If the Martyr Saint Stephen had not so
prayed, the Church had not had Saint Paul for a Convert. So let all (thine)
Enemies perish, O Lord: And the resolution is, Remissio judicii; a man may and
must sensibly understand, and apprehend an injury; for an injury being an
affliction, God will have us take notice of his strokes and hear his rod, who
has appointed it, Mic. 6.9. Jer. 5.3. 2. Remissio satisfactionis, when the
wrong done us from an Enemy, exceeds the guilt of the injured so far, that
the scandal accruing by it, extends to a public notice; and the
endangering of our credit, whether for good name, estate, or perhaps, Religion;
in this case, the Law is open, the matter may be empleaded, Act. 19.38. 3.
Remissio Vindictae, the forgivenes of revenge; and this is absolutely required;
[ Heb. 10.10.
Vengeance] is only Gods alone to repay, and to him we must leave it, Romans
12.19. and therefore King David (that Map of wrongs) was wont to [pray] for
such Enemies, Psalm. 35.13. But now, if the Enemies be more than Personal and
private, and prove public, against [God] or else, therefore, [Reflexively]
alone personal, that through our sides the wicked might strike at Gods honor;
as the Psalmist says expressly, Psalm. 38.20. They are mine adversaries, (see
their motive) because I follow the thing that good is: Lo! there is an
Antipathy between the two seeds; the just, even because he is just, is
therefore as a shepherd was to an Egyptian, an [ Genesis 46.34.
abomination] to the wicked: In this case, as they are Gods Enemies, we may
safely, with good Deborah here pray, That they may all perish: Hence that of
Jehu, the son of Hanani the Seer unto Jehoshaphat, Should thou love them
that hate the Lord? 2 Chronicles. 19.2. and David often, see Psalm. 139.20, 21, 22.
Thine Enemies take thy name in vain; Do not I hate them o Lord, that hate
thee? and am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? yea I hate
them with perfect hatred, I count them mine Enemies: and Psalm 109.
throughout, see what volleys of imprecation he spends upon Gods Enemies: so
we find, that the Primitive Christians had set prayers, against Julian the
Apostate; and even hither may not impertinently be applied that of our Savior,
Lu. 14.26. where we are bidden to hate our very Parents for Christ, that is,
whatsoever evil is in the nearest or dearest unto us, (it being against God)
we must, though cherish the nature, yet abhor the Vice.

Nor need we wonder at this zeal; Matthew. 13.43.
clowded, and who themselves were Psalm. 83.3.
hidden in some obscurity; they have then an opportunity of appearing; and that
Psalm. 112.4.
light and gladness, which was Ps. 97.11.
sown for the righteous, now Phil. 4.10.
springs forth afresh, and shines with glory, etc.

Wherefore, David, Psalm. 7.9. O let the wickedness of the wicked come to an
end, but establish the just: For the righteous God tries the hearts and reins.

Follows next the title here given to those, Part. IV.
she prays against, Thine [Enemies:] Let all thine [Enemies] perish, O Lord.

In another expression, they are called, in both Testaments, the [haters] of
the Lord: So by David, Ps. 68.1. Psalm. 81.15. and in the New, by Saint Paul,
Romans 1.30. Haters of God; the greek word, is (...): Theophylact says, the
phrase has a double acception, active and passive; it denoting both men hating
God, Deiosores; and also men hated by God, Deo odibiles, as Primasius renders
it: Thus God is said to hate, or to abhor the covetous, Psalm. 10.3. and to have
hated Esau, Romans 9.13. implying the dislike and detestation of the wicked, in
respect of their sins: But as Oecumenius, with S. S. Cyprian epist. 68. sect.
10.
Cyprian, (who reads it actively, abhorrentes Deo) and the best Moderns expound
the place: the word is taken actively, of such wicked, as do hate God: because
as Beza and Estius ad Romans 1 30. and Adam Sasbout; It. Cajetan in Paraphrabid.
Beza and EsTius give the reason; the purpose of Saint Paul is not to show Gods
affection of hatred toward the Gentiles; but the Gentiles foul enormities
resident in themselves: therefore Beza criticizing guesseth, it should be
accented probably in the greek, (...), not (...).

Take we it then actively, it implies that hatred, which men carry to the
Divine Majesty; where Schoolmen usually question; Whether it be possible for a
man to [hate] God, Psalm. 10.4. and cannot endure his presence; either in the D.
Sell. exposit. on Romans 1.30 p. 159.
Heart by his Spirit, or in the Congregation by his Word; nor in his coming to
Judgment, nor lastly, (to the Death) any of the friends of God, or of such as
love him; Therefore the adversaries of Gods (people) are called, the haters of
[God] himself, Psalm. 81.14, 15. Which sense soever you take it in; if they be
Gods Enemies, they shall be all as Job. 21.18.
stuble before a Heb. 12.29.
consuming fire; and the Lord to ease himself of his adversaries, (whose
iniquity he cannot Hab. 1.13.
see and like) shall set them as a Lam. 3.12, 13.
Butt, and spend the arrows of his sore displeasure upon them; they shall be
sure to perish.

AND so I pass on unto my fifth particular, Part. 5 and 6.
which is the matter of Deborabs Imprecation, Let thine Enemies (perish) O
Lord: To which part, I will add also that other, of the Extent of her
devotion; Let (all) thine Enemies perish. By [perishing] is not here meant the
utter annihilation of their eternal absolute being, the very Essence of the
Soul carries Matthew. 10.28.
immortality in it: but only of their [well-being] or rather of their
confusion, before the present world; because it is said of Jabin and Sisera,
that when they perished at Endor, they became as dung for the [earth,] Psalm.
83.9. So that our note from hence will be this, viz. To show us the
affectionate desires of the Saints, for the Universal overthrow and
extirpation of the wicked enemies of God, Obser.
and of his Church: Let them (all) perish, O Lord.

As it was said of Israel going out of Goshen, that they left not so much as an
Exodus 10.26.
hoof behind them, so is it earnestly wished by the Saints, that not so much
as one Agag, or one 1 Samuel 15.3.
Amalekite might be spared; no nor (if the Lord were pleased so to dispose it)
one Josh. 15.63. and 23.13. Proose.
Jebusite left as a Relic in Canaan; To this purpose, he who long
experimented the usances of such enemies, has expressed himself, Psalm. 104.35.
Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, Consumpti, id est simul sumpti.
and let the wicked be no more, and Psalm. 10.15. Break thou the arm of the
wicked and the evil man, seek out his wickedness, till thou find none: Oh
that some Isa. 14.23.
besome of destruction from the Lord, would sweep them clean off the Land, and
that all the Matthew. 3.12.
Chafe and Matthew. 13.25.
Tares might (if possible) at once, be bound up together in bundles, and cast
into flames Luke 3.17.
unquenchable. O my God, says the zealous Prophet, make them like a Psalm.
83.13.
wheel; strike them with some Vertiginous spirit of giddiness; let them be
vexed, even as a thing that is raw; restlessely, unexpressibly, never leave
rolling and winding of themselves, till they have utterly undone themselves;
and be clothed with their own Psalm. 109.29.
confusion, as with a mantle, etc.

Nor may we marvel at this zeal; since, whilst these Jebusites do stay
among us, Josh. 23.13.
thorns in our eyes; yea, the only Zech. 3.1.
Satan's, which stand at the very right hand of our Joshua's, to resist or to
disturb them, in their most fervent services and devotions: These the only
Achans, who Josh. 7.25.
trouble our Israel, and as Jebu said to Jehoram, What 2 King. 9.22.
peace can be expected (with any assurance) in any Nation; where the Whoredoms
or Witchcrafts, (whether Temporal or Rev. 17.5.
Spiritual) of but one Jezabel, are endured?

It is said here, in the close of this Text, That the Land had rest forty
years: but note the occasion, (and it is very observable) Judge. 4.16. All the
Host of Sisera fell upon the edge of the sword, and there was not a Man left:
in relation unto which, for the procuring of Peace for after times, the good
Prophetess in likelihood, here prayed for a total eradication; saying, So let
all thine Enemies perish O Lord.

Your selves with due Cautions, 1 Cor. 10.15.
wise men, who can judge, I doubt not, what I say.

AND so I come to the seventh and last particular in the Text, which is the
manner, Part. VII.
after which she desires, that all these Enemies of the Lord may perish, Sic
pereant, so: which Monosyllable (So) I have reserved to handle in the last
place; because it will best usher in my intended application of the whole; and
is indeed, as that Wine made by Christ at the Marriage feast, in Cana of
Galilee, kept as the [ Josh. 2.10.
best] till last: So, let all thine Enemies perish O Lord. How? or, which way,
would she have them perish? Perhaps we may resolve this So, as Ribera, ad Amos
4.12.
Ribera from Saint Hierom, does that [so] or [thus] in the Prophet, Amos 4.12.
Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel; Thus? How? or in what manner? R.
Non nominat mala, ut omnia timeant; He names no one particular evil, that so
they might stand in aw, and be afraid of every evil of punishment: Sueton.
lib. 1. sect. 65.
Suetonius tells us, that it was the very policy of Julius Caesar, never to
foreacquaint his Soldiers of any set time of removal, or onset; Scilicet, ut
paratum, and intentum, momentis omnibus, quo velle., subito educeret; That he
ever have him, in readiness, for the suddainest march: nor was his way of
animation and encouragement, by extenuating or denying the danger of the Enemy;
but he deemed it fitter to raise up thoughts of valor, by an aggravation of
the contrary forces; and (as the story shows us) did not seldom this way
Hyperbolically Rhetoricate; I know you can apply: But, whether that be intended
in this text, I will not peremptorily say: But certainly, my dear Brethren,
its a most useful meditation, and very availeable to prevent obstinate
security in dangerous times; to consider the variety of Plagues, that the Lord
has up in store for the children of disobedience; to which end, I think it
is, that the Lord is pleased to set before our eyes so large a Catalogue of
Curses, Deuteronomy. 28.

Give me leave a little to enlarge upon this subject, I shall ground my
enlargement on that of the Stoique Epictetus in enchiridio.
Epictetus, (...), says he, (...): that is (as I interpret it) according to
diversity of apprehension of good, or evil, so are men's minds diversely
affected: and there are evils grievous to some, that seem good to others: for
example, tell a valiant Soldier of War approaching, you speak to his heart,
for then he thrives; But tell a crazy Citizen of the fury of War, of the
roaring of Cannons, of the Nab. 3.2.
rattling of Chariots, of Isa 9 5.
garments rolled in blood, and such like hideous disasters of battles; you
pierce him at the heart, and give him Isa. 61.3.
mourning for the oil of gladness: To speak of famine to a rich Churl, that
keeps Pro. 11.26.
in his Corn, till the people curse him; you cheer his very soul, and his
joy is greater than the Isa. 9.3.
joy in harvest; but let the poor people fear dearth, or but hear of it, in
the causes, their very hearts even Josh. 7 5.
melt within them: Bring an earthworm tidings of a spiritual Amos 8.11.
famine, of hearing the word of God; or of the loss, at the least, hazard of
the purity of Religion; lo! such a Matthew. 7.6.
swine does but trample upon a pearl, and as Gallio, Act. 18.17. he cares for
none of these things; but deal with one, that has 1 Pet. 2.3.
tasted how gracious the Lord is in his word; which is the Romans 1.16.
power of God unto salvation, to a true believer, who labors to express the 2 Timothy 3.5.
power of godliness in his actions; he is affected as the good wife of Phineas,
when the Arc was taken; and cries out in the very bitterness of his 1 Samuel
4.21.
soul, Ichabod, where is the Glory? when the Ark is taken: surely the glory is
departed from any land, when the Gospel, (the Testimony of Gods presence and
favor,) is like the Ephesian Rev. 2.5.
Candlestick, removed thence.

Besides, there are some judgments of God, which naturally are dreadful, and
yet have been executed upon some for ensamples; as, why think we not upon that
of Sodom, when Genesis 19.
fire and brimestone were yoated down in full showers from Heaven, to consume
the bestiall inhabitants? Why not likewise, upon that vengeance of God upon
Corab, Dathan and Abiram; whom for their ungracious mutiny, and envy at the
sons of Levy, the earth opening Number. 16.
swallowed up quick, and (as unaccustomed morsells) devoured alive? Why not of
Israel, destroyed of Number. 21.6. and 1 Cor. 10.9.
serpents? on Absalom, taken off in the very 2 Samuel 18.9.
act of his sin, in the heat of treason and Parricide, 2 King. 9.36.
against a King, and a Father? Why not of Jezabel, that frontlesse brazen faced
strumpet, whose abused body and members were entombed in the bowels of Dogs?
Why not of Samaria and Jerusalem, where Parents were urged in distress to 2
King. 6.29.
boil and Josephus.
feed upon their own issue? Why not of Midianites, whom fear and sudden
frightfulnes occasioned to make Jud. 7.21.
each others bowels the sheaths of their mutual swords, and as the brood of
Suoque Mart ruunt subiti, per mutua vulnera, fratres. Ovid.
Cadmus, to destroy each other? I might be almost infinte, this way: What?
says the zealous Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.22. Do we provoke the Lord to jelousy?
are we stronger then he? Thus let us think that if Famine, or Sword, or
Pestilence, or the noisome Beast, (those four sore judgments of his, Ezekiel.
14.21.) have consumed some of us; Job. 4.5.
yet is not the storehouse of Gods vengeance exhausted: lo! Job. 10.17.
changes and armies of sorrow, as Job calls them; the Lord has still laid up in
his treasury of wrath; and what know we, which may befall us? Moreover, we must
take notice, that Gods judgments are not all of one kind: 9.35. and Isa. 6.10.
and To. 4.5.
there are invisible Plagues as well as those which light outwardly upon the
Body, Goods, or Name; What think you of, hardness of heart, horror, and 1 Timothy
4.2.
stupefaction of Conscience, blindness of mind, Ephesians. 4.19.
greedines in committing sin, yet stupid stockishnes and remorslesnesse under
the guilt of it; a Rom 4.28.
permission to run on in a course of enormity, to 1 John 5.19.
lie down in that wicked one, under the very power and 2 Timothy 2.26.
vassallage of the Devil; and all this without any sense of a God to judge
them, of any Conscience to accuse them, of any Hell to engulfe them, or damned
Spirits to torment them, to all eternity; when the Lord, as we read, Deuteronomy.
29.4. has not (all this time in this rufull plight) given them an heart to
perceive, nor eyes to see, nor ears to hear, and hearing to lay to heart the
dreadful Rev. 16.1.
vialls of wrath, and direful indignation, threatened to be powered out upon
such obstinate Ephesians. 2.2.
Children of disobedience. And surely of all judgments, these spiritual ones
are the heaviest, and most to be trembled at; and the persons upon whom we see
them executed, have (of all others) upon them, the most express Characters
(for the present, and quoad nos) of castawaies, and Soli filii iraeiram non
sentiunt, sed laetantur, and exultant in rebus pessimis. S. Bern.
sons of wrath; and methinks the powers of our very Souls cannot but be
shaken (as Belshazzars Dan. 5.6.
joints once trembled, and smote to either at the sight of the handwriting upon
the wall) at the meditation.

In short, for the wicked, this is that, which the Lord threatens; that which
he [ Prove. 10.24.
feares] shall surely come upon him; yea if there be any evil, that he fears
more than other, that let him expect to self upon him; for so God threatens
him, Pro. 10.24. And for the rest of us all, we have all cause to fear like
judgments for like sins, and impenitence. If we be 1 Cor. 10.7 etc.
Idolaters, Adulterers, Murmurers, 2 Timothy 3.2.
unthankful, unholy, disobedient, etc. How can we escape the same wrath with
others, living under the dominion of the same unrighteousness? fith the Lord
has protested, to make them share in like punishments, who resemble in like
sinning. Generally, let this be our wisdom, to forecast our possibilities;
and to foresee our penalties pregnant in their causes, our sinful security;
and let us all think, if one judgment smite us not, another may; if no
paticular, yet all may betide us: for lo! says God to Israel, [Thus] will I
do unto thee; I name no one particular judgment, that thou may tear every
judgment. And here Deborah in the text, praying for the overthrow of Gods
Enemies makes no mention of any particular way to have them perish in; but only
says, at large and in the General; Sic pereant, [So] let all thine Enemies
perish, O Lord.

But notwithstanding this useful meditation; If vet we reserre to this
particular story, (as indeed for an apt exposition, we cannot but do) then the
manner o^ Sisera's overthrow will best interpret Deborah^ meaning.

1. Then So that is by weak means; For we read, Judge. 4.9. that the honor of
Sisera's ruin was not to be cast upon Barak, though happily a valiant man, but
the Lord, says the Text, shall sell Sisera into the hand of a woman; For J^el
the wife of Heber, by a special instinct from God; (much like unto that
instinct which moved Number. 25.7, 8.
Phineas, to destroy Zimri and Cosbi) she was the instrument of Siseras
destruction; so was there a mighty deliverance wrought by Hester, a woman, from
Hamans intended cruelty upon the people of God; and by Judith, from Holofernes:
And if I may take liberty to weave a woollen thread or two of secular story,
among the white-silk threads of divine; I could acquaint you, that in the most
famous battles of the world, women have been renowned: in that war of Xerxes
against the Grecians, the Persian Men fled shamefully and were slain, when as
Artemisia, the Queen, stood it out, with valor; whence was the Proverb of
that time; The men were in that battle women, and the women, men; And did not
Zenobia show by far more prowess in defending the Roman Empire, than
Galienus? and how many of that sex, as Blandina and others, proved eximious
martyrs in the primitive times? What should I Vide Pet. Martyr. epist. ad Eliz.
Regin. Angliae, p. 1124.
mention our own home- Deborah Q. Elizabeth of famous memory? in whom besides
her sex, there was nothing woman like, or weak: as if (what Philosophy says)
the souls of these noble Creatures had followed the temperament of their
bodies; which consist of a frame of F. Res.
rarer rooms, of a more exact composition, than man's does; and (if place be
any privilege) we shall find theirs built in Paradise, when man's was made out
of it: But yet the Scripture has made her, if not inferior, yet subordinate
to man; and styled her, The 1 Pet. 3.7.
weaker Vessel; and therefore is the destruction of Sisera by a woman, here
noted as an occasion to magnisi Gods greater glory, in the weak means of
Sisera's overthrow; sutably unto that of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 1 27. God has
chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the things which are mighty;
Note the comparison and admire the deliverance; Sisera, a dreadful Warrior;
Jael, a feeble woman; Sisera, with 900. Chariots of iron, Jael, with a nail
only, and a work man's hammer, Jud. 5.26. Yet at the feet of so impotent a
female he bowed, even Sisera (that great terror of Israel) fell, he lay down,
at her feet he bowed, he fell, where he bowed, there he fell down dead: O Isa
45.8.
drop down righteousness ye heavens, and let the earth be astonished at this!
And (O my God) how easily can the Lord Christ. (as Sampson with the Jud. 15.16.
jaw bone of an Ass slew heaps upon heaps, even a thousand Philistines at a
clap) with the very 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
spirit of his mouth, and with the breath of his nostrils (so easily, so with
no labor) consume the very man of finne himself, and dung his Vineyard with
the dead carcass of that wild Psalm. 80.13.
Bore of the forest, Antichrist himself! God can as easily blast an Oak, as
trample a mushrome.

2. So, that is, by flight, Judge. 4.17. most shamefully and with dishonor; In
all Gods n Ephesians. 6.11, etc.
armory, there is no armor for the back; but see here this daring Champion
betakes him to his heels and flies; yea, all his mighty host seem to have been
called thither, only to be overthrown; for not a stroke was given, that we can
discover of his side; Thus therefore for proud Sisera to be cowed out, and
dastardly to turn his back upon the weak army of the Israelites; So, to
perish, was to lay his Psalm. 7.5.
honor in the dust.

3. So, to wit, by a nail, and by an ordinary workmans hammer; Note here the
law of Retaliation from the Lord; He who had so much vaunted of his iron
Chariots, is now slain by one mayle of iron; thus, Judge. 1.7. Adonibezek is
paid home, as it were, in his own Coin, and met with in the very same kind,
even in his Thumbs and Toes, which were cut off, as he had done before to
threescore and ten Kings: which observation forced him, to confess Gods
justice upon him, As I have done, says be, So God has requited me: So the
Wiseman, Wised. 11.16. Wherewithal a man sins, by the same also shall he be
punished: I could cloy you with examples; Appion scoffing at Religion, and
chiefly at cicumcision, had an Ulcer the same time and place, as Josephus
reports: the story of Haman trussed up to his Est. 7.10.
own gallows is known: Abimelech, who flew seventy of his Brethren upon a
stone, Jud. 9.5. has his brain-pan broken by the piece of a millstone, ver. 53.
Because rebellious Saul [cast away] the word of the Lord, therefore, the Lord
[cast him away] from being King, 1 Samuel 15.23. As Agag his sword made women
childelesse, so shall his mother be childeles among other Women, 1 Samuel 15.33.
Abner having slain Asaael under the fifth rib, 2 Samuel 2.23. was himself
likewise smitten under the fifth rib, by Joab and slain, 2 Samuel 3.27. The
Jews, who sold Christ Jesus for thirty pieces of silver, (a Zech. 11.13.
goodly price) had afterward thirty of their own heads sold for one piece of
silver; as Just postea 30. capita suorum viderunt vendi uno denario ad
illudendum. Hegesippus, de excidio Jerusal. p. 680.
Hegisippus acquaints us: Et delator habet, quod dabat, exilium, says Martial.
l. 1. Ep. 4.
Martial; In short, See Psalm. ^4.21, 22, 23. They gather themselves together,
says David, against the soul of the Righteous and condemn the Innocent blood,
but God, (the rock of our refuge) shall bring upon them their own iniquity, and
shall cut them off in their own wickedness; yea, the Lord our God shall cut
them off; Thus the Jewish Rabbis had a conceit, that therefore King David, in
his old age, failed of 1 King. 11.
warmth from his own clothes; because he had formerly cut off the lap of 1 Samuel
24.4.
Saul's garment, being the Lords Anointed: Thus, as one observes, the Lord
Hastings was beheaded at London, that very self same day twelvemonth, yea, the
same hour; and if curiosity may go farther, the same minute, wherein he had
conspired the death of the Queens Children at Pomfret Castle: Why waste I
breath in this endless course of examples? we find, that diverse of the
greatest account, of B^. Carleton relation of the deliverances of England.
this days conspiracy in the County of Warwick (whither they fled for shelter)
were as Florus, hist. l. 1.
Florus writes of the old Fidenates, cremati [suo] igne, maimed and scorched
in their faces, hands, sides, and other parts by Gunpowder; the same instrument
of death, that they had prepared for the Head, and for the whole representative
Body of this Kingdom: even as Sisera, in this story we now treat of, was met
with in a part of that iron, in the strength of which he had so much vaunted
himself. Neque enim lex justior ulla est, Quam necis artifices art perire sua.

Lastly, So; that is, whilst he was fast asleep Ju. 4.21. even in the height
of his most reposed rest, and security; for even in the very midst of tumult,
and the very jaws of death, this carnal heathen found a time to sleep; Quem
Deus perdere vult, stultum facit; whom God intends to destroy, he first
infatuates; when Sodom was to be destroyed, the men of the City were (some of
them) smitten with blindness; so that they could not foresee their own now most
imminent ruin; compare Judge. 18.27. And (not to be tedious) the infernal
traitors of this day, Genesis 19.11.
as Dr. Carleton relates it, were securely sitting and warming themselves by a
fire; (even as wicked Jehoiakim, Jer. 36.22. when the very threatenings of the
Law of God were against him, sat before the fire, without fear) when a
sparkle of that same fire flew out, and lighting upon some two pound weight of
powder that lay nigh them, miserably deformed and spoiled them, near the place
of their surprizall.

And it is a most irrevocable truth, my beloved Christians, that the Lord never
suffers his Enemies to go Hoe tene, nec crimen quenquam in pectore gestare,
qui non idem Nemesin in tergo. Lipsius, l. 2. c. 13. deConstant.
unrevenged one way, or by some means, or other; sometimes he takes them off in
the very beginning of their lewd projects, and crusheth the Cockatrice in he
Egg; sometimes in the very In Scelere sceleris supplicium est, and ^^aetanea
sceleripoena, etc. vid. Duplessis, c. 12. de verit relig. Christ. p. 198 etc.
vol. 8.
act, as Absalom, Belshazzar, Herod; sometimes the punishment, as thunder does
lightening, follows instantly upon the very heels of their sin; as upon
Act. 5.5, 10.
Ananta; and Sapphira; and sometimes, not till a long time after; as upon that
old Judge, who was with his age, waxen old also in wickedness; which was at
last brought to light, ver. 52. of the History of Susanna; see to the same
purpose, Luke 11.50.
Matthew. 23.35. (...), says Plato de repub.
Plato; In sum, cannot God blast the corn in the blade, in the harvest, in
the Barn, in the very mouths of the wicked? But if they be treasonable
attempts against the Lords Anointed; if 2 Samuel 18.9.
Absalom, 2 Samuel 17 23;
Achitophel, (who proved their own executioners) 2 King. 9.31.
Zimri, the 2 Chronicles. 35.25.
servants of Ammon, and the rest of the same rabble; if any of these prospered,
then may a like Traitor hope for immunity from vengeance; yea, what Sueton.
lib. 1. sect. 89.
Saeton reports of such as stabbed King Julius Caesar, is generally true of all
such; Nequisquam [sua] morte defunctus est, No one of them died a natural
death, or went down to his grave in 1 King. 2.6.9.
Peace: And the reason, why a [ Genesis 4.15.
seven-fold] vengeance was threatened more upon him, that should kill Cain, then
was upon Cain himself, though a bloody Fratricide; is given by some to be
this, viz. because Cain was a Prince, and being eldest Son to Adam, was Heir
apparent to the Crown of the whole world: Our own stories and experience may
convince us herein, How Psalm. 105.15.
tender the Lord is of Royal dignity; how much he thinks his Zech. 2.8.
own Majesty interested, in the injuries attempted, or done to his Vice gerents
and such as carry semblance of his authority upon earth; the vengeances have
been, sundry of them, fearful even to astonishment; Wherefore, Gods charge is
so peremptory, Psalm. 105.15. Touch not mine anointed, that is, Tactu
qualitativo, with the least intention of annoyance; and as David said to
Abishai, who would have smitten Saul (a Hos. 13.11.
wicked King) 1 Samuel 26.9. Destroy him not; for, who can stretch forth his hand
against the Lords Anointed, and be guilt less? I say, as Saint S. Ambros. de
Naboth Jezraelit. cap. 11.
Ambrose, when he closes the story of Abab and Jezabels fearful end: Fuge
ergo Dives bujusmodi exitum; sed fugies hujusmodi exitum, si fugeris hujusmodi
flagitium; Let all men tremble at the fearful ends of wicked men, chiefly of
traitors, for the brand of the King of Kings is set upon such; but such ends
ye shall avoid, if ye carefully fly from such like abominations.

Now to sum up the whole of this particular: [So] let all thine Enemies
perish, that is, in the height of their vainglorious ostentation, by [weake]
means; [So] that is, in so shameful a sort, as dastard [flying] before their
pursuers: So, in being entrapped in their [own] snares and nets; and lastly,
so, in the midd^st of their deadly security; when they are as insensible of
ruin, as of sin: Even [so,] says good Deborah here; So let all thine
Enemies perish, O Lord.

And thus have I gone over all the particulars of this my first general; and
with them, I perceive, I have filled up the hour: But because, as St. Austin
said of the feast of Pentecost, Gaudet [produci] haec solennitas; This
solemnity would be extended, and (as the silkworm stretches forth her self,
before she spins her finest threads) be drawn-out to a length: I could even
wish, with Joshua, that the Sun would Josh. 10.12.
stand still awhile; that we might the longer rejoice in this our gladsome
festival; which so much angreth our Romish Proselytes, and makes them
(because we will never have done with this day) to Psalm. 112.10.
gnash their teeth upon us, with meagre envy: This, Psalm. 118.24.
This is the day, that the Lord has made; let us rejoice and be glad therein.

And that we may the better do it; give me now leave, as Elisha sometimes did
upon the Shunamites dead son, to 2 King. 4.34.
stretch my Application upon each member of this Text; I may, perhaps, raise up
your attentions to some new life and vigor; and show your, that this Scripture
is as fit, and consonant to this days occasion and solemnity; as was to Casars
coin the Matthew. 22 20.
image of Caesar; Whether we consider the Enemies from whom; or the manner how,
or the author of whom this our great deliverance came.

And, as I remember, Saint Gregory Nanianzen prologues his first Steliteutique
against Julian the Apostate; so will I, this my ensuing speech; (...), --
(...), etc. Let all the Nations of the earth give ear; let all ages both this
present, and that to come, listen, yea remember, if not this speech, yet the
hints of a seasonable discourse.

For the first, the quality of our Enemies, the Papists, we cannot better see
them, then in the fashions of those Heretics, the Antitactae of old; who held
it Piety, to contradict the Laws of their Maker; and in stead of them, to
introduce the sottish fopperies of their own phrenzies: And if you are desirous
to see a map of them drawn up ready to your hands; you may see it, in that
[Serious disswasive from Popery; and, in the old Religion,] which are extant
among the precious Volumes of a glorious Light and Champion of our Church, our
Reverend Diocesan; Bp. Hall.
(a Prelate of immortal memory; whom for his mortal opposition unto all
Popish, rotten Doctrines, and Antichristian Superstitions; and for whose
peerlesse devotion and sanctity, posterity shall admire with Honor: as now, I
know, our neighbor Churches do, for one of the most accomplished Divines that
ever great Britain yielded.)

But, to show the quality of the Antichrist, our fatal Enemy of Rome, (for he
that is not [with] us, is [ Matthew. 12.30. Non (...), non (...), sed (...): an
opposite to Christ, as if h^ opposing should be not so much to his nature or
person, as to his unction and Function. D. Sell p. 118 on 2 Thessalonians.
against] us, says our Savior) I will represent the whole before you, under
these two Heads. I. Doctrine. II. Manners.


Upon which two, as the Heavens upon two Poles, all that can be said of that
fallen Church does move; In the unfolding of both which, it may appear
perchance, what friends this Golden Pulpit (that I may take off the aspersion
that is cast upon it, as I have been told of late; as being willing to burn
some Incense and sweet odors, after an ill sent) has afforded unto Popery,
unto accursed, most damnable Popery.

For the latter of these, their manners; I cannot better parallel, than with
those Blaines and Botches, that, Exodus 9.10. blistered both man and beast in
Egypt, in the days of Moses; yea, as the Isa. 1.6.
Prophet speaks, from the sole of the foot, even unto the head, there is no
soundnes in it, but wounds and bruises, and putrefying sores: By Stapletons own
confession, (the Devil sometimes confesses Christ, and speaks truth) there
can scarcely Vix ullum peccatum, (sola haeresi excepta) cogitari potest, quo
illa seeds turpiter maculata non fuerit, maxim ab anno. 800. etc. Sta pleton.
relect. controv 1. q. 5. Art. 3.
any sin be thought upon, (only Heresy excepted) which that Sea of Rome
has not been spotted with; chiefly, since the year, 800. Nor need they, I
wis, except Heresy; for Biel and Almaine confess the Popes to have been
foully plunged in it: witness those prodigies, who Vid. Platin. in vitis Romans
pont.
denied the immortality of the soul, professed Necromancy, etc. [thirty]
errors acknowledged by Onuphrius their own Chronologer; and indeed, says a
Reverend Ep. Davenant. qu. est. 41. p. 185. Edit. 1634. Cantabr. Ecclesia
Romana ex quo semel erravit, cogitur aeternum in suis eroribus per severare,
etc.
Bishop of our own Church; Rome has deservedly rewed this punishment of all
her errors; (since she has boasted her self of an incompossibility of them,
to consist with her) that since first she did err, she is permitted justly to
persevere in damnable erours: In sum, If such odious Doctrines (whereof anon)
have been delivered by her, when she says, she cannot err; Good God! what
would she do, if she could err. To be short; Sleidan. Comment, l. 1. p. 7.
Sleidan has Epitomized the whole thus; Omnium locorum totius orbis terrarum
faedissima sentina, and in exhausta quaedam colluvies; It Is indeed, the very
sink and drain of all impurity; which Salvian l. 7. de Gubern. Dei.
Salvian and Nicholas de Clemangis, de corrup to ecclesiae statu.
Nicholas de Clemangis have copiously exemplified: yea, her own stories, Acts
and Monuments do convince her to be a D. Raynolds, p. 608. in Preface to six
conclus. against Heart. out of Platin. Onuph. Sabellic. Guicciardin. Thedoric a
Niem Abbas Vrsperg. etc. Bapt. Mantuan. eclog. 9.5. Ste a Catalog. of her
corruptions, in conclus. s. p. 662, 663. D. Raynold. ibid.
nurse of wars, a parent of unfaithfulnes, a spoyler of the brethren, a
worshipper of Idols, a seat of covetousnes, a Lady of pride, a cherisher and
inflamer of Lusts, of outrages, of abominations, whose old [fame] continues,
but whose [goodnes] is gone; Hence that Distich of the Traveller, Roma vale,
vidi; satis est vidisse; revertar,
Cum leno, aut meretrix, scurra, cynaedus ero.


And is it not now meet, think you, that we should be whistled back to the lure
of that stews and strumpet? which thus pretends to be the Physician, to cure
the Church, when as indeed, she is the very disease of it? yea rather, my dear
brethren, Come out from amon^ them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, 2 Cor.
6.7. believe it, there may be less danger in a Pesthouse, than in such
familiarity: therefore Saint Rev. 18.4.
Joh. is also importunate from a voice heard from Heaven; Come out of her my
people, that ye be not partaker o^ Babylons sins, that so ye receive not of
her Plagues: We are sure, St. Peter himself, (whose infallibility, chiefly
seated in the [Chaire] of Pestilence, his pretended successor at Rome, does so
much crack of) persuaded unto another Practice, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. Be ye [Holy]
in all manner of Conversation: The truth is, He resembles Peter in nothing, but
in the Matthew. 26.70.
deny all of his Master; I should cloy you with a larger mention of their
reaking obscenities.

Come we next to Doctrine; and here I am in so overgrown a garden of weeds;
that it is hard to crop almost one flower, which resents not rankly; But, that
I may abridge the larger Volumes, under a few heads, I will make the principal
of them, (with which they have too-long inferted the Church of God) run, in
some sort, parallel; with the c^iefe of those passages and judgments, which
the Lord, of old, showed before, and inflicted upon Pharaoh in Egypt; And
indeed, I think them herein, better capable of a parallel, then (under savor)
some others, happily other ways; namely, with the (though too-much to be
lamented) blemishes of our own Church; I profess, I am not of a disposition,
delighting to lay open the shame of my dear Parent; because I should then
fear the Genesis 9.25.
Curse of Cham; I know, such immodest detections are too apt to occasion the
Psalm. 79.4.
derision and the scorn of Enemies: It is too true, (I acknowledge, and [Pudet]
haec opprobria nobis, and dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
blush in the relation) among the very sons of Eli the Priest, there might
perhaps be found some foully degenerous sons of 1 Samuel 2.12.
Belial; whose exorbitancies, reflexively, occasioned the very Ver. 17. ibid.
Sacrifices to be abhorred by the Vulgar; among the Apostles themselves, there
was a Judas, who was so wicked, that our Savior styles him no other then a
Devil, Jo. 6.70. But there are also (and I hope and doubt not, the greater
part) whose dross is more purged, and whose silver more Prove. 25.4.
refined; Glorious Lamps blazing both in Life and Doctrine, to the honor and
renown of this famous Church of England: One spark of a Diamond may be worth
whole piles of Marble, and the beauty of such eximious Worthies, outvie the
duskishnes of a few false lights; however, I should rather choose with that
pious Theodoret hist. lib. 1. c. 11. and Socrat. lib. 1. c. 8. and carranza in
Concilii Niceni apparatu.
Constantine to [seale] up the unhappy distempers of the Church, with a signet
of silence, and to imitate the good Samaritan, in Luke 10.34.
binding up the soars of my Mother Church, then to blazon her sears, (too
much, alas! known already, to the bellowing, and unsanctified 2 Samuel 16.5.
Shimeis of accursed Antichrist) to her shame or obloquie; He I believe, who
loves with Shem, to Genesis 9.23.
cover up the uncomely nakedness of his (chiefly) spiritual Parent, may not
without hopes, expect his heavenly Fathers blessing; Though, on the other side,
if there be found out any Achans, who have Josh. 7.25.
troubled our Israel, if they be convinced, let them be brought forth, and let
every one cast a stone at them; that Psalm. 85.9.
glory may still dwell in our Land; But for the Lamps of the Tabernacle, that
burn but [dimly,] the [Snuffers] of a seasonable Reformation, instead of
[Extinguishers] shall suffice, Exodus 37.23.

But I come to my Parallel; and here not to stand long upon the brick-kilns of
Egypt; to which I might compare the Romishz Purgatory, Council. Trident. sess.
25. p. 224. vol. 8. and Catechism. ad Paroch. sub Pio 5.
(but that it is but merely an Ignis fatuus) chiefly the Sea B. Morton p. 85,
86. sect. 2, 3. c. 5. Grand. Impost. ex Agrippa. de vanit. scient.
Inquisition, (that cruel rack, not more of bodies then of Souls:) The first
sign shown before Pharaoh, was the casting of Aarons Rod upon the ground, so
that it became a Serpent, Exodus 7.10. What was this Rod a Type of, but of that
[true] wood of the Cross of Christ? as Macarius, Homil 47. p. 523 (...), etc.
Confer. Pet. Galatin. lib. 6. c. 15. De Arcanis Catholicae verit. (...) Macar.
Macarius acquaints us; which Cross of Christ, whilst they teach to be adored
and cringed unto, and worshipped, whether in Timber or otherwise, (and delude
so many millions of souls with the narration of the saving virtue of the very
splinters of it, sent abroad to their simple and abused Proselytes,) instead of
informing them, how the Cross of Christ should not in shadow, but in Truth, be
taken up, by suffering affliction with Christ; What are these but Idolaters?
direct Enemies, even Enemies of the true use of the Cross of Christ? Phil.
3.18. So as that, which to the poor deluded souls among them, should be as a
[staffe] to support them; is like to that of Aaron, turned (by the Magical
enchantments of those Romish, (...).
Antichristian Impostors) into a [Serpent] to sting them even unto death.

Secondly, to the Lice and swarms of Flies, Exodus 8.1^.24. what may better be
resembled, then that corrupt Doctrine of 1 Timothy 4.2.
lies, which they forge and speak in hypocrisy; bred out of the putride matter
of their own ntoxicated heads; putrefying (as the Eccles. 10.1.
Dead fly does the box of sweet Ointment) the clear and living Doctrine of
Salvation? Thus, by what they teach of natures power to move it self, (of it is
self) to Heaven; what of Council. Trid. sess. 6. can. 4, 5, 6.
Free Will; of works (...). sess. 6. c. 16.
meritorious, of works of Supererogation, Bellar. and Rhemist. ad Luc. 10.35.
and more than duty; what of Conc. trid. sess. 22. c. 3 and sess. 25. p. 225.
Invocation of Saints, Ibid sess. 25. p. 225.
prayer for the dead, of final Apostasy, and the rest of that Doctrine of
Devils, crammed in together in their Trent Conventicle, and sealed up with an
Anathema, in eve-Canon; They [Vermine-like] endeavor most nastily to pester
the truth of Romans 3.24. and Art. ^1. of our Church.
free Justification by Faith only; of natures (...), Calv. Instit. lib. 2. c.
5. sect 13. in fine Joh. 15.5. and art. 10. of our Church.
Nothingnes; of Jer. 32.40. 1 Cor. 1.8. and art. 16. of our Chur.
Final perseverance, (the main proppe of a Christian in temptation) and the
rest of that 1 Timothy 6.3. Tit. 2.7, 8.
wholesome Doctrine of life; summed into the Articles of our own Church, (which
we have all, or most, [protested] to maintain, lately) but chiefly, contained
in the Isa. 12.3.
wells themselves of salvation, the Holy Scriptures.

And by the Flies, I may w^ll resemble th^se tales, and Legends, and lies,
touching the virtue of Beads, and Medals and Conc. trid. sess. 25. p. 225, 226,
227.
Relics, and Roses, and Crossings, and Agnus Dei, and innumerable bawbles of
like nature; together with other Trumpery and Trash, fitter for Children to
sport with, in a winters night, than for me to mention in this grave assembly;
What was that other than a base Lie, which Kellison in survey of the new Rel^g
lib. 1. ca. 1. sect. 18 and l 2. c. 5 sect. 6. ib. Idem fere, ac si
familiaritatem cum Diabolo ipso iniisset, dic t. Serarius Jes. tract. de
Lutheri Magistro.
Kellison leaves under his scabbed pen, of Luther, (the Si Luthero faverem, it
viro [bona,] quod fatentur and hosts, (exactissimum approbandigenus) Deuteronomy. 32.
Erasm. tom. 8. Ep. Albert. Card. Mogunt. page 401
worthy, and stout instrument of the Church her Reformation) that the Devil
was an Incubus to his Mother, or: succubus to his Father, and (as Cochlaeus
seconds him) d^ed Cochlaeus, in vita Lutheri.
suddenly a violent and shameful death? when^e says Costerus the Jesuit, If
any Lutheran be saved, Tum veldamner ipse, Then, (see his charity) let me be
damned! O. the same bran is that of Calvin, that he dyed, as Antiochus and
Herod, (after he had first Bolsecus, in vita Calvini.
called upon the Devils) being eaten up of Bellarm. lib. 4. de Notis ecclesiae
ca. 17.
worms: But as all the skill of the Magitians in Egypt, Exodus 8.18. failed in
the [ Magorum potesta^ defecit in [muscis] S. August. l. 3. c. 7. de trin.
least] wonder, the Flies; so, in these gross lies, our Romanists have been
made to yield, even by some of them, who (as Beza and others) have survived to
read, and smile at the relation of the manner of their own false Deaths.

I hasten; to the destroying of their [first-born,] Exodus 11.5. may be justly
resembled their desperate, and disconsolate Doctrine, concerning Infants, dying
without Conc. trid. sess. 7. Can. de Baptis. and Bellarm. lib. de Baptis. etc.
Baptism; the opus operatum, the work done whereof, if they partake not, they
enjoin their Clerks, as Pharaoh did the Midwives of the Hebrew women, to Exodus
1.16.
destroy and damn them unto Hell; directly against the promise of God, made to
the righteous [seed] in the Covenant, Act. 2.39. But, chiefly, the infants of
The pretended inconven. see in Hist. of trent. Council. p. 460.
Council. trid. sess. 24. Can. 9. and sess 25. c. 1. a Papa Syricio orimo
decretum est hoc votum, and per vim, and tyrannidem, reclamantibus Episc.
Italiae, German. Gall. ab Hildebrando insano confirmatum, Baron. an. 1974. sed
vide refut. ab ep. Davenant. quaest. 42. qua supra p. 197, 198.
Married Priests; whom they enforce, beyond their power, against the Laws of
God, and nature, to Besides, Nuda carentia non damnat, sed contemptus.
Vow perpetual Continency and single life; allowing rather (in some cases)
filthy Fornication, then Gods honorable ordinance of holy and Heb. 13.4.
undefiled Matrimony: Yea, if yet I may have leave, to wind up mine instrument
a pegge higher; the firstborn is, by Prerogative, dignor in populis, the more
worthy and eminent above his Brethren; so Lyra expounds that Text, Exodus 4.22.
Israel is my son, even my Firstborn; And then we may hereto parallel their
doctrine of the supremacy, whereby they make the Scepter to stoop unto the
Miter, and the King to bow unto the Pope; as, sometimes, the sheaves of Joseph's
brethren bowed to the sheaves of Joseph: Thus Hildebrand made the Diadem of the
Emperor, to (...) Pope called Antichrist, because contrary not only Chirsto
Domino, but also Christo Domini 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. He exalts himself above all that
is [called] God, that is, all Magistracy.
veil to his Chrosier; and that of Platina in vita Alex. 3. p. 206.
Frederik Barbarossa abused by that Beast, Alexander the third, is known; when
(having first kissed his Toe) being trampled on by that impudent Antichrist, he
had the words of the Psalm added; Thus will I tread upon the Basiliske and the
Adder, Psalm. 91.13. etc. vah Lucifer!

I should great your ears too-much by rehearsing, on this occasion, the
arrogant B. Mortongrand Impost. c. 13. sect 5. p. 251, 252. and Arch. usher
lib. 9 sect 1, 2. and p. 255, 256 etc. de success. eccles. Christ. and Dr.
Raynolds against Heart c 1. divis. 2. p. 17.19. also, Rogers, on Article 37. of
the Chu. of England, p. 211. All taken out out of Ezonius, in lib. qui
inseribitur, Romanus pontifex. Panormit. de transl. prael. cap. quarte and
Stapleton ep. Nuncupat. ad Grego. 13. Ante principal. doctrine. and ex multis
aliis, a digniss. Mortono ibid. citatis, it. D. Sclater, on 2 Thessalonians. c 2. v. 4.
p. 124.
titles, where with this Chough, or Daw of Rome, as with several feathers,
stolen from the Royal dignity of Monarchs, has plumed himself; yea, in which
he has prided himself, even unto Blasphemy; Thus Pope Innocent the eight was
styled, by his Parasites, in Royalty and Unction, [Christ] above his fellows;
an attribute proper unto Jesus Christ himself; Heb. 1.9. And more yet, of the
same Beast; He is called One, above all Principalities and powers, and
whatsoever is named in this, or in the other world; plainly also proper to
Christ, Ephesians. 1.21. Pope Gregory the thirteenth (stop your ears) called power,
might, or majesty of God upon earth; and again, Our Lord Se non solum Deum, sed
etiam solum se Deum esse dicit. lib. 3. Bell. cap 14 De Pont. Romans
God the Pope: We pretermit many the like hideous blasphemies of that
triple-crowned Lucifer.

To proceed to the judgment of Locusts Exodus 10.12, or, as the Psalmist says,
Psalm. 105.34. of Caterpillars [innumerable,] I may parallel their innumerable
orders of Monks and Friars, as Augustans, Dominicans, Franciscans, Capuchins,
and of late, their Nullani, and the rest of the like rabble without number and
without regard: But the Monster of all Monsters, is the prodigious brood of
[Jesuits] a mongrell Gregation; For as it is noted of the Mule, (that ulcer in
nature) that out of the filthy commixture of the stallion, and the she ass,
is generated that mongrell calle^ the Mule; in like sort, out of the corruption
of a Leprous Papist and something worse (if worse may be) is brought forth this
unlucky brood of the Jesuits, who after the guize of the Papa^^ns, that put
names ((...) upon their Popes, directly crossing their natures; as if he be a
Snowt face, they style him B^niface; if a tyrant, Caemens; on the other side,
if mecker than ordinary, (which is very rare) they call him Leo, etc. Notorious
hypocrites, that will never seem as they are, nor be as they seem! So these
carry in their names, [ISSUS] a Savior; but in their H^arts, like to the Apoc.
9 11.
King of the Locusts, (whose Vide Episc. Andrews, p. 53, 54. in concion. latin.
in Psalm 144.10. inter opera posthuma.
resemblance they carry) Abaddin, and Apallyon: Serarius, lib. 1. c 2 qu. 19.
in Josh.
Serarius vaynly will needs serive the name from the old Testament, Number. 26.24.
Jesuits quasi Jashubits; like as Erasmus found Friars in St. Paul's time, inter
falsos fratres, among the false Brethren: among much change of houses, they
have See (...). Hall in his Q^^o vadis? sect 15 and 19, 20, 21, 24. item
cundem, decad. 5. epist. 1. and sermon. styled Pharisaisme, and Christianity,
versus Finem, and Du Moulin, de fence of King James, c 4.
two famous, for the accordance of their Names; one called the Bow, at Nola,
the other, the Arrow, (l. Flesh) in France: though this latter were more
worthy of the name of a whole quiver, containing not fewer, then 800. shafts of
all sizes: Their Apostate Ferrier played upon them in this Distich; Arcum Nola
dedit, dedit illis alma sagittam
Gallia: quis funem, quem meruere, dabit?
Nola the bow, and France the shaft did bring:
But who shall help them to an hempen string.


Of their [ Ephesians. 4.14.
cunning craftinesse] to deceive by their wicked equivocations, mental
reservations, etc. and their [ 2 Timothy 3.6.
creeping] into the houses and society of silly people, under the pretense of
devotions, (as of old, the Matthew. 23.14.
Pharisees) swallowing up the Patrimonies of deluded weak ones; and because of
their cunning, therefore the more [ Facilior cauti^ est, ubi manifestior
formido est. Plus metuendus est, and cavendus inimicus, cum latenter obrepit,
cum per pacis imaginem fallens occultis accessibus serpit, unde and nomen
serpentis accepit, etc. S. Cyprian. lib. de Vnitat. eccles. sect. 1.2.
dangerous;] What page of the faithful relatour of their practi^es, shows not?
They have like those locusts of the bottomless pit, the Rev. 9.7, 8.
faces of men, and the hair of women, pleasing and alluring; but the very teeth
of Lions, and the stinging tails of scorpions: If a learned man encounter
them, their words are smoother then oil; and the fair pretense of being soon
accorded in matter, if once the Terms of expression might be reconciled: But,
if they meet with the feebler sex, or the Vide P. Martyr epist. Calvin. p.
1124. qua supra.
less grounded Christian, their words will eat, as does a 2 Timothy 2.17.
Canker, or Gangrene, 2 Pet. 2.14.
beguiling unstable Souls to their utter undoing: like unto King David's Psalm.
144.8.
strange Children, their mouth speaks vanity, and their right hand is a right
hand of falsehood: Oh for but one wind, of the God of Exodus 20.5.
jealousy, to blow off these crawling Caterpillars and Frogs, that have too
long kept croaking in the very Chambers of Princes, even into some dead Sea,
never to flow more, for their return! Awake O Cant. 4.16.
North wind; and come o South, and blow upon our garden, that the spices of
repurged Religion may flow; after these weeds, these limbs of Antichrist be
universally eradicated, and plucked up by the very Roots. In the mean while,
let us take up that of dying Jacob toward his two Sons Simeon and Levi, O my
soul, come Genesis 49.5, 6, 7.
not thou into their secret, unto their assembly mine honor be not thou united.

The next judgment that I shall mention in Egypt is, their black and
palpable darkness, Exodus 10.21. And does not their Doctrine of Thom. 2a. 2ae.
qu. Art. 5, 6, etc. S^d nihil aliud est, quam Diabolica (...). Beza, ad 1 Romans
ver. 17. refuted by Arch-Bp. usher, c. 6. sect. 8, 9. p. 150. de successione
eccl. and by Bp. Daven. qu. 29 qua supra. and Calv. Inst. l. 3. c. 2. sect. 2,
3.
Implicit Faith, of Divine Service, in an Conc. Trid. sess. 22. c. 8 and Test.
Rhem. Annot. p. 463. and Matthew. 21 6. The pretended inconvenience see in hist.
of the Trent. Counc. l. 5. p. 460. But contrary to S. Paul. 1 Cor. 14.6.9.14.
and Art. 24. of our Church.
unknown, known, etc. resemble this? To which is added, the denying of the use
of the holy Scriptures to the Laity; lest pearls (forsooth) should be cast
before Swine, and holy things to Dogs: By which practice, they deal like to
the Philistines, 1 Samuel 13.19. who put down all smiths in Israel, lest the
Hebrews should make themselves swords and spears, or as that Bungler, in
Plutarch, who having with his coal scraped out the figure of an Hen, in a most
ill-favored and misshapen sort; was forced to keep one standing by, to drive
away all living ones, least they should shame his draught: in like sort, they
keep off the Vulgar from the searching of the Scriptures; lest they with the
Bereans, searching Act. 17.11.
and 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
proving their Traditions, and vain inventions, by this touchstone; should not
only have them all deserted with scorn; but themselves, (the imposers)
derided, for their blockish phansies, yea abhorred, [probably] or Matthew. 23.13.
shutting of their poor souls up, under such black ignorance; more palpable
and more dangerous, than that darkness of Egypt, that might be Exodus 10.21.
felt.

To the judgment of Lightening and Hail, Exodus 9.23, 24. I parallel the
innumerable Excommunications and Anathema's, that from the mount Deuteronomy. 11.29.
Ebal of their Trent Conventicle, even with Bell, Book and Candle, they send
forth flashing in the faces even of Kings and Princes themselves, who may
perchance refuse the good Ostlership of his Holiness Vid. D. Scl. ad 2 Thessalonians.
stirrup: or a busse forsooth, of his greasy Toe. Vah Lucifer!

But lastly, to that of Exodus 7 19.
blood and Exodus 9.23.
Thunder, (for I will now join these two together) what is more like, than that
accursed doctrine of theirs, teaching the Vide Arch-B. Usher exampling this and
refuting it zealousty, in sermon. upon 1 Cor. 10.17. p. 44, 45, 46, 47, etc.
Before the Commons House of Parliament.
murdering of Prince and people: nor are their tongues longer then their
hands; witness the Records of the infinite Golgatho's and Acheldama's, that
the Tyranny of that man of sin has caused in the Christian world; making the
channels of whole streets to run in the color of the red Sea; or as the purple
waters of Isa. 15.9.
Dimon, streaming all with blood; Lo, even Kings have been seen to wallow in
their gore-blood, shed by their desperate Assafines: See D. Rayn. p. 664.
conclus 5. against Heart. Ignat. Loyola Fundat or Jesuit Chemnit. in exam. Conc.
Trid. initio, de iis item scripsit Maffeius
rebellions, seditions and combustions, in all Christian Kingdoms have been
raised by the fiery spirits of the disloyallb Ignatians.

That cruel Phlebotomy in the massacre of France is not to be Nullu [simile,]
saevitiae exemplum in tota Antiquitate reperire, circiter sexagint a millia
hominum circa illud tempus trucidata, etc. Natalis Comes.
paralleled, by any example, in all antiquity of former times; when there were
about sixty thousand slain, and yet that Romish horseleach still cried out,
Give, give, and was not satisfied: And God be pleased to chain up that wild
Psalm. 80.13.
boar, from having power to rage in the like nature, (even now) among our
distressed brethren in Ireland; where (as we are informed eradications against
the State, Laws, King dome, Religion it self, are endeavored, by conspiracies,
Rebellions, and all hostile Machinations: May the God even the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the father of 2 Cor. 1.3.
mercies and the God of all comfort, Job. 5.12.
disappoint the devices, Isa 37.27.
blast the projects, and nullify the power of the enemy; or give the oppressed
Heb. 10.36.
patience, and 1 Chronicles. 28.7.
constancy, to bear up under that 1 Pet. 4.12.
fiery trial, of which they are in danger; Arise O Lord, make bare their own
arm, Isa. 52.10. break thou the spear, and stop up the way before the
cruel, Psalm. 46.9. and Psalm. 35.3.

To conclude; to the judgment of thunder, I will liken the Flectere sinequeo
superos, Acheronta movebo, Virgil.
Acheronticall Powder Plot, as upon this day; when in thirty six barrels of
powder, there was a great brewing of death, tunned up, for the destruction of
the three Estates of this whole Kingdom: an example beyond all examples of
ages past; and for the heinousness thereof, hardly credible, in the generation
to come; For now, by a crack or hellish thunder were King, and Prince, and
Peers, and the whole representative Body of the Commons expected (to use the
Prophets expression, Isa. 9.18.) to mount up like the lifting up of smoke; in
which there could be imagined no mercy; unless so total and so big a
destruction had in the [suddennes] the reof, found a kind of mercy.

I read in the Florus l. 2. c. 6.
Roman story of a great massacre of the Roman Nobility at Canna (but an
obscure village of Apulia) to the groaning of the State, for so fatal a loss;
but this was in open hostility, young Hannibal no way brooking an opposition:
Our Verslegan, c. 5. p. 130. out of William of Malmbsbury.
own Chronicles likewise mention an overthrow of three hundred of the British
Nobility slain at once upon Salisbury plains, by the treacherous devise of the
Saxons, whose King Hengistus coming without thoughts of Peace (though he
pretended it) to meet Vortiger, King of the Britains at the same time, and
giving them their watchword, which was this, [Nem eowr seaxes] take you Seaxes,
(a kind of crocked Knife, from which some think, the Saxons took their name)
at the banquet there appointed, slew the Nobility and imprisoned their King;
But this was likewise, in the times of Civil discords and intestine Wars.

But for miscreants, in the time of peace, to make themselves ready for war,
and to pile up a whole Kingdom into one corner, as one faggot to be consumed
in one flame at once! Oh treason unheard of! Oh act imparallel'd; Oh Lucifer
out-devil'd! surely, as the Florus, l. 2. c. 4.
Historian says, of the Gauls of Insubria under the Alps; Animi illis
[ferarum] erant, their Psalm 5 6.
inward parts were very violent and fierce, as the wild beasts of the forest;
or as Maginns, Ceograph indescrip. Galliae.
Maginus, of the Gauis in general, [Ignea] illis men's; Their mind and heart
like to the mountain Aetna, boiled with the [fire] of malice, as if it had
feamed out flakes of Hell, ere they came into it: And well may we here resume
that, which was said of Simeon and Levi, Genesis 49.5, 6, 7. these Romish
Impostors are brethren in iniquity; instruments of cruelty are in their
habitations; in their anger they slew a man, cursed be their anger, for it was
cruel; Divide them O Lord, divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel;
or rather [out] of our Israel; Oh that the Lord would remove, but even this one
Plague from us!

And thus have I made an end of my parallel, between the Egyptian judgments,
and the Impostures of Papistry: By all which laid together, we may cauly
discover, what a [plaguy] Religion that of Popery is; or rather indeed, that
their faith is naught but faction, nor their Religion but Rebellion, and
murdering of Kings, etc. If any man then longs within himself to get a Souls
infection; let him but join issue with these doctrines and practices; he shall
be sure to be sped; even as surely as those ships, that pretended to sail to
Ophir for gold, were split in sunder, 1 King 22 48.
at Ezion-Geber, and miscarried.

And thus far of the Enemies, from whose deadly conspiracy we were freed,
this day.

The next head of our application, was the manner of our deliverance, How; to
which we may join the time, When, also it was: And the story or relation
thereof shows us it to have been in the very height of danger, and by a very
weak and improbable means: the danger was, at the very (...), and perfection;
so that from a match ready fired, we received a matchless deliverance: Cum
[duplicantur] lateres, venit Moses, is the Hebrew Proverb, God sent not a
deliverer to Israel in Egypt, till their bricks were [doubled:] man's
extremity, is Gods opportunity; when the time of trouble is most [needfull,]
then especially, is the Lord a very [ Psalm. 46.1.
present] help; even as he was upon this day, when there wanted nothing, but
the very act of execution, to our certain ruin; Nor had Gods glory been so
much magnified, had not the danger been so far heightened.

And for the [manner] of it; it was only by the delivery of a By. Carleton.
Letter, written in a dark expression; and delivered with not over much care
or regard, by a Page or Lacquay, crossing the street, to the Lord Monteagle:
Which letter being presented to that Prince, who had more than an Eagles
perspicacity, (yea, though perched on a mount) to spy out the treason; the Lord
(to give that King the honor of so strange a discovery, though he could have
done it by other means) now laid it open, by his wise conjectures; So are the
wicked 2 Samuel 15.31. and 17.14. and Romans 1.22. (...).
befooled, often, in the ripenes of their deepest projects; and defeated in the
maturity of their proudest and their vastest hopes: For as the Barbarians seeing
a Viper actually fastened upon Saint Paul's hand, expected each moment, his
Act. 28.6. Ver. 5.
falling down dead, even suddenly; yet he only with one shaking of his hand,
disappointed their thoughts; even so easily can, yea did that God, ( Act. 27.23.
whose we are, and whom we serve) blast the hopes of this days most infernal
and diabolical Treason.

And lastly, for the [author] of the deliverance: we must needs take up that of
the Psalmist and say, Psalm. 124.1, 2, etc. If it had not been the [Lord] who
was on our side, now may Israel, yea England, say; if if it had not been the
[Lord] who was on our side, when men rose up against us; Then they had
swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us; But lo! great
deliverance he has given unto his King, and has shown mercy to his Anointed,
unto our David, and unto his seed for evermore, Psalm. 18.50. Behold, our soul
is escaped as a bird out of a Psalm. 124.6, 7.
snare of the fowlers, the snare is broken and we are escaped; and blessed be
the Lord, who has not given us as a prey to their teeth: O sing Psalm 47.6, 7.
praises unto our God, sing praises, sing praises unto our King, sing praises:
for God is the King of all the Earth, sing ye praises with understanding: See
also, Psalm. 118.24, 27, 8, 29. Psalm. 10^.8, 15, 21, 31.

Beloved Christians, leam say to you, on this occasion, as Moses sometime unto
Israel, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, etc. Ye sland this day, all of you before the Lord
your God, your little ones, your wives, and whatsoever is nearest or dearest
unto you; as yet your Psalm. 144.12, 13, 14, 15.
Sons grow up in their youth, and your daughters are as the polished corners of
the Temple; your garners are full, affording all manner of store, your sheep
bring forth thousands and ten thousands in your streets; your Oxen are strong
to labor, there is no breaking in, nor going out, nor is there any complaining
in your streets: happy is that people, that is in such a case; yea happy is
that people, whose God is the Lord.

But now, do but faigne a little to your selves; if the Lord had not beenon
our side, but had delivered us all over to the merciless cruelty of the Enemy;
and suffered us to lie down under the bondage and slavery of Antichrist: Then,
instead of this blessed liberty of the Gospel, and of the pure worship of God,
and of those happy opportunities we now (under so godly and Peerlesse a Prince)
enjoy; we might have been plundered in gross Superstition and Idolatry; have
been worshippin, of Images, cringing to Crosses, adoring of Crucifixes,
blattering to a Saint, rumbling of our Beads, wandering in some Pilgrimage; all
overrun with the rank weeds of Col. 2.23.
wil-wership, angring our God of jealousy, and irritating the just wrath of
Heaven: or else all dragged unto racks, or stakes, or dungeons, to fire, and
faggot, or other exquisite tortures; the proper badges of that Romish
Antichrist, that man of sin; whereas that true Religion and Wifedome, that is
from above, is first pure, then [ Jam. 3.17.
Peaceable;] so far from bloodines, as it is from Popery.

But thanks be unto the Lord for his 2 Cor. 9.15.
unspeakable Gift: He has rescued us from the Col. 1.13.
power of a [more] than Egyptian (because a spiritual) darkness: yea more
than so, he has broken the Psalm. 13.7.
teeth of that 2 Thessalonians 2.3.
Son of perdition himself, and Jud. 6.
chayned up his power: And as we have found out the beginning of his rise; so
we hope to see the end of his final downfall. About the year Juel, Apol p. 29
vol. 16.
six hundred and thirteen, shortly after the death of Saint Gregory (the great
indeed, but humble Bishop) who endeavored to quell the Vide Bullinger. ad
Apoc. 9.
insolency of John the Prelate of Constantinople, for aspiring to the title, Of
See Epist. of S. Gregory the great to Mauricius the Emperor, added to the hist.
of Trent. Council. p. 829, 830.
universal Bishop, and directly styling him, The forerunner of Antichrist, who
should dare to assume it unto himself: Yet Boniface the third moved nothing
herewith, obtained of wicked Phocas (who, by the murdering of his Lord
Mauricius, had got into the Empire,) that the Church of Rome might be called,
and taken for the chief and head of all Churches; and himself to be sty led
the Universal Bishop of the World: And in this, thus ambitious Boniface, had
Antichrist his (...), the entrance upon his height: After that, through many
cruelties and tyrannies, his (...), or perfection, was in Gregory the seventh,
commonly called Hildebrand, By. Downam, Diatrib. de Antichrist. contr. Leon.
Lessium.
who first of all the rest, about the year, 1073. subjected the Diadem to the
Miter, exalting himself above all that is called God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. That is,
above all Magistrates, both supreme and subordinate; Otho. Frisingensis, lib.
9. c. 35.
who by reason of the resemblance in Majesty, being Gods Vicegerents in
authority upon Earth, are called Exodus 22, 28.
Gods, 1 Cor. 88.5. though Essentially they are no Gods: And by the devise of
the holy See M. Fuller his Hist. of the holy War elegantly penned.
War at Jerusalem, lurching the Patrimony of deluded Princes, (whom he had
persuaded to bear arms in that cause) in their absence, to Saint Peter's
chair; he advanced himself at length to so great an height, that his head grew
giddy; and so that Rev. 9.1. Stellam hanc omnes fere Neoterici interpretantur
de Romano Vontisice, ut Joachimus, Abbas Bulling, Gyffard, Dent. etc.
star fell down from Heaven, to the earth; And ever since in the later times,
has this Antichrist had his (...), the remission of his vigor, and his
declination: And now how should every zealous soul, who clearly and without
dissembling, wishes well to the Peace of this our Zion; take up that of Edom,
in the day of Jerusalem, and cry Psalm. 137.7.
down with him, down with him, even to the ground? Lo this great Rev. 17.1.
whore of Papacy is cast upon her bed of Psalm. 41.3.
languishing, and is sick, we hope to death; so that she shall never be able
more to rise up, nor with the Revel. 17.2.
Wine of her spiritual, filthy fornications, to entoxicate the nations of the
earth; so long, so rufully, already, made drunken by her; yea, the Lord Christ
shall consume the 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
man of sin, with the spirit of his mouth, and destroy with the brightness of
his coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. yea even so Revel. 22.20.
come, Lord Jesus, come quickly: And do unto him, and unto all his accomplices,
as unto the Midianites, as to Psalm. 83.9, 10.
Sisera, as to Jabin, at the brook of Kishon, which perished at Endor, they
became as dung for the earth, etc. Yea, let God arise, and let his Psalm. 68.1,
2, etc.
Enemies be scattered, let them also that hate him fly before him, as smoke is
driven away, so drive them away; as wax melts before the fire, so let the
wicked perish, at the presence of God: but let the righteous be glad; let them
rejoice before God, yea, let them exceedingly rejoice; let them sing unto God,
sing praises unto his Name, and extol him that rides upon the Heavens, by his
Name J A H, and rejoice before him.

It is time to end: suffer a word of exhortation and I have done; I shall begin
it, in the words of Ezra, cap. 9.13, 14. Seeing that thou our God, have given
us such a deliverance as this; as this, so emin^nt, so miraculous, so when we
were high o destruction, and the very mouth of ruin gaped, and was open to
devour us; should we again break thy Commandments? and join with the people
of these abominations? would thou not be angry with us, till thou had
consumed us, so that there should be no remnant, nor escaping? Ah my brethren,
let us be awakned from our deadly security, from our sinful unthankfulnes;
favors bestowed raise up an expectation of obedience, and of a godly
conversation, Mic. 6.8. As therefore the Heathens had their three Graces, (as
inseparable sisters) he one to give the benefit, the other to receive it, and
the third to return it, and they painted them always [young;] to the end, a
benefit might be ever [fresh] in their remembrances: Heb. 13.22.
so let us never Psalm. 137.5.
forget this favor of all favors, this day, bestowed upon this Land and
Kingdom: Let us give up our selves, our souls and bodies, all that we are, or
have, as a solemn, real Romans 12.1.
Sacrifice to the Psalm. 18.46.
God of our salvation, who has done so 1 Samuel 12.24.
great things for our souls: This, this alone is the way to continue his mercy
and loving kindness unto us, and our Deuteronomy. 4.40.
posterity for evermore; which God grant for the sake of the Son of his love,
Jesus Christ the righteous; To whom with the Father, and the holy Spirit be all
praise and glory, world without end, Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Reader, faults escaped in the Press, and seemingly perverting the sense, are
thus to be corrected before thou read.
Page 1 li^ 4. for prayer read praise, and l. 11. ibid. for bosom r. besome,
p. 5 l. 9. for he, r. the, p. 7. for near r. never, p. 10. l. 7. for nigher r
higher, p. 11. l. 26. for God, r. Gods, p. 17. l. 15. r. El-schaddal, and l.
28. ib r.thresh, p. 20, l 20. r. Matthew. 5.18. p. 24. l. 29. for opposite r.
apposite, p. 30. l. 16. r. vellet. and after He, in the same line, supply,
might: p. 31. l. 6. r. creezy, p. 32. l. 34. (...) yet, r. yea, p. 37. l. 22.
for Warwick, r. Worcester, p. 48. l. 7. for grea. r. grate, p. 49 l. 12 for
never, r. neither, p, 46. l. 7. for eve, r. every, p. 50. l. 32. for known, r.
tongue, p. 52. l. 27. for their, r. thine.


