LICENSED,

Aug. 25. 1669. Roger L'Estrange.

THE UNEXPECTED CHOICE, A NOVEL.

BY Monsieur SCARRON.

Rendered into English, with Addition and Advantage.

By JOHN DAVIES of Kidwelly, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for John Martyn, at the Sign of the Bell without Temple Bar,
1670.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL AND Most Accomplished, THOMAS STANLEY Esquire
IF we may credit the dictates of Venerable Astrology, we are to impute the
happy or unhappy conduct of our Lives, to the benevolence, or malignancy, of
those Aspects, which guide our Nativities. What Pieces of the most Comical, and
most Burlesque Monsieur SCARRON have come forth in my Dress, I fell upon under
your Roof, and they had their Birth, in English, under your Patronage, and
accordingly proved fortunate in the World. But since, in the production of the
least Effect, there is a general concurrence of all natural Causes, I am to
attribute that success (besides the precedent Direction) to the just
persuasions of the more ingenious, who voted something of more then ordinary
excellency, in what they saw Dedicated to so precious a name as STANLEY.

When the former NOVELS came first abroad, you were acting Lord Chancellor
among the Ancient Philosophers, assigning the several Sects, their proper
Sentiments and Opinions, and, in a Decree of Two large Volumes, deciding all
the differences between them. But This (if I am rightly informed) will find you
consulting the Oracles of our Municipal Laws, of which Study, since you have
overcome the severity, I am only to wish you the Sweetness and Advantages.

It were easy for me to apologize for the smallness of the Present I now make
you, by alleging, that Books, like Essences, derive not their value from
Quantity, but Virtues, and that a little Pill, or Cordial, prescribed by a
HARVEY, or SCARBOROVGH, outvy, in esteem, all the voluminous Recipe's of the
ordinary Class of Physicians. But I would rather let the World know, by this
Address, that your Kindnesses to me have begot this Familiarity; that they have
excited in me a presumption of your Acceptance, though I waited on you with the
Copy of a meaner Original; and that I am, notwithstanding this Confidence, with
the greatest submissions and respects,

Honored Sir, Your most humble, and much obliged Servant, J. DAVIES.

TO ALL INGENIOUS NOVELISTS.
Gentlemen,
PRefaces, Advertisements, and whatever else is preliminary to men's Works, seem
to be certain Supererogations, whereby Authors would inveigle their Readers
into a greater conceit thereof. The Motives to this Devotion I find to be
different, suitably to the diversity of men's humors.

Some, out of a generous inclination, unwilling to omit any thing of ceremony
or complement, when they court the public Eye, think it but requisite, by this
means, to excite a kind of previous satisfaction, in those whom they would
oblige to the perusal of their Labors. Others, through the contagion of
Example, have heightened the Civility into an Obligation, and conceit it
incumbent on them, to usher in their Discourses, with some commendatory account
thereof, as if they would represent the pleasantness of a Country, by a
Landscape of it. Others again do it, out of compliance with the clamorous
desires of the Bookseller, who flatters himself with the hope of good success
in his Adventure, upon the elaborateness of what is introductory to his Book.

For my part, what I now do, in this kind, proceeds not strictly from any of
these Motives. As for my Productions, they who know me, know also, that I have
not been guilty of those profusions in point of advertisement, as might cajole
many into a perusal of them, but have left them, without much preoccupant
recommendation, to stand or fall by their own merit: And as to the Venders of
them, it is only to be wished their Civilities had born some proportion to the
Advantages they have made thereby.

What then occasions the present Trouble? This; that I thought it convenient to
give some account of this so late obstetrication of one Brother, so long after
the first, second, and third Births, in the English Tongue, of seven others,
and that within the space of seven years.

Monsteur SCARRON, a person the most eminent of this last Age, for the humor
of his writing, has betrayed therein a certain Drollery, or (if I may so
express it) Burlesquery of Wit, transcending all others who offered at any
thing in that kind, and what made him the more remarkable, was, that he did it,
amidst the perpetual torments of Chronical Diseases, Among others, he fell upon
the subject of NOVELS, wherein he proved so fortunate, that had he written
Conturies of them, divertive Inclinations would never have complained of a
glut. Of this there cannot be a greater demonstration, then the kind
entertainment they have met with in our Language.

The first Three which came to my hands, and, by that means, into English, were
communicated to me by a Lady, who died, young, the Luster of her Age and Sex,
Mrs. Catharine Philips, published under the Titles of The FRUITLESS
PRECAUTION, The HYPOCRITES, The INNOCENT ADULTERY.

Afterward, lighting on Monsieur SCARRON'S COMICAL ROMANCE (since ingeniously
Englished by another Hand) I added the four others I found there; to wit, The
INVISIBLE MISTRESS, The TRAPANNER TRAPANN'D, The JUDGE in his own CAUSE, and,
The CHASTISEMENT of AVARICE: which, put to the other Three, make up the Seven
Elder Brothers, mentioned before. How this last, on which I have bestowed the
Title of The UNEXPECTED CHOICE, came to ly dormant so long, I cannot tell; and
only think it imputable to their precipitancy, who printing his Works, since
his death, and not having it by them, put out what Collections they could
hastily make, to get the start of others, whom they suspected to be engaged
upon the same design. So that this last appeared not in any collected Edition
of his Works, till that printed in the Year 1668. wherein I find it added to
the three former, and so making up one Volume of the six, into which all his
Works are now divided.

Meeting with it thus, and thereupon reflecting how kindly the others had been
redeiv'd here (so as in few years to come to a third Impression, now sold by
Thomas Basset, at the George in Fleet-stree) I could do no less then supply the
place of a transplanting Father to this, as I had done to the rest, and to send
him abroad, like another Joseph, to see how his Brethren did, yet without any
presumption of his attaining such Grandeur, as that his Elders should bow to
him, and acknowledge his Supremacy.

And observing withal, that there was not any thing more, of that kind, to be
had of Monsieur Scarron's (at least according to that Collection of his Works)
I have ventured to give it what Additions I could. Whence it comes, that in the
Title, I affirm it to be Englished with much Addition and Advantage; which if
any shall think much to credit, that is, are Skeptical as to my Sincerity; let
them pursue their own satisfaction by consulting the Original.

And thus have I acquitted my self, as to what I had to say of this late
publication of the present Novel. But another complaint I have to make against
the Posthumous Editions of Monsieur Scarron's Works, is, that I find not in any
of them a perfect Catalogue of the Pieces written by him; of which defect, I
may have occasion to say more elsewhere.

And lastly, whereas it is not unusual in Prefaces, to make some promise of
what else may be retriv'd, of Authors, whose precedent Labors have been well
received; I am here to acquaint the Ingenious Novelists, and other Lovers of
the Productions of Monsieur Scarron, that there is yet something of his upon
the Stocks, which will be ready to be launched out in the English Language some
time the next Term, without any Proviso, upon the kind or unkind reception of
this.

J. D.

THE UNEXPECTED CHOICE, A Novel.
By Monsieur Scarron.
THough it be the first requisite in the writing of a story, to begin with the
circumstance of Time, yet must I (who am a man of an humor by my self, and
have always pretended to greater sincerity then any that ever employed
themselves in writing Novels) acknowledge my self at a loss, as to this
particular, and can only say, that what I am going to relate happened during
the time that Naples was governed by Kings. Under one of those named (if my
instructions deceive me not) Alphonso there lived one Leonard de S. Severin,
Prince of Tarentum, one of the chiefest Grandees of the Kingdom, and the most
eminent for Military Affairs of his time. To the great regret of all lovers of
Heroic Spirits, this excellent person dies in the Summer of his Age, and noble
exploits, and leaves the Principality of Tarentum to an only Daughter, named
Matilda, of whom I find one very pleasant remark, whereof I think it my duty to
give the Reader a strict account, to wit, that the very day of her Father's
death, she had been upon the Theater of this World, just sixteen years and a
half, wanting eleven weeks, and consequently that from the time that her
Parents made use of the means to get her, we may account much about seaventeen
years. This young Princess was born, or begot (it matters not much whether)
under so benevolent a Constellation, as if a Society of Astrologers had minuted
either the coition or the nativity, to her advantage only, without any
communication of its influences to others that might possibly come into the
World at the same time. But whether we are so much obliged to the stars for
their influences, as those Gentlemen tell us, or not, certain it is, that
common fame gave it out of Matilda, that she was beautiful as an Angel, and
that this beauty, lest it might dazzle such as beheld it, was surrounded by so
extraordinary a mildness and sweetness of nature, as gave occasion to such as
were unacquainted with the strangeness of her ingenuity, to suspect her being
at a great distance from it.

Her Father, having no other, and out of hopes of any more Children, had long
before his death promised her in marriage to Prospero, Prince of Salerna. This
Prospero was a person of an insolent and very incompliant humor: and yet the
pattern of mildness and serenity, Matilda, by reason of her often seeing of
him, and bearing with his imperious treatment of her, had brought her self to
such a custom of loving and fearing him, that there was never any slave so
absolutely dependent on the disposal of a Master, as this young Princess was on
that of old Prospero; for, in comparison of a person so young as Matilda, I may
justly so call a man, who trebled her Age, that is, wanted not much of
completing a Jubilee.

The Love she bore this superannuated Lover might well be called a certain awe
and submission, begot by custom, rather then the effect of any inclination; and
yet, however it might be called, it was so full of sincerity, as that which he
bort her was of self-interest. Not but that he had a kindness and affection for
her, and that to as high a degree as possibly he could have, and in that he did
no more then what any other might have done as well, since she was the most
amiable person in the World: but he was of his own nature, one that was
incapable of being amorous to any great height, and, in the person, to whom he
directed his affections, setting a value on her merit and beauty, distinct from
that due to her upon the account of her wealth. According to this Character of
him, his addresses should have been very importunate to Matilda; and yet he was
so fortunate, or rather she so easily satisfied, that though he had not for her
all the respects and complyances requisite in a person that knows how to love,
he nevertheless became absolute Master of her affections, and by accustoming
her to his ill humors, brought her to think them the more supportable. He
always found fault with whatever she did, and was perpetually persecuting her
with those instructions, which grave persons are apt to give to young people,
and which the latter so unkindly entertain. In a word, he must have been more
troublesome to her then an ill-natured Governess, if she could have found any
thing to quarrel at, in a person whom she truly loved. This indeed must be
acknowledged, to his commendation, that when he was in a good humor, he
entertained her with pleasant stories of the old Court, he played on the Guitar
before her, and expressed his activity in the footing of a Saraband. His age I
gave an account of before, which was, that if he had alienated his Patrimony,
he was within two years of his restoration, according to the Jewish Lawgiver.
There was little to be objected against his person; he was very neat and modish
in his Clothes, but above all extremely curious in his Periwiggs, a clear
argument that he had but little hair of his own, what service soever he may
have lost it in. Nor was he negligent in ordering his teeth, for the greater
beauty of them, only it might be said that time, which shortens other things,
had made them somewhat longer then they were twenty or thirty years before. He
also took a great deal of pains to exceed others in the whiteness and delicacy
of his hands, and suffered the nail of the little finger of his left hand, to
grow to a very great length, which he thought the finest piece of gallantry in
the World; for which I cannot imagine what reason he might have, unless it were
to distinguish him from all others. Moreover, he was a great Artist in the
disposing and intermixture of his Feathers and Ribbands; very punctual in the
observance of some devotion at night; went always persum'd, and his Pockets
were never unfurnished with somewhat to eat, and Verses to recite; and he
forgot not to bring along with him some wretched Copies of his own production.
As for new Songs, and whatever were A la mode, of that kind he was as well
stored as any man, and as cheaply; for, of those who had the reputation of
being ingenious, he was a great lover of such only as expected nothing from
him. He had a little smattering skill upon several instruments; did his
exercises passably well, and above all others, that of Dancing. He had done
some remarkable actions, whence he might have pretended to some repute of
gallantry; but these were counterpoiz'd by a many others, not fit to come into
that Class, so that they were, as a man may say, like Cherries has stily
gathered, for one ripe one, two or three that were not. In fine, to make a more
perfect Anatomy of the person, I conceive it cannot be done any way so well, as
by a certain description, which I had occasion to make of one who thought it
his shortest way to reputation, to write somewhat against me, wherein he would
needs make my diseases, and the deformities of my body the subject of his
Satyr. As to the fame he proposed to himself, he is the more likely to obtain
it; because both his writings and mine contribute to the accomplishment of his
desires. And thus much of his Character suits with the person I am now to
describe, and so I shall not stick to give this latter the same denomination,
as I had done the other, which was;

The Fantastic Gallant.
HEre lies one known so well by fame,
That we need not inquire his name,
Needing no other superscription,
For his discov'ry, then this description.
He Would been a tow'rdly child and bold,
And sat a Horse at seven year old;
But alas! who would ere have thought,
He should at manhood come to naught.
To singing he a love did bear,
Though he had neither voice, nor ear;
And at a dance he would make one,
Though's dancing-days were well-nigh gone.
Yet as to this fair Quality,
Some stick not to affirm, not I;
That they are not the best to dance
Who Have lived at Naples, or in France.
There was another great disaster,
Our Gallant was a Poetaster;
And Verses made, such as they were,
But still Minerva was not there.
He had too, but the Devilish was in it,
A Fortnight's mind to be in print;
Yet was he at perpetual Jars,
With Printers, and with Booksellers.
With these he had had treaties many,
But still without effect in any;
They still with charge and hazard close,
Liking Men's works to Gondoloes.
Of these some few, for state or price,
For Grandees were and Seigneuries,
Others, for many that desire
Frequent convenience, at low hire.
To neither he contribute would,
parted with Coin like drops of blood;
And so the cautious crew to spite,
id all transcribe, or all recite.
Another way then came in's pate
His reputation to dilate;
Of some new Mode to be th'inventer,
His wits he stretched upon the Tenter.
For colors, Mottoes, and devises
To please fair Ladies of all sizes,
All came to him, sooner or later,
As to perpetual Dictator.
Of Fancies, Periwigs, and Feathers,
He had to suit all sorts of weathers;
Yet might he justly make it his boast,
That all was done with little cost.
Another humor much did haunt
This Fancy-Feather-wigg'd Gallant;
His Pedigree he would derive
As far -- as any man alive.
From truth, I mean a for had he not
A Christian been, cause so begot
(However he had seaped the briars)
The Heathenish Gods had bin his Sires.
But Modesty a Virtue is,
Sometimes resides in Palaces;
So some well known Heroic coition
Did satisfy his great ambition.
Howere, he had no mind to wars,
Because men thence returned with scart.
Broken pates, wounds, and many thumps.
Disordered limbs, and wooden stumps.
Yet would he talk of fights and sallies,
Pitched fields on mountains, or in valleys
Onsets, assaults, storms, and approaches,
As freely as of Balls or Coaches.
Nay such was his discourse, in fine,
Of Military Discipline,
That, to a common understander,
He seemed to be some Alexander.
He further understood the Globe,
As Surgeon does the use of Probe,
Knew how the Stars their course did vary,
As if he would been their Secretary.
But what did more concern mankind,
He was not in those things behind,
Wherein some men do place a glory,
Transcending all Romance or Story:
That is, he fastened had his claws
Of study in most Countries Laws;
Could give account of several Nations,
Their humors, policies, and fashions.
Of knowledge nothing escaped his wit,
As if he would been in the deep pit,
Where unexhausted Science lies,
Humane attempts to exercise.
In things also, some time he would spent,
Of quite another Element;
For (since it was not Heavens command
All mischief should be done on Land.)
In Sea-affairs he was well skilled,
To Mathematics kindly-will'd,
And on the Chard could read a Lecture
Much better then on Architecture.
To Empires far remote, by line
In Map, their bounds he could assign;
And, by the same, account did keep
Of the vast Regions of the Deep.
Yet little maw he had to roam,
Nor seen, but once, ten miles from home
He would not trust the Seas untrue,
For all the Treasures of Peru.
Those he so hated, that he swore,
He Would rather break his neck ashore,
Then hazard drowning in the Main,
Never to be retriv'd again.
But what e're he might be, yet these
Were comprehensive Knowledges,
Such as the Owner might commend
To some Admirer, and some Friend:
But still there wanted somewhat yet
These great endowments to complete:
In all emergencies, Men's sana,
Sincerity, and prudence, Ana.
Modest thoughts, of high perfections,
In all cuncerns, calm recollections,
Neatness, without affectation,
Constancy in inclination.
These Characters denote a mind
To all transcendent Acts inclined,
Which Art and Nature's joint consent
Would raise up to accomplishment.
But what are all these advantages in comparison of that which out-weighs them
all? One of the most amiable Princesses in the World looked on this person as
the only object of her devoted Love; true it is, she was not full seventeen
years of age; but this pitiful Prince of Salerna thought that the least of his
concerns, and reflected not on the disproportion between them as to that
particular. The Princess Matilda, being beautiful and wealthy, as she was,
would, no doubt, have been adored by diverse other humble-Servants, and
Gallants, if it had not been generally believed in Naples, that her matching
with Prospero had been a business fully concluded long before her Father's
death. To which may be added, that the quality of this Prince was such as
diverted all those, who upon the encouragement of their estates or extraction
might have been his Rivals, from making any addresses to her. The greatest part
therefore of these over-timorous, and over-cautious Lovers were content to make
a discovery of their inclinations for her only by their sighs, which we may
well think availed them little, since that is the concerns of this world,
speeding ever presupposes speaking. Only one person, named Hippolito made a
public profession of being a Rival of Prospero's, and a most respectful Lover
of Matilda. He was of one of the most illustrious houses of Spain, descended
from that great Ruis Lopez d' Avalos, who was Constable of Casteele, and in
whom Fortune made the greatest demonstrations she could of her inconstancy;
insomuch that having been the wealthiest and most eminent Grandee of his
Country, he was scornfully forced out of it in a poor and wretched condition,
and reduced to the extremity of accepting money of his friends, to make his
escape to Arragon, where the King took him into his protection, and assigned
him such Revenues in Naples, as to maintain him answerably to the rank of the
chiefest in the Kingdom. This Hippolito was one of the most accomplished
persons of his time; and the reputation of valor which he had acquired in
several parts of Europe, meeting in conjunction with that of having a clear and
gallant Soul, made him remarkable above all others. He was then fallen in love
with Matilda; conceived little hope of his being beloved by her, while she had
any kindness for Prospero, and yet could not forbear loving her. He was liberal
even to prodigality, whereas his Rival was thrifty, even to avarice. He
slighted not the least occasions of making discoveries of his magnificence
toward Matilda, yet without the least advantage to himself, in regard her
imperious Servant Prospero kept her from approving ought of those gallantries,
which any other besides himself might have performed upon her account. But a
violent Love defies all difficulties and disdains, and will act consonantly to
its own inspirations, whatever the success may prove. He therefore often ran at
the Ring before his Mistresses Window; entertained her with Serenades,
appointed Tournaments, and Tiltings; in fine, he omitted no divertisements,
whereby he might force that insensible Beauty to some acknowledgment of the
Love he bore her. The devises, and colors of Matilda, were known and observed
in his Liveries; and the Verses he made for her, and the Aires and Songs he got
composed and sung in praise of her, made her the general discourse of all in
Italy, who were any way concerned in the affairs of Love. And yet she was no
more moved at all this, then if she had never heard any thing of it; and it
happened many times, that by the express order of her Prince of Salerna, she
must take some trivial occasion to get out of Naples, just on the very day,
when the amorous Hippolito intended to divert her with a Ball, Tilting, or some
such gallantry. Nay upon all occasions she disobliged him with so apparent an
affectation, and behaved her self toward him with a rigor so inconsistent
with the disposition of so intelligent a person as she was, as gave all a just
ground to charge her with cruelty, and to murmur against her.

But Hippolito was nothing discouraged at all these obstacles; and his Love was
rather enflamed to a higher pitch, then any way remitted by those visible
disdains of Matilda. Nay what was yet of greater consideration; he expressed
toward Prospero, the respects he ought him not, even though he had not been
his Rival, and, to show his submissions to Matilda, had for him those
deferences, which are commonly observed by such as converse with persons of a
quality transcending their own, though only Fortune (not always the Patroness
of Merit) made the difference between him and the Prince of Salerna. In a word,
he respected his Mistress in his Rival, and, by an inexpressible violence in
the business of Amors, forbore all aversion toward him, because he was
beloved by Matilda.

It was quite otherwise with Prospero; he had a perpetual Pique against
Hippolito, talked of him with all the disadvantage he could, nay would have
given him an ill report, could he have been persuaded any would have believed
it. But Hippolito was the darling and delight of Naples, and his reputation was
there so well settled, that all his endeavors to blast it would have proved
fruitless, even though the other had discontinu'd the doing of those noble
actions, whereby it had been raised.

Thus was Prospero the happiest man living in his Loves, and at a small charge,
assured of the Favors of Matilda; and that fair Princess saw him not often
enough, though he visited her every day, when, by a sudden Apostasy of Fortune,
she was reduced from the height of prosperity, to the extremest point of
misery. She had a Cousin-German by the Father's side, a Person, whose worth had
been the more remarkable, had it not been obscured by his ambition and his
avarice. He had had his education with the King, was much about his age, and
had so far insinuated himself into his affection, that he was in a manner the
director of all his divertisements, and the Alembick, through which all his
favors to others were distilled. This Rogero de S. Severin (so was he called)
bethought himself, that the Principality of Tarentum belonged of right to him,
and that a Daughter could not inherit, to the prejudice of an Heirmale, of the
same name and family. He acquainted the King with his pretensions, who
permitted him to make all the advantages he could thereof, and promised to
countenance and assist him with his authority. The business was kept secret a
while, till such time as Rogero had possessed himself of Tarentum, and put a
strong garrison into it; all which was done before Matilda had the least
distrust of any such design.

The poor Princess, surpised with this treacherous turn of fortune, and never
having had any cross accident before, was as it were thunderstruck at the news
of it. She was forsaken by all, save only her sincere Lover Hippolito, who
appeared on her behalf, in opposition to all the attempts of a Royal Favorite.
On the contrary, Prospero who was obliged to her above all others, did less for
her then any; whereas Hippolito did not only what he should have done but much
more. He went and proffered her the utmost of his services, which yet she durst
not accept of, fearing she might thereby displease her Prince of Salerna, who
visited her not as he was wont to do, while the Principality of Tarentum was
thought to be indisputably her right.

In the mean time, Hippolito fell into discourse, upon all occasions,
concerning the injustice they did Matilda, and the groundless pretense of
Rogero; who hearing of it, threatened him with a Guard, in case he forbore not
that freedom of talking. But he being a person generally beloved, not only in
Naples, but diverse other places, where he was known, had raised up a party
strong enough to put the Favorite into some doubt of the success of his lewd
designs. He made several attempts upon Tarentum, but all proved fruitless, by
reason of the good order which Rogero had taken for the security of the place.
At length, animosities growing higher and higher on all sides, and several
Princes of Italy concerning themselves in the quarrel, the Pope was forced to
interpose his authority therein; by whose persuasions all further Acts of
hostility were prevented, and the King of Naples was prevailed with, to appoint
Judges, of known integrity, to decide the difference betwixt his Favorite and
Matilda.

It may be easily imagine what extraordinary expenses Hippolito was at in the
mean time, being the head of so considerable a party, and of the humor he was
of; and it will not also be a hard matter to grant, that Matilda, though a
great Princess, was soon reduced to very great extremities. The Favorite had
got all her Estate into his possession. He had persuaded the King that she held
a correspondence with his enemies. Of all her former Revenues, she could not
command any thing, and none would become Creditors to a person, whom a
Favorite was resolved to ruin. Prospero had made an absolute breach with her,
not affording her so much as the favor of a visit, nor expressing the least
compassion for her misfortune; yet was her affection still so great toward
him, that she was not so much sensible of his ingratitude, as his forgetfulness
of her. Hippolito would not himself make her any proffer of money, as being
fully satissy'd, that she would have resus'd it. He bethought himself of a more
generous course. He got one of his friends to present her with it, with
instructions that he should not so much as mention the name of Hippolito, and
engage the Princess upon her honor, never to speak of it, that the pleasure he
did her might not procure him the hatred of the Favorite.

In the mean time all preparations were made for the decision of the
difference; the Judges met, and the cause was carried for Matilda. The King was
displeased with the Sentence; Rogero was enraged; the Court was astonished at
it; all were glad or sorry, according to their different inclinations and
concerns; but the generality admired and commended the integrity of the Judges.

Matilda being overjoyed that she had got the better in a suit of so great
importance, sent a Gentleman express, with all the expedition she could, to
give Prospero an account of the happy success of her affairs. Prospero was very
much pleased to hear it, and to assure the Messenger of his gladness, he
embraced him, and entertained him with much kindness, and liberally promised
him his services, if ever any occasion should require them. Hippolito, who had
no notice of it till after his Rival, presented the person, who brought him the
news, with a Diamond of very great value. He prepared a noble treat for all of
the Court, that would participate of it: he caused a spacious place to be
railed in, before his Mistresse's Windows, and for eight days together opposed
all persons that came against him, at the exercise of running at the Ring. A
divertisement and gallantry of that transcendence is not ordinarily performed
without much noise of it. Many Princes of Italy, most Relations and Friends to
Matilda, were concerned in it, and were remarkable for what they did; and the
King himself, who was a great Lover of that kind of exercise, honored it with
his presence. The Favorite had such an ascendent over his Master, that he
might have prevented his being there; but he, out of some mysterious policy,
had made a seeming reconciliation with Matilda, as it were out of a design to
have all the World satisfied, that if he had not really been persuaded he had a
right to the Principality of Tarentum, he would not have attempted the
possession of it. The King took it kindly at his hands, that he had so readily
submitted to the decision of the Judges; and to reward his compliance, and
recompense the loss of his pretensions to Tarentum, bestowed on him one of the
most considerable Governments in the Kingdom, additionally to those he had
before.

Mean time, Hippolito out did all that appeared at the exercise of tilting.
Among others, Prospero would needs be his Antagonist. He came in over-shadow'd
with Feathers beyond all that ever used that ornament to vanity; but at the
first carriere he got, instead of the honor he had proposed to himself, a
cruel fall, either through his own fault, or that of his Horse, and hurt
himself very sore, or at least pretended it. He was carried into Matilda's
House, who out of indignation immediately left the Balcony, and bestowed many
ill wishes on the amorous Hippolito. He came to hear of it, and was so
extremely troubled thereat, that he broke up the meeting, and went his ways,
like a Desperado, to a fair house he had, about a League distant from Naples.

Prospero in the mean exasperated at his fall, treated Matilda after a strange
manner, so far as to tell her in plain terms, that she had been the occasion of
his disgrace, and to reproach her with being in love with Hippolito. The
innocent Matilda, always sweet-natur'd, always humble, and always implicitly in
love with her own Tyrant, begged his pardon, made all the excuses she could,
and in a word was as simple, as he was brutish.

Hippolito had a Sister, who had been brought up at the Court of Spain, where
the Queen was pleased to have a more then ordinary kindness for her, and was
not long before returned to Naples, upon some account or other, whereof I could
never meet with any, and yet it might have been of great concern to the
carrying on of this story. Besides her advantage as to beauty, which was very
great, she was a person of extraordinary merit, such as might well render her
worthy the vows of the chiefest in the Kingdom. At her return out of Spain, she
found her Brother's affairs in so bad a posture, that when he had appointed the
running at the Ring, she would not by any means appear at Court, where she
could not have an attendance suitable to a person of her condition, and she had
confined her self to that fair house, which was all her Brother had unsold. She
saw that Divertisement; but, incognito, and having observed her Brother
breaking up the meeting so abruptly, and departing from Naples, she followed
him, and found him in the most deplorable condition of any man living. He had
broken his Lances to pieces, torn his feathers, and his hair, nay wreak'd his
indignation on his clothes and his face; in fine, he was fallen into such a
distraction, as she could have conceived but little hopes of his recovery, had
she not known, that a look of Matilda's, though still indifferent, nay even
cruel, would make him forget a thousand ill treatments. She therefore made it
her only care to comfort him, gave way to his passion instead of opposing it;
railed at Matilda, while he gave her ill language, and spoke again as
advantageously as she could of her, when, after all his transportations, she
found him more amorous then ever he had been.

The humorous Prospero was far from having the same compliance for Matilda; the
fall off his horse stuck in his stomach still, and he was perpetually charging
her with it, as though she had been the principal occasion of it. It happened
one day, that, after she had been to give her Judges thanks for their
savourable decree on her behalf, she went to do the like to the King, though he
had been against her; but, in Courts, for any one to speak sincerely and
according to his Sentiments, argues weakness of judgment, and want of Prudence,
and to receive denials otherwise then with thankful acknowledgements, a certain
indigence of common civility. It happened then, one day, that being in an
Outer-room at Court, adjoining to the Presence Chamber, she sees Prospero
coming in. He had visited her indeed after his fall, but never left her without
a reproachful Lecture, for having suffered Hippolito to run at the Ring before
her door. Nay he stuck not to tell her plainly, that if she had not resolutely
settled her affections on his Rival, she would not have had so great a
compliance for him.

But nothing could be more injurious, nothing more insufferable then the
impertinent complaints and expostulations of Prospero. It was not in Matilda's
power to prevent a public exercise of that kind, though it had not been done
upon her account, since her Palace took up one whole side of a spacious
Quadrangle, and if she could have done it, she ought not to have done so,
without hazard of being defective in point of Civility or Gratitude. Only
Prospero's erroneous reflections fatisfy'd him, that she had done amiss, and
that she had injured him in a high degree, and he was so incensed against her,
that he had forborne visiting her, as if all correspondence between them were
quite broken off. The poor Princess was extremely troubled at it, and she no
sooner perceived him coming, but she went and stood just in his way. He would
have shunned her, and with a scornful look, passed by. She took him by the Arm,
and looking on him with an Eye able to charm any but that humorous Master, she
asked him what occasion she had given him to shun her. What occasion have you
not given, replies the Prince very angrily, and what hope you ever to recover
the reputation you have lost, in countenancing the Courtship and Gallantries of
Hippolito? It is not in my power to hinder his affection toward me, nor yet to
prevent the discoveries he makes of it, replies Matilda; all I have to say for
my self, is, that he has little encouragement to do either from my approbation
thereof; and methinks I could not give him a greater assurance of my
displeasure, then that of quitting the Balcony soon after he had begun the
sports before my Window. You should have forborne coming into it at all, says
Prospero; but give over dissimulation, and acknowledge, that the true reason of
your departure thence, was, that you observed, in the looks of all that were
present, how much they wondered at your appearance there. The love of Hippolito
had already dispossessed you of your judgment, and his empty gallantries had
soon out-weigh'd, in it, all the services it was in my power to have done you.

Matilda could not forbear tears at this harsh reproof; yet would have returned
him foam answer; but he gave her not the time to do it, besides that the
indignation she perceived spreading over his countenance, quite startled her
out of all resolution. When it was doubtful whether you were Princess of
Tarentun said he to her, and the King was ready to order the securing of your
person, I was desirous to see what might be the fruits of your infidelity and
imprudence, and whether adversity would occasion your being guilty of a great
miscarriage I forbore making any public discoveries of my solicitations on
your behalf, as your Gallant did, nay I pretended my self clearly unconcerned
in what had happened to you. In the mean time Hippalito made much noise, and
served you but little, and your affairs were a long time in a desperate
condition. You did what you could, to reassure your self of my affection, but
still left undone the main thing you should have minded, since your kindness
was still the same toward Hippolito. You had your designs in all, and imagined
you carried them on with much secrecy and subtilty. You bethought your self of
all the ways you could to drain that undeserving Gallant, out of a sond
persuasion, that when it would be for your convenience to disburthen your self
of him as a superfluous and useless person, I should think it an excess of
happiness, to supply his place; and you made a full account that if upon the
trial of your cause you should have lost Tarentuns, the charms of your Beauty
would at any time assured you of being Princess of Salerna. But as soon at a
favorable Decree had made a revival of your hopes, the scene of your affection
was changed, and your maxims of Policy gave way to those of your Love. You
imagined to your self, that a young Gentleman, who had ruined himself by the
extravagant discoveries of his inclinations to you, was fitter for your turn
then I might have been; that marrying a Prince of Salerna, you would come under
the tuition of a Master authorized by Custom and the Laws, and that your dear
Hippolito would have been as much your humble Servant and Slave after marriage
as he seemed to be before. Ah unfortunate and imprudent Princess! durst your
besotted Hippolito make such open professions of love to a Lady of your
fortunes, had she not given him some extraordinary encouragement to do it? and
is it possible, that, upon a weak presumption of meeting with some return to
his Love, he would have been at those vast expenses which have ruined him, and
guilty of so remarkable an extravagance, as, by one single present, to enrich
the person whom you sent to acquaint him with the good success of your cause?
And after all these undeniable discoveries of your infidelity and indiscretion,
can you be so vain as to imagine I should still bear you the affection I
sometime did? Farewell, and, if you can, be fortunate with your Hippolito, and
be not so fond as to imagine, I shall ever be unfortunate with Matilda.

With these words, he would have left her; but the Prince stopped him again;
nay, what she had never done before, presumed to contradict him. Ungrateful
Prince, said she to him, it is impossible for me to give a greater assurance
that still love thee, then by telling thee, that, after this most unmanly and
disobliging discourse, I have not yet an aversion for thee. What thou have said
is more against thy self then against me, and I can make no better use of it to
thy confusion and my advantage, then by acknowledging to thee, that all is
true. It Is true Hippolito has expressed a great affection for me, Hippolito
has not been frightened from rendering me all the services he could, and, to do
that, defied the malice of a Favorite and the displeasure of a King; He
honors me with all imaginable respect, and he does what he can to please me.
He was desirous to protect me, when I was forsaken by all; and it is not to be
denied, that he has ruined himself upon my account. Do thou instance in any one
thing thou have done that may come into the Balance with any of these: Thou will tell me that thou love me. But can thou have any affection for me, who
art wanting even in point of civility toward me; civility, I say, which I
conceive due to my Sex, though thou ought not any to my quality? And yet
what ill-natured, or ill-humour'd Master ever treated a Slave more unworthily
then thou have always treated me? And who would have suffered it, but a person
besotted with an excessive love toward thee, as I am? No, no, Prince, thou art
far from having occasion to complain, and thou should take it the more
kindly from me, that I do not. Nay, I do much more, I acknowledge, if thou will
have me to do it, such crimes as I was never guilty of; I will never see
Hippolito more, and I will be ungrateful to him, to recover thee out of thy
ingratitude toward me, in a word, that I may once more gain thy heart, I shall
think nothing impossible for me to do. There is nothing impossible for your
fair Eyes to do, replies the Prince, setting his Periwig right; they have
dispelled all my anger, and provided I ever hence forward have their favorable
looks, the over-fortunate Prospero will never love any but the fair Matilda.

The amorous Princess was satisfied with this short complement from her grave
Lover. Had they been in a place less public, possibly she would have cast her
self at his feet, to give him thanks that he had pardoned her; but neither time
nor place permitted her to make any further answer. The King was coming out of
his Chamber; she entreated Prospero not to be far from her, while she spoke to
the King; but he told her, as he was leaving her, that it was not fit they
should be seen together, for some reasons he could not then acquaint her
withal. She could not hinder his departure, and read in his looks, that it
proceeded from a fearful distrust of his own Courtship: but she was got so near
the King, that she had not the time to reproach Prospero with his being rather
a subtle Courtier, then a sincere Lover. She presented her self to the King,
rendered her respects to him, and gave him thanks. The King received her very
coldly, and the answer he made her was so equivocal, that it might have been
interpreted as much to her disadvantage, as to her favourt but the endearing
expressions which she had so lately received from Prospero, had given her so
great a satisfaction, that the last ingratitude he had expressed toward her,
in refusing her his attendance to wait on the King, made no impression in her
mind, no more then the slight reception she had from the King; so much was she
overjoyed, that she had regained the favor of her imperious Lover.

The very same day, she was visited by all the Ladies of quality about Naples;
at which meeting there was an appointment made, that they should all go
a-hunting the next day on Horseback, in Country-habits, and narrow-brim'd
Hats, with Plumes of Feathers in them. All the Amorous part of the Court came
to see, and contribute to the divertisement, and so it is not to be questioned
but the Prince of Salerna, the quintessence of all Courtship and Gallantry, was
there among the rest. Nay he was at this time guilty of a strange profusion of
kindness toward his Mistress, that is, he would needs make her a Present,
which was more then ever he had done before. He writ her a Letter sweetened with
all the candid expression she could imagine, and, with it, sent her one of
those fine Hats; but to give the World a strict account of things as they
passed, he had himself taken the pains to order the Feathers, among which there
was not so much as one new one. If my memory fail me not, I have already told
you, that, in matter of Plumage, he was the most remarkable person about the
Court: This was the only extravagance wherein he was expensive, yet was that
charge managed with all the thrift imaginable. He had the knack of diversifying
his Plumes, transplanting, and transposing them so dexterously, that though the
several parts were all old, yet he made them appear as if they were new, with
as much art as the most expert Master of the Profession could have done it. I
am apt to believe, that for the accomplishment of the Present, he spent a good
part of the night in ordering it. The Princess received it, as if it had been
sent her from Heaven, returned him more thanks and complements for it, then all
the Feathers in the World were worth, and promised him in the Letter she
returned in answer to his, that she would look upon that miraculous Hat, as her
chiefest ornament as long as she was able to wear it. I am extremely troubled,
and doubt not but my Reader will be so too, that these two excellent Letters
are lost; by which means, my Novel, and his satisfaction, are somewhat shorter
then they might have been. But grief is superfluous where there is no remedy to
be had: the bald consumer of human productions has devoured other things,
which we can only bemoan among the lost; but the only curse I have for his
greedy teeth at the present, is for the loss of these two Missives, of which I
would have said more, but have it not.

The very reflection on this disappointment, has put me so much out of humor,
that I shall forbear giving you any account of what past at the Hunting; nor
indeed could I ever learn the particulars. Yet this may be imagined, that some
Horses stumbled, and some fell; That the Ladies had this comfort, that if they
had the misfortune to be thrown, they wanted not assistance to help them up
again; That Prospero made an insufferable oftentation of his Gallantry above
all the rest, and that he out-talk'd all, though he said nothing worthy
attention.

The divertisement the Ladies found in this Huntingmatch, raised in them a
desire to recreate themselves some other way the day following. They made an
appointment to go by Sea to Pouzzolo, where the Princess Matilda was to treat
them with a Collation and Music. They dressed themselves no less sumptuously
for the diversion by water, then they had before for that by Land. The Boats
wherein they were to be carried, had all the Ornaments they could have; they
were hung with Tapistry, whether China or Turkey-work I know not, and there was
no sitting but on rich Cushions. Prospero would needs go thither by Land, and
without any Company, whether out of some discontent or melancholy, is not
known; for there are those who never think better of themselves then when their
humors clash with those of other people. He was mounted on the best Horse he
had; clad in his richest Country-habit, and his head so beset with Feathers, as
if some remote Island, where Ostriches are plentiful, had paid him an annual
tribute of their Plumage.

Hipplito's Country House was in the way to Pouzzolo, and not far from the
Seaside, so that the Prince of Salerna must needs pass by it. As soon as he
came in sight of it, a slight imagination of Hectorship came into his head. He
knew that Hippolito was at home, and thereupon alighted at the door to speak
with him. Hippolito entertained him with all the civility due to a person of
his condition, though he had not been accosted by the other with any. Prospero
broke forth into a brutish expostulation with him; in that he had the
presumption to make such discoveries of his Courtship to a Princess, who, by
the disposal of a deceased Father and her own inclinations, was designed to be
his Wife. Hippolito suffered his reproaches and harsh Language a good while,
and answered him with all the meekness imaginable upon such an emergency, and
told him, that he had noreason to be so much offended at those declarations of
a love without hope. But at length. Prospero's insolent carriage overcame his
Patience, and he was ready to call for a Horse, to give him satisfaction at a
little further distance from his own House, when news was brought them, that
the Sea was very rough, and that some Boats, full of Ladies, which they
perceived from the shore, were in some danger of being cast away. Hippolito
made no doubt, but Matilda and her Company were the Ladies in that distress,
and thereupon he entreated Prospero to contribute his assistance, for the
safety of their Common Mistress. He excused himself, alleging that he could
not swim, and that he had not yet recovered himself of the hurt he had received
by his fall at Tilting. The generous Hippolito detesting in his Soul the
ingratitude of his Rival, made all the speed he could to the waterside. His
Servants followed him, cast themselves into the water after his example, and
with the help of some Fishermen, who fortunately chanced to be not far off,
Matilda, and the Ladies of her Company were saved. All the Boats ran a-ground
about a hundred Paces from the shore, and being split to pieces, Naples would
have been full of lamentations for the loss of its choicest Beauties, had it
not been for this seasonable relief. Hippolito was so fortunate, as that
Matilde ought him her life. The love he bore her made him soon distinguish her
from the many other Ladies, whom the Waver cast half dead upon the Rocks, along
the Seaside. While the Fishermen and his Servants indifferently relieved the
first they met withal, he lays hold on h^ Princess, just as she was coming
above water, and taking her under one arm and swimming with the other, he
happily got her to the shore without the assistance of any other person.

Matilda was much more disordered by that unhappy accident then any of the
other Ladies whom they had saved as well as her self. They all made a shift to
recover themselves after a little casting up of the Salt Water, change of
Clothes, and fright, and so were well enough to take Coach, and return to
Naples. But the Princess of Tarentum continued a long time ere she came to her
self, and gave those that were about her any assurances of life. Hippolito, and
his Sister Irene, took all the care they could of her. He sent immediately to
Naples for the ablest Physicians, besides him whom the Princess particularly
employed, and left his whole House to Matilda, and such of her Servants as were
come to her, upon the report of that disaster. He accommodated himself and his
retinue the best he could at a little Village not far from his own House,
whence he sent frequent Messengers to enquire how the Princess did, when he
could not do it himself. As for Prospero, he, extremely self-satisfy'd with the
discovery he had made of his resentments to Hippolito, had recommended Matilda
and the other Ladies to the mercy of the Waves, without giving his thoughts any
trouble concerning them, imagining happily, that, since he was note person likely
to relieve them, it was his best course to deny his Eyes the sight of so
unfortunate a spectacle, and to take his way gently back again to Naples, and
there expect the doubtful event of the wrack, that he might rejoice at, or
bewail it, according to their escape or miscarriage who were concerned therein.

In the mean time, Matilda, with the assistance of her youth and the remedies
prescribed to her, recovered her health, and, with that, her beauty, and was
extremely satisfied with the kindness done her by Hippolito, and the obliging
cares of his Sister Irene, who ingeniously acquainted her with the base
indifference which Prospero had expressed for the hazard she had been in.
Matilda made not any discovery of her resentment of it, either in her
countenance or discourse; whether it were that her Love had smothered it, or
that she had the power at that time to dissemble.

The night before she intended to leave Hippolito's House, in order to her
return to Naples, her thoughts were so disordered, that she could not sleep,
whereupon she called for a Book and a Candle, to be set by her Bedside. Her
Women were gone out of the Room, to take their repose, or do somewhat else,
when she hears the door opening of a sudden, and perceives Prospero coming in.
It may easily be imagined, how much she was surpised to see him at so
unseasonable an hour, and how highly she conceived her self disobliged by so
dis-respectful a visit. Her reproaches to him upon that occasion were not
without some bitterness. Prospero was little moved thereat, but rather growing
the more imperious, would needs have the Princess acknowledge, that she had
purposely run into the hazard of losing her life, to give Hippolito the glory
of being her deliverer. He charged her with the misfortune of being so near
cast away, as a slur to her reputation, and represented to her, how base and
unworthy a thing it was for her, to reside in the House of a person in love
with her, to be lodged in his own Chamber, and laid in his own Bed.

Matilda was somewhat astonished at these reproaches, yet thought it below her
to make it appear to him how unjust they were, but pressed him with others that
were not so easily avoidable, for the backwardness of his assisting her, and
with a Satirical ralliery bemoaned his want of skill in swimming, and his being
still indisposed by reason of his fall. This put his Spirits into a general
commotion, so that blushing with anger and confusion, he fell a railing at her,
and told her that she should never see him more, in as much as Rogero the
King's Favorite had proffered him his Sister, and with her all the advantages
which may be expected from the alliance of a Favorite.

Matilda was not able to hold out any longer against so terrible a menace; her
thoughts were discomposed into a trembling astonishment; her indignation gave
way to her love; and she who had seemed so fierce and furious before, was by
this sudden storm become submissive and suppliant. On the other side, Prospero
grew more and more calm, when he saw her sufficiently humbled; and according to
his Custom, he began to cajole her, and fell into those kind and amorous
insinuations, which he might have used, if, in all the debates that had
happened in their Loves, he had always observed the respect and and compliance
he ought her. He renewed his protestations of love to her, and out of eagerness
to make them over-pressing and persuasive, he made such as were ridiculous and
impertinent; so far as to wish her all manner of misfortunes, that he might
have a noble occasion to assure her how much he would concern himself therein.
Why are you not still in disgrace at Court? said he to her, with an amorous
tone; Why are you not still persecuted by the malicious Favorite Rogero? Why
are you not still unjustly dispossessed of your Principality of Tarentum? You
should see how earnest a Solicitor I would be on your behalf; how I would
importune the King himself, though by all Artifice exasperated against you, to
do you justice; with what rigor I would engage my self in your quarrel against
your Enemies, and whether I would be afraid to hazard my life and fortunes, to
restore you to what were unjustly detained from you. It is not decreed I hope,
replies the Princess, not is there any necessity, I should become more
unfortunate the^ I am, that you should have occasions to give me so great
assurances of your generosity, nor were it just I should put your Love to such
dangerous Trials.

They were thus seriously engaged in discourse, when some confused and dreadful
outcries of fire obliged them to run to the Windows, whence they presently
perceived the lower part of the Lodgings where they were casting up fire and
smoke; and ere they had well looked about them, a thick Cloud of smoke
intermixed with Sparks of fire was coming up, along the Staircase into the
room, which put them out of all hopes of es^aping that way, which Prospero was
putting himself into a posture to attempt. The Princess extremely frighted,
begged of him, that he would not forsake her in so great a danger, and minded
him of making some advantage of the Sheets and Hangings, to get out at the
Windows. The Prince, as much frighted as she, told her, the danger was too here
at hand to think of any such expedient, and having already measured with his
Eyes the height of the Window, and deliberating how he might best cast himself
down into the Court, he plainly told, that, in such an emergency as that was,
the only resolution was, get off who could. Nay if it be so, said she to him,
thou shall not escape without me, and if I run any hazard here, I am resolved,
that the most ungrateful and least generous of men shall participate of it with
me.

With those words she courageously fastened on Prospero, and the indignation
she had conceived against him for his cowardice, gave her so much strength,
that, notwithstanding all his endeavors to clear himself, he could not get
from her. He fell a swearing and cursing; then railed at her; and at last was
so much a brute, as to threaten her with beating or death (which of the two is
not certainly known) and no doubt he was a person as likely as any to do it,
and in all probability would have done it, if, while he was struggling with her,
and that with as much earnestness and animosity, as if he had had to so with a
detested Enemy, the generous Hippolito had not come reasonably into the room.
The Princess seeing him, dis-engag'd her self from Prospero, and made toward
Hippolito, who, not allowing her the time to speak to him, covered her with a
wet Sheet, which he had purposely brought with him, and having taken her in his
Arms, rushed out like a Lion with his prey, through the flames which filled the
Staircase. He was so fortunate as to bring her to a place, where she was out
of all danger, and his generosity was so excessive, that he did the same
kindness to his Rival. True it is, that he burnt his Clothes, and findg'd the
hair of his Head and Eyebrows in the service; but what are burnt Clothes, and
sindg'd Hair, to a person whose heart is enflamed with Love?

In the mean time, while Matilda is recovering her self out of the fright, and
while Prospero gets away with all the speed he could to Naples, without so much
as returning thanks to his deliverer, his over-generous deliverer sees his
house burnt down to the ground, and with his house all the furniture of it, and
his horses; in a word, all that his former profusions had left him Master of.
Matilda was troubled at it, I will not say more than he, for he was not much,
but as if she saw what she accounted of greatest value in the world condemned
to destruction. She imagined her self the occasion which had brought that great
misfortune upon him; and she was not mistaken. Her Cousin, the Favorite, who
had not made a reconciliation with her, but out of a pernicious design to ruin
her with more ease, had found out some mercenary souls among the menial
servants of Hippolito, whom he had hired to fill the Cellars of their Master
with materials easily combustible, which they set on fire in the nightime,
according to the instructions they had received from Rogero. This cruel
Favorite made no conscience of procuring the ruin of a decayed Cavalier, and
his destruction to boot, conditionally there were involved in it that of a
Kinswoman, whose estate he was to inherit; and as if he thought it not
wickedness enough to compass her death, which was unavoidable if his design had
taken effect, he bethought himself of a way to render her memory odious. While
Hippolito's house was a burning, Rogero had managed his treacherous plot with
so much subtilty, that, by order from the King, some Officers were sent to
Matilda's Palace where having broke open her Closet, it was pretended, that
there were Letters found, which seemed written to the Duke o^ Anjou, and to
convict her o^ holding a correspondence with that dangerous Enemy to the State.

The still-unfortunate Princess received this sad news, just a she was sending
to Naples for Coaches, in order to her return thither. She was extremely (...)
a loss to hear it, yet soon reassuming what courage she could in so unexpected
a perplexity she and her train made a shift t^ get to Naples a foot, but in so
deplorable a condition, as raised pity in all that saw them make their entrance
into it. Hippolito would have gone along with her, but she laid her absolute
commands upon him not to do it, as being, possibly, still in some fear of
displeasing Prospero. So that the most generous, and most faithful, yet most
unfortunate of all Lovers beheld her departure, much more afflicted at this
fresh accident which had happened to his Mistress, and that he durst not
presume to follow her, then at the loss of his House.

Matilda was no sooner come to Naples, but she was secured. She desired access
to the King; it was denied her. She sent a Messenger to desire Prospero to come
to her; he pretended indisposition, and that he could not stir abroad: and so
she was of a sudden forsaken of all friends, as if she had fallen sick of the
Plague. The same day there was an order brought her from the King, that she
should depart Naples. Her Domestics basely left her in the height of
extremities; her Creditors began to persecute her, forgetting all respect to
her quality; and she was reduced to so great misery, that she could not procure
a Hackney-Coach, nor any other convenience of riding, to get to I know not what
Prince of Italy, who, next to Rogero, was the nearest of her Relations, and had
always espoused her interests, even against that unjust Favorite and bloody
Kinsman.

Being thus forsaken by all he^ friends, destitute of all things and reduced to
an impossibility of complying with so rigorous an Order, she took her refuge in
a Monastery, into which yet they would not receive her, till they had the
King's Permission to do it, and conditionally that she should depart thence
that very night. She accordingly departed thence, and that so secretly, that
the amorous Hippolito, notwithstanding all the Spies he had abroad, to bring
him an account of her, could never get the least intelligence of what course
she had taken. However, he would needs put himself to the hazard of missing
her, rather then that he should be reproached with a neglect of seeking her.
While he is running after her, or thinks he does so, she little thinks of him,
and Prospero as little, or less, of her. Nay, this humorous. Prince speaks of
her as one guilty of High Treason, is punctual in his attendance about the King
and the Favorite, and as different emergencies produce different designs, he
seriously falls in Love with Camilla, Rogero's Sister, and entreats the King to
promote his obtaining of her. The King, who thought him a very advantageous
match for his Sister, whom, of all his Subjects, he had the greatest affection
for, communicates the proposal to the Favorite, who was content in all things
to comply with the desires of his Master.

This Sister of Rogero's was one of the greatest Beauties about Naples, and
what relation soever she might have to her Brother in point of Fortune, she was
no way concerned in his lewd designs. She was looked on at Court as the most
considerable Match in the Kingdom, and she looked on Hippolito as the most
accomplished Cavalier of his time; and possibly she loved him, or at least
would have loved him, if she had not observed his affections passionately
devoted to another. Matilda's misfortune had raised so great a compassion in
her, and she was so generous, that if she had thought her Brother's malice had
occasioned it, she would no doubt have reproached him with so lewd a procedure,
and have been the first that should have detested it. She concerned her self so
much in the loss which Hippolito had received, that, careless of whatever might
be said of it, she went to give him a visit at his burnt House, to present him
with a sum of money, and assure him of all it was in her power to do for him.
She there met with his Sister Irene, who little expected such a visit, and much
less the proffers of a kind reception, where she had any thing to command. The
fair Irene thought her self extremely obliged to Camilla, for so generous an
invitation, and was content to go along with her to Naples. What less then a
ready compliance to so kind a proposal could be expected from a young Lady of
her quality, who was then destitute of a House, and all other requisite
accommodations, in a Country, where she was not known to any but her Brother,
nay where it may be said she had not him, since that, as soon as he understood
that Matilda had left Naples, he was gone a wandering after her like a
distracted person, not knowing which way she had taken?

It happened, the very day that Camilla went to Hippolito's house, to bring
Irene thence to her own, the King was pleased to make her a visit, but the
occasion of it was to recommend the Gallant Prince of Salerna to her
affections, which he doubted not to gain upon the first assault of all that
force of gallantry he always carried about him. Camilla, whose thoughts at that
time were full of Hippolito, entertained Prospero and the proffers of his
services, with as much coldness and indifference, as was consistent with the
satisfaction which she conceived at the honor of a visit from her Prince. The
disconsolate Irene kept her Company, and though her affliction was but too
temarkable, yet did the rays of her Beauty like lightning, so break through
the Cloud of her sadness, as to inflame the young King's affection toward her.
His Love was violent even at its Birth. He approached her with as much respect
and fear, as if he had been of her quality, and she of his: he took occasion to
fall into discourse with her upon her Beauty, and that amiable person, without
being daunted, or betraying any surprizal at so unexpected a Courtship, made so
great discoveries of a perfect combination of Ingenuity, Prudence, and Modesty,
that he considered her, from that interview, as a good, which only was
deficient to the completing of his fortune.

The King made a longer stay with Camilla then he thought to have done, and the
pleasure he took in entertaining Irene, was so much the more observed, by all
that were present, the more he had seemed before insensible to love, and
behaved himself with an indifference toward the fairest Ladies about Naples.
But indeed Irene was Mistress of such charms, that it was impossible for Souls
the least subject to that tender passion, and least able to judge of her merit,
to forbear loving her. Camilla, before she was acquainted with her, had a
design to serve her upon the account of her Brother; but after she came to be
known to her, she loved her wholly upon her own. She was easily inclined to
believe the King was fallen in love with her, because she wished it so, and she
was so far from envying her so great a happiness, as it might have been in some
measure excusable in any other amiable person, that she was extremely satisfied
therewith. She congratulated Irene, upon the noble conquest she had made, and
no doubt she might have flattered the vanity and hopes of a Virgin more
lowly-conceited of her self then she was; but this discreet person was firm in
her persuasion, that what the King had done, was rather out of a frollick of
gallantry, then Love; that he had no other design in it, but to find matter for
his diversion; and that happily she was as soon out of his thoughts, as out of
his sight. She was very much mistaken: the young King could not keep away long
from her; and his Love was grown so violent that he resolved to see her again
the very night after his first falling in love with her. He communicated his
design to the Prince of Salerna, and told him, that he would go, incognito,
according to the Spanish Courtship, to renew his addresses to Irene, under
Camilla's Balcony. It may easily be imagined, how overjoyed Prospero was at
this admittance to the Privacy of his Master's pleasures, and to be made his
companion in an amorous adventure. It is probable, the Favorite Rogero would
have been the person pitched upon for this design, or at least should have made
one in it: but that he had had leave of the King that very day to go to
Tarentum, where some important affair required his presence.

Night came, and the King, accompanied by Prospero, armed as he was, according
to the Italian way, that is, with more offensive Arms then were requisite for
one man, took up his Post under Camilla's Balcony, who had been advertised of
it by Prospero. She was too well versed in that kind of Courtship, not to
afford the King the freedom of entertaining his Mistress with as much privacy
as might be. She thereupon withdrew, and went into another Balcony,
notwithstanding all the entreaties, which Irene made, that she would stay with
her. The King made some reproaches upon that occasion, and told that fair
Virgin, that she ought at least to have some compliance for a King, who had for
her some what transcending it. I should owe your Majesty all that lies in my
power, replied Irene, were it not there is something I owe my self, which I
cannot owe any other. What can you owe your self, replies the King, beyond what
you owe my Love? This, answered she, that I am not to believe you have any for
me. Ah Irene, cries the King, can you doubt of that? assure your self, there is
not any thing more certain, nor ought I am not ready to do, to satisfy your
incredulity. Could I believe your affection proportionable to the assurances
you give me of it, replies she, I should yet have more reason to be
dissatisfied with your Majesty, then admit what you do for a kindness. That
were a strange injustice, said the King, for how is it possible, that a sincere
love, such as mine is, should give any dissatisfaction? It would be an honor I
confess, to some great Queen, replied Irene, but may well give people just
occasion to pass harsh censures of the prudence of a person so mean as I am.
It Is true indeed, says the King, that you are not a Queen, but who deserves to
be such, may in time come to it. I am not guilty of so great a vanity, replies
Irene, as to hope for so great a change in my fortune, from the slenderness of
the merit I can pretend to, and I have this opinion of your Majesty's good
nature, as that you will not any longer make an unfortunate person, such as I
am, the subject of your diversion. Ah fairest Irene, said the Amorous Prince to
her, what greater assurances, then I have done, can I make of the sincerity of
my affection? Be satisfied then, that, as to my Love to you, the most
passionate, and most faithful Lover in the World; cannot pretend to a greater,
and if my tongue has acquainted you with what my looks and sighs could not
make you comprehend soon enough, imagine not that I expect, upon the account of
my quality, to be exempted from the afflictions of a long Address, or am
unwilling to undergo all the services and submissions, which the most amiable
Mistress may look for, from a respectful Lover. But a disease grown so violent,
as mine was, required a sudden remedy, and, how coy and scrupulous soever you
may be, it may be some satisfaction to you, that a King, in the discovery of
his love to you, has been afraid to displease you.

He said several other things to her, more passionate even then these, which he
who overheard them, could not remember, as he did what I have given you an
account of; I therefore leave it to the discreet Reader to imagine them: For,
to make this King of Naples speak with the tenderness he did, and not injure
him in the business of complement, it would be requisite a man should be as
amorous as he was, which it is now past my time to be. Irene still answered him
with her accustomed modesty, and without seeming over-hardly, or over-easily
perswasible, she so ingeniously broke off so ticklish a conversation, that the
esteem the King had for her was thereby much heightened, and he was more in love
with her at his departure thence, then he had been at his coming thither. From
that time, no day passed, but he visited Camilla and Irene, nor did he miss any
night his attendance at the Balcony where he employed all his amorous
eloquence, to assure her how passionately he was her Servant.

It happened one night, that having ordered his guard not to follow him, he
went up and down the streets of Naples disguised, accompanied only by the
Prince of Salerna, and he met with so much diversion at several places, that
the better part of the night was past, when he came to Camilla's Balcony.
Looking about him more narrowly, he found that two men had taken up their
station under it, or if not under, they were at least so near it, as to
over-hear all the discourse which would have past between him and Irene. One of
those men parted from the other, and went into Camilla's house, and the other
continued still in the street. The King expected a while, to see if he would be
gone and leave him the freedom of the Street; but finding that he stirred not
from the place, no more then if he had been a Sentinel charged upon pain of
death to keep his station, he grew out of patience, and commanded Prospero, to
go and question what that fixed person was, and to force him to a removal
thence. The Prince of Salerna makes toward him, but with such preparation and
observance, as if he had been employed in some hazardous adventure. As he drew
nearer and nearer him, the other made away before him. Prospero animated by his
removal from the place where he stood, endeavored to come up to him, yet not
with so much expedition as he might have done. The other made the more have to
get away, and perceiving Prospero still pursued him, he made the best advantage
he could of his heels, and got into another street, the Prince of Salerna still
following at a convenient distance.

Mean time, the King stirred not from the place where Prospero had left him,
expecting his return, that he might send him to give notice to Camilla and
Irene of his waiting for them under the Balcony; and it is not unlikely his
imaginations were wholly fixed upon his love (for a Lover never does any thing
else, when he is alone) when that person who had parted from him whom Prospero
pursued, and was gone into Camilla's house, was coming out again, and taking
the King for his Camerade, Here Calixtus, said he to him, take this packet and
make haste; the Commander in chief at Cayetto will take order for a Vessel for
thy transportation to Marseiller^ The King, not making him any answer at all,
received the packet of Letters, which he presented to him. Farewell, Calixtus,
added the same unknown person, the rest depends on thy diligence, and thou have
now in thy hands the fortune of the Duke of Anjou, thy Master, and mine. How,
ungrateful villain! unparalled Traitor! cries the King, putting his hand to
his Sword, what design have thou contrived against me? Rogero (for it was no
other) exasperated at his being so unhappily mistaken, and by his despair
becoming more wicked then before, thought of nothing but of either sacrificing
his own life, or taking that of his Prince, who had loved him so well. The
reproaches he conceived might be justly made him of his ingratitude and
perfidiousness were as terrible to him, as the tortures he might have been put
to. He had his Sword out as soon as the King, who charged him with so much
rigor and fury, that Rogero, tormented with the remorse of his crime, as he
was, was forced to use all the art he could to defend himself. At last animated
with rage, and rallying all his spirits and courage, he no longer looked on his
Prince otherwise then as an enemy, whom he must either destroy, or perish, and
by the efforts of a desperado which he made against his sacred person, obliged
him also to defend himself the best he could. But Kings, who possibly may be as
valiant as other persons, are commonly assisted by a Genius transcending those
of other men. Rogero, though he charged his incensed King with the greatest
fury and despair imaginable, yet would he not happily have been able to hold out
long against him, if the noise of their engagement had not brought to the place
where it passed, several persons, who would soon have torn to pieces that
detestable subject, that durst attempt the life of his Prince. Some of his own
domestics, and of those of Camilla were the first that came into the street
with lights, much astonished to see their Master struggling with the King. The
unfortunate Rogero was so cast down at the appearance of the light, which
exposed him to the dreadful looks of his Prince, that he was not able to endure
them. His rage and valor forsook him, and his Arms fell from him. The King,
who had the satisfaction to see him wounded, after he had had much ado with all
the assistance of his valor, to prevent his being so by him, seized on him
with his own hands, and committed him to the Custody of the Captain of his
Guards, who had seceiv'd Orders to keep all that night about the avenues of
Camilla's house, and was come in very seasonably at that time, followed by his
Soldiers.

Prospero, in the mean time, was still in pursuit of his man, who running away,
with all the speed he could, had unfortunately met full butt with the Watch,
who that night, according to their custom, were taking their round about the
City to prevent disorders. He discovered so great astonishment, and was at such
a loss in all his answers to whatever was asked him, that they were resolved to
secure him, though Prospero, who pursued him with his Sword drawn, and made
himself known to the Watch, had not commanded them from the King, to take him
into their Custody, and to have him ready whenere he should be called for. He
returned to look after the King, and if he was at first sight astonished at the
great number of Torches he saw in the street, and to find the King, whom he had
lest all alone, so well accompanied, he was so much more, when he understood
what had past between the King and Rogero, and to see that Favorite, whom all
the Court adored, generally detested by all, and by the Guards conducted to
Prison.

This accident prevented the King's seeing of Irene that night, or at least he
forbore it, because he would avoid seeing Camilla, whom he sent Prospero to
complement, and withal to assure, that he made a distinction between her and
her Brother, whose crime should not derogate ought from the esteem he had for
her. Irene writ to him on Rogero's behalf, and, to oblige her Friend, did that
which the importunate entreaties of a King passionately in love with her could
not have obtained. The very next day Rogero was examined, and found guilty of
High Treason, for holding a correspondence with the Duke of Anjou, who had
besides a great number of other Partisans in the Kingdom. He had received
information by them of the insatiable ambition of Rogero; upon which
intelligence, having proposed to him a match with a Princess nearly related to
him, with such advantages as he could not hope from the King his Master, that
ungrateful Favorite, betraying his Faith and Honor, was in requital to
receive the French into Cayetto and Castellamara, of which places he was
Governor.

The same Judges who found him guilty of the Treason committed against his
Majesty, discovered also the treacherous design he had contrived against the
Princess of Tarentum. I think I told you elsewhere how the Prince of Salerna
had shunned this Princess and disclaimed her concerns, when he saw her in
disgrace, and very earnestly courted Camilla, whom he saw in favor. I am now
to tell you of the same Prince, that no sooner had he perceived, that the King
repented him of the ill treatments and misfortunes he had caused Matilda,
through the malicious prosecutions of Rogero, and was of himself inclined to
restore her to her former honors, and reinstate her in the possessions, which
had been unjustly taken away from her, and to make considerable additions
thereto, but he, the same generous Prospero, who had so lately so earnestly
entreated the King to promote his Addresses to Camilla, was now as earnestly
desiring he might decline her, and that he would not think amiss of him, if he
still pretended to the possession of Matilda; and in the mean time, he prayed
the King that he would order her to be sought out, and that he would give him a
Commission to find her, where ever they had intelligence that she was, and to
bring her back to Court. The King had his thoughts too full of Irene, that he
should need a Remembrancer to put him in mind of her Brother Hippolito, and it
was the greatest trouble he had, that there was no tidings of him. He thereupon
sent Messengers into all parts of Italy, with order to find him out, while they
sought after Matilda; and when they had found him, to bring him back to Naples.
It was his hope, that he should give Irene an assurance thereby how nearly her
concerns touched him, and how great an affliction it was to him, that she knew
not what was become of a Brother, who was so dear to her.

This Amorous Cavalier, having spent much time and diligence in quest of his
exiled Princess, without any success, not so much as the satisfaction of having
any tidings of her, wandered from place to place, as his Horse was pleased to
carry him, not making stay at any, but when his own Horse, and also that of his
Servants, whose thoughts were not so much bent upon the retrival of the
Princess of Tarentum, as his Masters, needed rest and refreshment. For the
latter abating only the little time that sleep forced it self upon him, it may
be said, he took as little rest as a damned Soul, and after he had spent whole
days in sighing on Horseback, he many times trifled away the succedent Nights,
in making his complaints to the Rocks and Trees of the cruelty and absence of
Matilda, and in quarrelling with the innocent Stars, which often shined to his
great convenience, since he for the most part took up his lodging in the open
Fields, and had no other Canopy then that of the Heavens.

It happened one day, that, being so orepress'd with sadness, he little
reflected that his Servant and Horses could not feed on amorous thoughts, as he
did, he was got, about Sun set to an obscure Inn, which looked more like a
Rendezvous for Bandits and Rogues, then a place of entertainment for Travelers
Hippolito was riding on, for Lovers are indefatigable, when his Servant
represented to him, that their Horses were not able to travel any further, by
reason of weariness and want of meat, not speaking any thing of himself, who
stood in no less need of refreshment and rest. The despairing Lover was content
upon this remonstrance to alight; but the Master of that wretched receptacle,
who stood at the door, with his Wife, and another person of a mischievous look,
and one that seemed to be somewhat of a Soldier, came and told him bluntly,
that he had no accommodation for him, and that both his House and Stable were
full. Hippolito was nothing troubled at that disappointment, and would have
kept on his way, whereat his Servant was enraged, when the Soldier, who
accompanied the Host, after he had whispered him somewhat in the Ear, comes to
Hippolito, and fells him in the Calabrian Language, that he might alight, that
he would heartily resign his Chamber, for the entertainment of so noble a
person as he seemed to be; and upon the difficulty which Hippolito made of
accepting so kind a proffer, the Host himself, who had before been so churlish,
came and held the Stirrup for him to get off his Horse, looking on him with a
smiling countenance, which might have sufficiently discovered the treacherous
intentions of the person.

With these civilities is Hippolito conducted by the Master of the House, and
the Soldier, like an Ambassador, into the Inn. He had no mind to eat any
thing, and having drunk only a glass of water (for Love is dry) he went out to
take a walk at a place fit enough for the humouring of his Melancholy thoughts,
which he had observed not far from the Inn. His Servant in the mean time sat
down to Supper with the host, his wife, and the civil Calabrian, who had so
kindly resigned his Lodging to Hippolito. He fed like one that had made an
escape out of a Garrison besieged to the greatest extremities, and drunk so
liberally, as that he had only so much discretion left, as might carry him to
give his Master notice of Bedtime, which he was as likely a man to forget, as
could have been wished.

He went out to look for him among certain Rocks, where at last he found him,
deploring the sad posture of his affairs and affections, and brought him back
to the Inn. They carried him up to a Chamber, suitable to the house, that is,
furnished with a couple of wretched Beds, and the Partitions so bad, that wind
and air came in of all sides. Hippolito laid himself down with his Clothes on,
upon one of the Beds, and his Servant did the like on the other, where, having
his brains and his belly full, his bones were soon at rest, and he slept so
soundly, as if he had done it to give his Master an example. Hippolito slept
not, that is, he would not, for it is as great a reproach for a slighted Lover
to take a good night's rest, as to commit some unworthy action.

It was not long ere all in the Inn were laid to take their repose, or seemed
to be so; and that there was a general cessation of all noise, but snoring,
when some people on Horseback gave a sudden Alarm, and knocked at the doors, as
persons who were extremely impatient to get in. The Host, who started out of
his Bed upon hearing of the noise, knew them, and presently let them in. A
while after, Hippolito hears the door of the Chamber next adjoining to his own
opened, and several persons going into it, whereof some came presently out
again, and the others, who continued there, had some discourse together. The
particular concerns of Hippolito were such as left him but little curiosity to
make any enquiry into those of other people, and he had not listened to those
persons whom he heard talking, if, upon their speaking sometimes louder then
other, they had not given him occasion to observe one voice, which he thought
was not unknown to him. He therefore kept in his breath, and listened to those
who were talking, but could not hear what they said, till that toward the end
of their discourse, one of them spoke so distinctly, that these words teach'd
his Ear. It Is even so, my Dear Julia, and I tell thee again, that few persons
of my quality have been so cruelly persecuted by Fortune, as my self. She
hurries me into disgraces beyond all former example, yet how great and
insufferable soever they may be, I am less sensible of them, then of the
ingratitude, wherewith the basest and unworthiest of men, has requited the
inclination I had to love him, and yet I must withal acknowledge, that this
ingratitude of his toward me is a less discontent to me, then that which I my
self am guilty of toward another. This is the only reproach which perpetually
attends me, and the remorse it gives me is a thousand times a greater torment
to my thoughts, then all the losses I have received, and all the miseries and
misfortunes I am now reduced to.

Another person, who seemed to make her some answer, spoke so low, that
Hippolito could hear only some words, without any connection, which were many
times interrupted by sighs. He thereupon got up from the Bed, and drew near the
Partition, which divided the two Rooms; but the noise he made was overheard, by
those, to whom he would have listened, and so there was a cessation of
discourse, but not of the sighs of that afflicted person, whose voice he
thought should be that of Matilda. It may well be imagined that he was
extremely impatient to know whether he were mistaken or not. To be satisfied
therefore of so important a doubt, he was preparing himself to get out of the
Room, when of a sudden the door was opened; upon which, by the light of dark
Lanthorn, he perceives four men coming in to him with their Swords drawn, among
whom he took notice of the Calabrian Soldier, and the Master of the House. If
he were surpised to see those men come into his Chamber, which he might well
think was not out of any good design, they on the other side were as much at a
loss, that they found him not a sleep, as they expected to have done. Hippolito
thereupon drawing his Sword, asked them what they came for to his room at that
unseasonable hour, and in that posture, and he no sooner observed them making
ready to fall upon him, instead of returning him any answer, but he charged
them first, with so extraordinary rigor and dexterity, that he soon forced
them to find out their way out of the room. His man in the mean time awaked;
run to the place where the noise called him, and seeing his Master set upon by
so many Enemies, he relieved him with much valor; but ere he came in,
Hippolito had wounded two of those who were engaged against him, and laid the
most desperate of them dead at his feet. The Rogues fought and defended
themselves with such animosity as if they expected no Quarter, but though there
had been a greater number of them then there was, they could have made no long
resistance against the valiant Hippolito, seconded by a servant so courageous
as his was. He afterward dispatched another of his enemies, and the other two
made a shift to escape. He was slightly wounded in one Arm, whereat he was so
incensed, that he would needs pursue them, and it is not unlikely he would have
disburthen'd the World of those two Villains, as he had done of their
Companions, if, amidst the astonishment those lewd men were in, they had not
bethought themselves of the only expedient they had left, which was, to make a
fair jump of a whole pair of stairs, and to shut the door after them. Hippolito
was a good while ere he could get it open, by which means the two murderers
got away, and vanished, so that he and his Servant made a fruitless fearch
after them. At last he returned to the Inn, and went up to the Chamber, where
he thought he had heard Matilda's voice. He found it open, and empty, as were
also all the other rooms in the house, which he searched with no less exactness
then disquiet. Fulvio, said he to his Servant, I have heard Matilda speak, and
I presently knew her by her voice, and none but a person damned to misfortune,
as I am, would have mist her, after he had been so near her.

He thereupon related to Fulvio the words he had heard Matilda speak, construed
them as much as he could to his own advantage, as he had indeed some reason to
do, and instead of deriving any comfort thence, his affliction was the rather
augmented, out of a persuasion that Fortune had not done him the kindness to
let him hear the voice of Matilda, out of any other end, then that from his not
seeing her, and not knowing what was become of her, his discontent might be the
greater. He thereupon went out again to make enquiry after the Princess in all
the places thereabouts, and when he had done so, to as little purpose as
before, he was so simple as to return back again to look for her in the Inn,
where he met with an absolute solitude, unless it were in the Stable, out of
which Fulvio brought four Horses, besides his Master's and his own.

Hippolito left the Inn, the most disconsolate Person in the world; Fulvio
proposed to him the carrying away of their Horses, who intended to have been
their Murderers, as being lawful pillage, and represented to him, that
possibly they might find Matilda, and so they should have a convenience to
mount her, and what company she might have with her. Hippolito minded not what
he had said, or vouchsafed not to make him any answer, so much were his
thoughts orewhelm'd with sorrow: Fulvio took his Masters silence for consent,
and having fastened the four horses one to another by the tails, drove them
before him, with a design happily to make money of them, with the first
opportunity.

They rode up and down a good part of the day, ere Hippolito would so much as
open his mouth to make any answer to the several questions put to him by
Fulvio, to divert him from his sadness. They lost their way, and were got
amongst a Company of barren Rocks, which seemed strangely shuffled together
along the Seaside, at the end whereof there was a sandy plain. Amidst these
rocks, at a place where the Sea made a little encroachment unto the Land more
then at any other, they fell in amongst a company of Country People, armed with
Cudgels, Clubs, Pitch-Forks, Halberds, and what other Arms they could get. At
first sight, they were somewhat surpised at the sudden appearance of two men
on Horseback, and accompanied by so many unmounted Horses: but seeing their
number so small, and deriving a confidence from the greatness of their own,
which might amount to above a hundred men; they tumultuously surrounded those
who happily had put them into a little fright, and directed the points of their
rusty Arms against them. Some cried out, who goes there? Others, what are you?
Others, down with them. Others, whence come you? It was a hard task for
Hippolito to have answered so many Interrogatories put to him at once, and if
he could have done it, the confused multitude, which made a noise greater then
that of a Conventicle of infernal Spirits, at the consecration of a Conjurer,
would not have heard him. At length, a certain ancient and grave person, who
made it appear afterward, that he had some command over them (for then there
was nothing to be seen of it) with extraordinary calling upon them, which
occasioned him a troublesome cough, as also with a few bastinadoes bestowed on
some of them, caused a cessation of their talking so loud, though not of their
grumbling. He comes up to Hippolito, and mildly asked him who he was, and what
he sought in so solitary a place, and so far distant from the Road. Hippolito
told him he was a Gentleman of Naples, and that he was going toward Ancona,
but had lost his way. He thereupon asked the Commander in chief of that
hastily-armed crew, upon what design he had got together so great a number of
people; and he was informed by him, that certain Moorish Galiots, which had
been seen cruzeing along the Coast had landed a considerable number of
Soldiers, who had Pillaged some places near the Seaside, and upon the little
opposition which had been made against them, or rather out of a covetousness of
greater booty, were imprudently got further into the Country. He added, that
most of those whom he saw in arms with him, had been plundered by them, and
were resolved under his conduct to venture an engagement with them, as they
returned laden with slaves and pillage, from a Village where in all likelihood
they would not leave behind them, but only what they could not bring away; that
they must of necessity fall into their hands, there being but that only passage
for them to get back to the Seaside; and that the loss of their goods did not
so much animate those Peasants to that generous attempt, as that of their Wives
and Children.

Hippolito was so moved at the relation of the old man, that he proffered to
expose his life in their quarrel. They took him at his word; and the old Blade
resigned his command to him, which he accepted of, and he prevailed with his
Companions to consent thereto, who from the gallant demeanor of Hippolito,
derived no small confidence of their good success. They mounted the four horses
which the precautious Fulvio had brought away from the Inn, with four of the
most likely persons among them, whereof the old Blade was one. Hippolito
divided his men into three parties; he posted one amongst the Rocks, where they
could not be descried by their Enemies, with order they should not come out to
fight, till they saw them and the enemies engaged: he planted another party in
a narrow passage, which led to the Seaside, to prevent the coming up of the
Infidels that way; and he himself with his Horse marched before the third
party, exhorting his people to behave themselves valiantly, and to close with
the enemies as soon as they could, so to prevent the advantage they might
otherwise make of their Arrows.

He had no sooner made an end of giving out his orders, after he had appointed
his people their several Posts, but the enemy appeared, to the number of about
a hundred and fifty men, in the midst whereof there marched several Horses
laden with booty, and followed by the Women and Children, whom they brought
away as Slaves. The Moors, who expected not to carry off so considerable a
booty without some blows, were not at all daunted to see Hippolito and his
Troop marching up toward them, or happily slighted them by reason of the
smallness of their number, nay possibly accounted them an augmentation of the
prey. I shall not trouble my self, or Reader, with a particular description of
an engagement between a party of Turkish Pirates, and a Company of Country
people confusedly shuffled together, though the transcendent actions which
Hippolito did, upon that occasion, deserved a recommendation to Posterity. I
shall therefore only tell you, that his orders were punctually executed, that
the Moors were prevented making any advantage of their Arrows, by his sudden
falling in upon them; that he began their defeat, by the death of their Chief
Commander, and put a period thereto by ridding out of his way, and the World,
the most resolute among the Moors. The Peasants being by that time a little
fleshed with their good success, knocked down without any mercy as well those
who fought to the last Gasp, as those who laid down their Arms and cried
Quarter, notwithstanding all the endeavors of Hippolito for a cessation of the
Massacre. The dead were regretted, as much as the common joy would permit, and
the wounded were looked to. Hippolito received a thousand acknowledgments, and
as many thanks, from those poor people, who attributed all their success to his
valor and conduct. While he was refusing the richest part of the spoils,
whereof they would have made him a present, and would not do them the kindness
to go along with them to refresh himself after his Victory, Fulvio brought up
to him two Women, in Pilgrims habit, whereof one had no sooner taken off her
head a great broad-brim'd Hat, which eclipsed all her face, but he found her to
be his Mistress Matilda. He alighted, or rather flung himself down off his
Horse, and cast himself at the feet of his Princess, who embraced him with such
demonstrations of tenderness, as made him forget all the former disobliging
returns he bad received from her, occasioned by the tyranny of the Prince of
Salerna. This faithful Lover was not able to bethink himself of complements
pathetical enough to express the joy and satisfaction it was to him, that he
had found her: never did he discover less eloquence in his discourse, and never
could he have better persuaded what he desired, then he did then by the
disorder of his thoughts, and the loss he seemed to be at, as to what he would
have said.

He was in suspense a while, whether he should acquaint Matilda with the pains
he had taken in quest of her, and the excess of his modesty made him so
reserved, as that he would have forborne making any advantage of what he had
done, though he could not well have done so without being unjust to himself.
Yet at last he assumed the confidence to give her a faithful account of all his
adventures, ever since his departure from Naples, to look after her, and forgot
not what had happened to him at the Inn, where he thought he had heard her
voice.

Matilda satisfied him how extremely sensible she was of these fresh
obligations, which he had laid upon her, and told him, that she ought him her
honor and her life, since the defeat of the Moors was the effect of his valor
and conduct. She acknowledged it was no other then her self, whom he had heard
so near him in the Inn; promised to acquaint him by what adventure she had been
brought thither, and to give him a relation of what else had befallen her, when
there were a fitter opportunity to do it, and that she might do it without
making others privy thereto.

The other Female in Pilgrim's habit, who accompanied Matilda, was one of the
Women that waited on her, named Julia, who only, of all her Servants, had been
so faithful to her Lady, as to participate of her fortunes, and bare a share of
whatever might happen to her. It is to be imagined that Fulvio and she
considered that happy meeting as a kind of Jubilee; and for my part, I am apt
to believe, that the complements upon the rencounter were very pleasant and
witty, and (if I may presume to venture upon a new expression) the subalternate
discoveries of their eloquence were transcendent upon that occasion.

The victorious Peasants, who had observed Hippolito, and Matilda's taking
acqualntance one with another, renewed their proffers of entertainment to
Hippolito; who then made no difficulty to accept of them, upon account of the
Princess. Among others, the ancient Commander in chief, who, as I have already
told you, had brought the Peasants into the field, and commanded the ragged
Regiment, before Hippolito came up to them, entreated him and Matilda also,
that he might have the honor to lodge them; which they granted him. He
thereupon sent away one of his Sons, to take order for their reception, at a
pretty convenient house, which he had at the next adjoining Village.

'Twas now time to think of a departure thence, and the Victorious Army would
have disbanded, had it not been thought civility to wait on Hippolito to his
new Quarters. Matilda and Julia were mounted on the best Horses could be found.
Among the many women who had been rescued out of the hands of the Moors, Fulvio
took notice of one whom he conceived he had seen somewhere, and who would have
avoided him, as if she had known him, and was unwilling to be known by him. At
last he got near her, and knew her to be the Host's Wife, who would have
murdered them at the Inn. He went and acquainted his Master with it, having
first ordered some of the Peasants to take her into their Custody.

Hippolito and Matilda with their retinue were entertained at the old Man's who
was to be their Host, with all the kindness and good looks which could be
expected from persons who thought themselves infinitely obliged, and would make
all the expressions they could of their gratitude. The Peasants who lived in
the same Village repaired to their own Houses, and those who lived at a greater
distance took their way homewards, to enjoy themselves and be merry after their
Victory.

Hippolito ordered to be brought before him the Host's Wife, whom Fulvio had
caused to be secured; and upon the first threats of imprisonment, she
confessed, that their Inn was a Rendezvous of Bandits, and High-way-men; that
her Husband held a correspondence with all such who haunted those parts, and
that his refusal of entertainment to Hippolito at his first coming to their
house proceeded from his expectation, that night, of a notorious Robber,
Camerade to the Calabrian whom he had seen at the Inn, to confer together about
a Robbery they intended to commit the next day. She further acquainted
Hippolito, that the kindness which the Calabrian pretended to do in resigning
him his Chamber, was only out of a design to rob and murder him that night.
The Story gives no account of what was done to this woman, after she had
discovered to them all they would have known of her.

Supper-time drew on, and Hippolito and Matilda, the better to disguize their
condition, would needs have Fulvio and Julia, the old man and all his family to
sit down at table with them. After the repast (which I suppose was soon ended,
because they had not had time to make great provision) Matilda would not suffer
Hippolito to continue any longer in the impatience of being informed of her
adventures, and having an account by what traverses of fortune she was brought
to the Inn, and afterward fell into the hands of the Moors.

After the command I had received from the King to depart Naples, said she to
him, and that through the great prevalence of my enemies, I had but that very
night allowed me, to put my self into a readiness to comply with so rigorous an
order, I implored the assistance of those about the Court, whom I thought I had
obliged to be my Friends; but I found, to my regret, that they were only such
to me proportionably to my prosperity. I had yet this greater affliction, that
all my Servants forsook me, save only Julia. She had a Brother married in
Naples, who proved so generous, as to quit his family and the concerns of his
profession, upon the entreaty of his Sister, and to present his service, for my
conduct, to what place I should pitch upon for my retreat. It is to his
diligence I am to attribute it, that though the order for my departure from
Naples was brought me with the night, yet I was in a readiness to leave it
before the next morning. Our Pilgrims habits of Loretto disguised us so, as
that there was no notice taken of us at our going out at the Gates. I traveled
that day as far as a young person of my Sex could have done, who was not wont
to go much a-foot; and we continued our Pilgrimage several days after, without
any cross adventures. Yesterday, somewhat late in the Evening; we were met in a
narrow passage by three men on Horseback, whose looks assured us they were
engaged in some mischievous design. I would have shunned them, but did it with
so much precipitation, and so unfortunately, that, my foot slipping, I fell
down at their Horses feet, which forced them to make a sudden halt. A great hat
which covered my face, fell off my head; my Head-Cloaths were loose, and my
Hair, wherewith I am well stored, came down over my face, and some part of my
body. My misfortune would have it so, that those men observed somewhat in me
which they fancied. They had some discourse together, and soon after alighted;
one of them laid hold on Julia, another on me, and the third was engaged with
Julia's Brother, who had put himself into a posture to rescue us, and whom we
soon saw laid on the ground, run through the body with a Sword. From all the
misfortunes that have happened to me, and which, of a Princess in all
appearance happy, have reduced to the greatest miseries of any person in the
World, I have reason to make this inference, that all humane prudence, and
precaution cannot divert the designs of Fortune. We must let her take her own
course, and assume a persuasion, that her inconstancy, which has made us feel
her malice, when we thought our selves most in a condition to defy it, may
restore us to her friendship, when we have least occasion to expect it. Upon
this reflection am I fully resolved, continued Matilda, humbly to comply with
Heaven's disposal of me; and according to that resolution was it, that, when I
saw my self at the mercy of those unknown persons, I spared them the doing me
any violence to get upon one of their Horses, since I doubted not but they
would have done it by force; and that though I was fallen into their hands, yet
death would deliver me out of them, if ever their insolence should constrain me
to make use of that extreme remedy. Julia, who had lost her Brother in the
encounter, could not for bear lamentations, yet suffered her self to be brought
away in the midst of them, without any opposition. It was after night ere we
got to the Inn, where you heard my voice. At the first hearing of your
engagement with those Robbers, we were extremely frighted; but when you had
forced them out of the Inn, and that we heard no further noise, Julia and I got
out of the room where we were. The solitude we met with wherever we came,
inspired us with a resolution to make our escape at a back door of the Garden,
which happened to be open, and the fear of being overtaken and brought back
again, obliged us to make all the have we could to get away. We traveled all
the remainder of that night, and a good part of the day, till the heat of the
Sun and our own weariness, forced us to repose our selves amongst certain
Rocks, not far from this place, whither we were invited by the shadiness, and
where we were found fast asleep by the Moors, whom you have this day so
fortunately defeated.

Matilda concluded the relation of her adventures with new protestations to
Hippolito that she would never forget what he had done for her. She would not
acquaint him with the place where she intended to make her retirement, nor did
he press her to do it. Her designed refuge was to be at the house, or palace,
of one o^ those petty Princes of Italy, o^ whom there is good store in that
Country; for he that ha^ money may soon be Highness there. 'Twere easy for me
to create a title according to my own fancy, since the History names not him,
at whose habitation she retired her self; but his name would not contribute any
thing of beauty or advantage to my Relation. Hippolito proffered to conduct her
to the place whither she intended to go; but she would not by any means permit
him, and with as much ado was she persuaded, at the earnest entreaties of the
officious Cavalier, to take his Servant Fulvio and his Horses, to carry her and
Julia.

I shall not here excite a sorrow in the compassionate Reader, by giving him an
account how mournfully Hippolito took his leave of her. I shall, without giving
him the trouble of any reflection of mine by the way, bring her to Ancona,
where she sold some Jewels, and bring back the disconsolate Hippolito to the
smoaky ruins of his burnt house, whither he got without money, and of all his
Estate having nothing he could call his own, but the Horse that was under him.
He was hardly alighted ere he was accosted by a Gentleman of Naples, who was
riding up and down at random, in quest of Matilda, as did also several others,
whom the King had sent into all parts of Italy to find her out. He was informed
by this Gentleman, how Rogero was fallen into disgrace; how Matilda's innocence
came to be known and vindicated; the orders the King had granted for the
finding of her out, and whatever else had passed at Naples, since he had left
it, only he made not the least mention of the violent Love which the King had
for Irene, which was generally known to all, and whereof this Cavalier gave
Hippolito no information at all, either out of an excess of discretion, or for
some other reason, which I know not. You may well imagine, that Hippolito, a
person so generous as he was, and loving Matilda beyond himself, was extremely
glad to hear of this revolution in her concerns, though he at the same time
understood that his own made nearer and nearer approaches to the precipice of
misfortune; the said Gentleman having assured him, that the King had promised
the Prince of Salerna, that he and the Princess of Tarentum should secure their
loves by the solemnities of marriage, as soon as she were returned to Naples.

Hippolito intended to have made his appearance at Court, but he was so
thunderstruck at this last news, that he resolved never to see it more. Nay
his very life grew a burden to him, and he so shunned the conversation of all
sorts of persons, that he last of all the Kingdom knew, that his Sister was
looked on as the Beauty who had an absolute sovereignty over the King's
inclinations.

In the mean time, Matilda could not be found, and though the Gentleman, whom
Hippolito met, had been at Ancona, where he told him that he had left her, yet
could he not get any tidings of her, notwithstanding all the enquiry he had
made after her. There was a report spread abroad of the death of that Princess,
with all the particular circumstances of it, and that report came to the Ears
of Hippolito, who took it so heavily, that he was very far in his way after
her. But at length he recovered of the sickness it had put him into, and the
indisposition of his mind abated proportionably to the reassumption of his
strength and Spirits.

He sometimes went abroad to take the air on Horseback along the Seaside, and
it was in one of those disconsolate diversions of his thoughts, that, after
several reflections made on the misfortunes of his life, he resolved to give it
a period in the War, which some of the Grecian Princes were then engaged in
against the Turks, who out of Asia began to make their incursions into Europe.
But Matilda was at last found out, and Hippolito was so overjoyed thereat, that
he bestowed his Horse, that is, all he had left him, on the person who brought
him the news of it.

The same day, his Servant Fulvio came and found him out, and was much
astonished to see his Master so extremely cast down, and in very ill equipage,
at a time when there was no other talk all over Italy, then of the great
influence which his Sister Irene had over the King, and the affection he had
for her. He acquainted Hippolito with the name of that Prince, at whose house
Matilda had retired her self; how that Prospero was come thither from the King,
with order to bring her back to Naples; and according to the commendable custom
of Servants, of being overhasty to tell their Masters bad news, he
represented, to his, the joy which Matilda expressed at the sight of Prospero,
much greater then it was, and insisted particularly on the assurances of
affection which she gave him. Nay, the expressions of her love toward him,
added this indiscreet Servant, were so remarkable, that she would adorn her
self with the old Hat, of which Prospero had sometime made her a present, which
he had so often reproached her with, as an extravagance of his generosity, and
which was so well known in Naples by the drollery it occasioned about the
Court. I know not what Devil she had entrusted with the keeping of it, that it
could be found so of a sudden against Prospero's coming thither, which I
believe was little expected; but it may well be imagined she had a great esteem
for it.

With that honest Fulvio broke out into downright railing at the Princess of
Tarentum, and that with so much invection and bitterness, that Hippolito was
forced to command him to be silent, and possibly would have banged him, had he
continued any longer speaking of her, without observance of that respect which
he ought her. Fulvio told his Master further, that the Princess entreated him
to meet her in the way to Naples. How! cries out Hippolito, is it not a
sufficient affliction to me, that she loves me not, but she must add to that
affliction, by obliging me to be an Eyewitness how much she loves another?
Must I needs be present at her caresles of Prospero, purposely that he may have
the satisfaction to see me die with grief, as if there wanted nothing but my
death to complete their felicity? But -- she must be obeyed, though it were
only to see, to what extremity she can be unjust.

He was in as good an humor to bemoan himself as man could be, and it is
likely he would have acquitted himself of it proportionably to the occasion he
had to do it, when he observes coming up toward him a considerable party of
Horse, which Fulvio assured him was that which conducted the Princess of
Tarentum, who out of a design to see Hippolito, had taken her way by his house,
where she was in hopes to meet with him. And for that reason, though the King
had sent some of his Coaches to meet her, yet was she resolved to make her
entrance into Naples on Horseback.

Prospero looking on himself as the best mounted, priding in his Plumes, as if
he had been some Indian Emperor, thought it his place to ride next Matilda,
who was not a little importuned with his old expressions of Courtship. But if
the persecution had ended with them, her patience had not been so much
exercised; she must also lend her attention, or pretend it, to some amorous
Songs, and the relation of what remarkable things had happened at Naples since
her departure thence, and what new Plays had been acted, and how they took.

On the other side, Hippolito, melancholy to extremity, and making a
discontented comparison, between his former magnificent appearances, and the
mean equipage he was then in, would gladly have shunned the sight of Matilda
and his Rival, especially being attended as they were by so great a concourse
of people. But Matilda, who had him in her Eye at a great distance, and knew
him, happily by reason of Fulvio, who had left her but a little while before,
rode up to him, which obliged Prospero and the rest of the Company to do the
like.

Matilda could not but observe how much Hippolito was surpised at her coming,
yet, to make one further trial of his constancy, by reproaching him with a
neglect in coming to meet her, and to congratulate that happy reverse of her
condition. How! said she to him, is this Hippolito, the generous Hippolito, the
best of my Friends, the noble rescuer of my Life and Honor, and not give me
the meeting upon this strange turn of my destiny? How much am I the more
obliged to these noble persons, who though they were invisible during the
eclipse of my fortunes, yet have come so far to express their joy at the
recovery of my former luster? if I am not to consider their civilities as
rendered rather to the Prince of Salerna, then my self. I have been so
persecuted by the Goddess who rides not in the Chariot, but is turned about
with the Wheels of it, that I do not think my self yet so far out of the reach
of misfortune, as that I may not stand in need of an Hippolito, when I have the
least hope or thought of his assistance.

Hippolito had no answer to make, but to assure her by Oaths and protestations,
that he had but just then heard of her happy return, adding withal, that if he
had had intelligence of it sooner, he should have forborne meeting her, out of a
fear, that a person so irrecoverably unfortunate, as he was, might have
interrupted the public joy. This respectful reply begat a compassion in
Matilda toward that faithful Lover, and that obliged her to assure him, that
it would have much disturbed her particular satisfaction, if she had not meet
with him. She thereupon desired him to participate of her good fortune, since
he had shown himself the most concerned in her adversities; telling, him, that
being now fully resolved to dispose of her self in marriage, as having found by
woeful experiences, that a young Princess, destitute of Relations, stood in need
of a Husband to vindicate and direct her; and that having already cast her Eye
on him, whom she would make Prince of Tarentum, it was her desire, he would
honor her with his presence at the Nuptials, which she would be very unwilling
to have celebrated without him.

Prospero imagining himself the person principally concerned in that affair,
added his entreaties to those of the Princess, and, contrary to his custom,
spoke with much civility to his Rival, accompanied with greater caresses then
ever would have been expected from him. An unfortunate person, who despairs of
seeing any period of his misery, explicates all things to his own disadvantage,
as one desperately sick turns all manner of good aliment into poison, Hippolito
entertained all these civilities and expressions of Matilda as new cruelties,
which she would exercise upon him. He was not able to comprehend, how her heart
could be so far petrified toward him, as to desire he would be a Spectator of
the ceremonies of her Nuptials. He was absolutely at a loss what answer to make
her, and could only look on her with a certain amazement. His faithful Servant
Fulvio was as much scandalized at it, as he. He stood behind his Master venting
his indignation in bitter curses, and wishes, that they had rather fallen by
the hands of the Murderers, or the Moors, then be reduced to the extremities
they were then in, and at last he presumed to whisper his Master in the Ear
with an execrable Oath, that he should not go, and that Matilda was a person
irrecoverably lost to all shame, to invite him to her Nuptials with Prospero.

In the mean time, Hippolito could give no great attention to the advice of his
Man, in regard Matilda reiterated her entreaties, and with so much importunity,
that he could not deny her. She would have him immediately mount a Horse, which
she had purposely ordered to be brought for him, and it may be, he was not then
so well accoutred as to have his Boots on. Thus was Hippolito with many sair
words courted a Horse back, but extremely out of countenance, and humor,
riding of one side of Matilda, who on the other had the Prince of Salerna. The
Princess satisfied that she had prosecuted her design so as to get his Company,
made him the only subject of her discourse. She took occasion to discover how
infinitely she was obliged to him, and gave all those, who were near enough to
hear her, a particular relation of all the gallant actions performed by
Hippolito, as well against the Robbers who intended to murder him at the Inn,
as against the Moors, whom he defeated afterward, with a small party of
Peasants little acquainted with the business of fighting, though the former had
very much the advantage as to number.

This discourse was perfect discord to the Ears of Prospero, and therefore to
interrupt her, he must needs, how impertinently it matters not, bring in the
story of his achievements, the night that Rogero was taken, and tell them,
with what speed he had pursued that Calixtus, of whom we have elsewhere spoken,
as one privy to the correspondence which that pernicious Minister held with the
Enemies of his Prince. Matilda gave him no great attention, and still directed
her discourse to Hippolito, though he made little answer to any thing she said
to him. But Prospero, upon the least occasion, falling afresh upon the same
discourse, would be heard, though with the dissatisfaction of those from whom
he expected audience; and notwithstanding whatever others had to say, yet would
he not have any thing heeded, but his insisting still on the important service
he had done the State and Matilda, in running after that Calixtus, so great a
privilege of talking did he assume to himself.

He would have mortified the Company much longer with an account of that noble
exploit, if the King had not appeared, attended by all the gallantry of both
Sexes about Court and City. Prospero expressed much joy at the King's advance,
as conceiving, the accomplishment of his happiness near at hand; Matilda and
the Company looked on it as a welcome deliverance from his impertinent talk. He
rode up to the King, not knowing why he did it, and soon after returned again
to Matilda, then to the King again, till at last, like a Muscovian Interpreter
at the reception of a Foreign Ambassador upon the Frontiers, both parties were
got so near, that he thought it time to present Matilda to his Majesty, though
there was no necessity of his taking that trouble upon him. She was received by
the King as kindly as she could have wished. He made his excuses to her, as to
the violence and injustice had been done her; charged Rogero with all, and for
reparation of the injuries she had received through the malicious contrivances
of that disgraced Favorite, he bestowed on her one of the most considerable
Counties in the Kingdom. Prospero, thinking himself obliged to make
acknowledgments of that Princely boon no less then Matilda, would needs prevent
her in the doing of it, but in the midst of his complement brought in his
adventure of running after Calixtus, as if the King had done it as much out of a
consideration of that service of his, as the sufferings of Matilda. But
Matilda, taking her turn to express her gratitude to his Majesty, acquitted her
self so well, that the Audience were at a loss whether more to admire her
humility, or her wit. I shall not here undertake to make a recital of the
excellent expressions, whereby she discovered her resentments of the King's
innocence as to all the disasters she had weathered out, and those of her own
gratitude upon this unexpected liberality. I shall only tell you they had the
general applause of all that were present, as I have been assured by creditable
testimonies. Prospero observing that Matilda had done speaking to the King, who
was casting his Eye about to see what other persons he might take notice of,
would have added something to what she had said; but mistrusting it was more
likely he would have come off with disgrace, he wisely forbore it.

While the King, the Prince of Salerna, and Matilda were thus engaged, Irene
was gone to Hippolito, whom her eye had singled out, though he stood behind
several other persons; and perceiving she was out of the King's sight, she cast
her self about the neck of that dear Brother, for whom she had shed so many
tears, and could not even then forbear the doing of it. Hippolito who loved
Irene no less then a Sister so amiable and obliging could deserve, entertained
her with such demonstrations of affection and kindness, as might have raised a
sympathy in those among the spectators whose hearts were most petrified into an
insensibility of passion, so strangely was his, as it were, dissolved, at that
happy interview. The King, having disengaged himself from Prospero, looked
about for Irene, for he could not be long without her, and having perceived her
with her Brother, his amorous impatience was such, that he would needs ride up
to her. He treated not Hippolito as a simple Subject, when she presented him to
his Majesty. Matilda, Camilla, Prospero, and what other persons of quality were
got near the King, might easily observe that he spoke to Hippolito after such a
manner, as argued that Cavalier was in a fair way to rise at Court. But all the
King's kind expressions and looks were not powerful enough to dispel from his
countenance, that cloud of sadness, wherewith it was overcast, by the serenity
observable in that of his Rival, whose satisfaction seemed so great, that all
others were dissatisfied thereat.

In the mean time, the Sun darting his perpendicular rays on that Courtly
Assembly, grew too warm for some heads among them, especially such as were most
inclined to baldness, of whom such as wore Periwigs had then the advantage. All
the Gnats, whose habitations are much about the Seaside; the flies that
sported themselves about the adjacent places; those which waited on their
Horses, who waited on the King from Naples; those also which had taken a
greater Progress with those persons who accompanied Matilda; in fine, all those
winged Insects, which we may call the Parasites of the Air, seemed to have
appointed a Rendezvous at the place where these great persons met, with a
design to torment both Horse and Man, as much as lay in their little power, and
of those Horses, the most exposed to the animosity of the flies were such as
had shortest tails. The Umbrelloes indeed did in some measure secure, such as
had them, against the heat of the Sun, but not against the reverberation of the
scorched earth, and the Clouds of dust, which the Sistole and Diastole of the
Lungs, commonly called Respiration, forced into the throats of most there, even
of the King himself. In a word, the place was not maintainable any longer; but,
to the greater persecution of those, who were most unmercifully treated by the
Sun and the Flies, the King thought no time long to be where Irene was, nor had
he yet disburthen'd himself of all he had to say to Matilda. He therefore spoke
to her, loud enough to be heard by those who were within any convenient
distance of him, in these terms; for I have the relation of this passage,
verbatim, as I may say, from one who took what the King said, word for word, by
the Art of Memory, the time and place being very unfit for the doing of it by
Characters.

Fair Princess of Tarentum, said he to her, the persecutions you have suffered
under my Reign, and, as I have already acknowledged, in some measure by my
orders, I must confess have been very great; and the reparation I have made you
argues how far I am satisfied of the injustice of your sufferings; yet shall I
not think my self fully acquitted, till I have endeavored, to the utmost of my
power, to contribute as much to your future felicity, as I have done to your
past misfortunes. It is not therefore enough, in my apprehension, that I have
declared you innocent, that I have re-instated you, in all that had been
unjustly detained from you, and that I have made an unexpected augmentation
thereof, if I gain not your concurrence with the inclinations which the Prince
of Salerna has to join with you in Matrimony. It is by the recommendation I
make you of this Prince, that I hope to cancel some part of my obligations
toward you, and it is by your acceptance of him, that I make account to
recompense him, for the important services he has done this State.

Ah! my Liege, replied Matilda, be pleased to be so cautious in your desires of
being just to Matilda, as that you be not unjust to Prospero. Acknowledgments
may have their excesses as well as ingratitude. You would not reward the Prince
of Salerna proportionably to his merit, by only bestowing on him the Princess
of Tarentum; and by making me a present to that great Prince, you would bestow
on me more then I have deserved. I am satisfied with your Majesty as far as it
is possible I should be, and these last demonstrations of your munificence,
wherewith you have honored me, upon a consideration of my misfortunes, are so
dear to me, that they will henceforward be the most pleasing object of my
reflections. If therefore, your Majesty be so conscientious in making
satisfaction where you conceive your self obliged, and since Subjects ought to
regulate their actions according to the examples given them by their Prince,
will not your Majesty give me leave, now that I am in condition and ability to
acquit my self, to do it without any further delay, and to make my satisfaction
proportionable to the services which have been done me? Approach then, brave
and generous Hippolito, said she to that Cavalier, turning her self toward
him, and make your acknowledgments of my gratitude, after you have so long had
cause to complain of my want of it. You have obliged me, by a love of many
years standing, a love so violent, that all the traverses of my fortune, all
the disasters that have happened to me, nay all my disdains have not been able
to check into any remission. I am indebted to you, besides the vast expenses
which that constant passion put you upon, besides the greatest part of your
estate spent in the vindication of my quarrel, for your fair House, which was
burnt upon my account. I am further to acknowledge that I owe you my honor and
my life, which were in danger amongst Robbers and Moors; and I owe you also the
life, which you hazarded to rescue me out of their hands. I am as desirous,
generous Hippolito, to acquit my self of all these obligations, as I have been
willing to acknowledge them: but those which I have received from Prospero, as
being the more ancient, are more pressing upon me, and may justly claim
precedence of yours.

Hippolito grew pale at these last words of Matilda; but presently, that
paleness dislodged, and a sudden Scene of blushing succeeded, as if he had
summoned all his blood and Spirits into his face. Prospero looked on him with a
smiling countenance, but whether it proceeded from pity or a secret
insultation, none had the time to guess at: and composing his countenance into
an amorous posture to look on Matilda, he received her thoughts of him, and his
pretensions to her, in these terms.

Prince of Salerna! you have taken much trouble upon you to induce me to a
persuasion that you loved me from my Childhood; I am convinced, and have found,
that you have always treated me like a Child, You always made it your business
to keep her in awe, whom you called your little Mistress, and you have
perpetually amused her with trifling Stories and Songs, or persecuted her with
your checks and reproaches, and this at a time, when she expected more
important services from you. In a word, the greatest demonstration of Love you
ever thought fit to make her, amounted only to a plume of old Feathers, worn by
you, happily ere she was born, which she promised you to keep, and now makes it
appear, that you cannot charge her with any breach of her word. With that, she
took off her Head the Hat, wherewith the Prince of Salerna had sometime
presented her, and making him a return of the same present, she put this period
to her discourse. Dreadful Prince of Salerna! the noble expressions of your
Love, Words, and Feathers, I here requite, by giving you a return of the like;
they may prove more fortunate in your future Addresses to some other Beauty
then they have done to me, who thus disengaged from you, bestow my self on
Hippolito, and, by that UNEXPECTED CHOICE, make him Prince of Tarentum, and
account all I have little enough to satisfy my obligations to him, whom of all
men I have found the most generous. She thereupon gave the Prince of Salerna
his own fatal Hat, with one hand, and with the other fastened on that of the
despairing Hippolito, who thenceforward ceased to be such and as little looked
for that unexpected happiness, as Prospero did for his Hat and Feathers.

The King and all there present were not a little surprised at this strange
turn; but when he considered how much Irene was concerned in that fortunate
advancement of her Brother Hippolito, and the justice which was remarkable in
the action of Matilda, he could not forbear approving it: And the commendation
he thereupon gave that Princess, for her generous choice, kept the Prince of
Salerna from falling into those impertinences, which possibly his passion might
otherwise make him guilty of. For no question but this Satirical discarding of
him by Matilda, when he so little imagined any such disaster near him, and
before so eminent a concourse of noble persons, struck him so to the heart,
that he knew not which way to turn himself, such a conflict of shame,
confusion, and distracted thoughts was there apparent in his very countenance.
Nay he was so exasperated against Matilda, that he would have vented his
indignation in railing at her, according to his magisterial custom of treating
her, if the fear of displeasing his Prince, and the concern of his estate had
not checked his natural insolence. His disturbance was so observable, that the
King took pity on him, and presenting Camilla to him, after he had had some
private discourse with her and Irene, he told Prospero, that so beautiful a
Lady as she was, with all the estate and advantages, which her Brother Rogero
had some time been possessed of, might in some measure make him reparation for
the loss of Matilda.

While the King was obliging the Prince of Salerna by this new overture, the
whole Court was got about Matilda and Hippolito, wishing them all the joys
consequent to the just choice she had made of that faithful Lover. They were
both of them put to the extremities of their eloquence to make returns
answerable to the complements they received upon that occasion; and no
question, at the long run, they would have been forced to repetitions: but the
King came up very seasonably to their relief. Fair Princess of Tarentum, said
he to Matilda, I am now convinced, that nothing argues a juster desert of
greatness, then the imitation of great examples. Such have you given me in your
choice of Hippolito, and requital of those services of his, whereof he hardly
imagined that you had any remembrance. Irene is a person I conceive my self
infinitely obliged to, upon the account of her beauty and that of her virtue;
and, according to your example, I make her the greatest acknowledgments I can
thereof, by making her this day Queen of Naples.

This so unexpected a declaration of the King had such an effect on that noble
Assembly, as it is more easy to imagine then express; and they were all more
surpised at it, then at that of Matilda. Irene, falling down at the King's
feet, expressed her humility and resignation, by her respects and silence. The
King took her up, contenting himself then only with a kiss of her hand, and
from that time treated her no otherwise then if she had been the greatest Queen
in the World. They took their way toward Naples, where all hands and wits were
set on work about the preparatives for the King's Nuptials, who ordered a short
prorogation of those of Hippolito and Matilda, Prospero and Camilla, that one
and the same day might be remarkable in all subsequent computations of time,
for the solemnization of those three illustrious marriages. The King never had
the least occasion to repent him of the choice he had made of Irene. Matilda,
who was of so amorous a disposition, as to have loved the Prince of Salerna,
much beyond what he deserved, and that upon no other account then that he had
been the first who had presented himself to be loved by her, had an affection
for Hippolito consonant to the seasonable services he had done her, and the
sincere Love whereby he was animated to the performance of them. On the other
side, Hippolito could make no greater acknowledgments of that Unexpected
Choice, which, of the most disconsolate, had made him the most fortunate of all
Lovers, then by loving her as entirely, now that he was her Husband, as he had
done whilst a Gallant. Only Camilla was unfortunate in her match with Prospero:
she durst not refuse him, out of a fear of incurring the King's displeasure,
who had promised Irene, that he would inflict no other punishment on Rogero,
then that of a departure out of his territories. And so, to save her Brother's
life, she made her own unhappy, by marrying an impertinent and a jealous
Prince, who was thought ridiculous enough before his Addresses to Matilda, but,
after her discarding him, with so remarkable an affront, became the scorn and
derision of the Neapolitan Court.

FINIS.

