A LETTER From the Commissioners of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND Residing here at
LONDON To William Lenthall Esquire Speaker of the House of COMMONS

Concerning the present proceedings in this Kingdom, against Religion, the
King, and Government; Together with their DECLARATION and Protestation against
the taking away his Majesty's Life.

London, Printed Anno Dom. 1649.

A Letter from the Commissioners of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND, etc.
SIR,
THe Committee of Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, understanding, that the
Honorable Houses of Parliament, were proceeding in a Treaty for peace, with
His Majesty; did about the beginning of the last Month, authorize Us to
present Propositions to his Majesty, and particularly to deal with him, and the
honorable houses, for establishing the Covenant and Presbyteriall Government,
the Confession of faith, Directory for Worship, and Catechism: For preventing
the tolleration of Idolatry, Popery; Prelacy, Superstition, Blasphemy,
Haeresie, and Schism; And for perfecting the great work of Reformation and
uniformity, according to the Covenant: the substance whereof has been formerly
communicated in a letter from the Committee of Estates to both houses, and by
one of our number, upon his reception ar the Committee of Derby house, by order
from the houses of Parliament. But to our great grief we do perceive; That the
distractions of this kingdom are, beyond our expectation, grown exceeding
high; That a force has been placed on the passages to the houses; which during
transactions of highest concernmens, has imprisoned and secluded a great
number of Members of Parliament, and given occasion to many others to withdraw,
because they find they cannot Act, as in a free Parliament; that applications
are made to you for proceeding against the King, to take away his life, and for
changing the fundamental Government of this kingdom; And strong endeavors
are used, to overturne the whole work of Reformation, to cast off the Ministry,
and introduce a toleration of all Religions and forms of Worship: and so in
effect to destroy the Cause, wherein both Nations have been engaged, and
frustrare all the ends of the solemn League and Covenant, which both kingdoms
have sworn with uplifted hands to Almighty God sinceerly, really, and
constantly to perform. The consideration of these things does exceedingly
trouble us, and fill our hearts with fears* that, as they are for the present
matter of great provocation of the wrath of God against us, dishonorable to
his Name, and a reproach to Religion; so, if persisted in: that they shall
greatly weaken and divide us amongst our selves, invite foreign Enemies
against us: advance the popish interest, loose Ireland, and in the end, prove
destructive to the Reformed Religion, and to the peace and happiness of those
kingdoms.

In the year 1640. when these Kingdoms were oppressed under the yoke and
tyranny of the Prelates, who then were far advanced in the design, to introduce
popery; the kingdom of Scotl. did join their Endeavors with this kingdom, to
procure a free Parliament here, looking upon it, as the chief mean by the
blessing of God to give a check to the designs of the Prelates, who were
studying the chang of Religion: And to the interprises of evil Counselors
about the King, who were endeavoring to establish an Arbitrary and tiranicall
Government, and afterward, when through the power and prevalency of papists,
prelates, and Malignants, this kingdom was distressed: The kingdom of Scotland
did enter into a solemn League and Covenant, with this Nation: For reformation
and defense of Religion, the honor and happinsse of the King, and the peace
and safety of the three kingdoms: And particularly for bringing the Churches of
God therein, to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in Religion, Confession
of Faith, form of Church Government, Directory for worship, and Catechizing,
for extirpation of popery, prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, profanes.
And what soever shall be found contrary to found Doctrine for mutual
preservation of the rights and privileges of Parliaments, and liberties of the
kingdoms; for discovering of Incendiaries, Malignants, and evil Instruments,
that hinder Reformation of Religion, divid the King from his peopl or one of
the kingdoms from another, or make any faction or party among the people,
contrary to the Leagu and Covenant, that they may be brought to public trial
and punishment: for preserving peace and union betwixt the kingdoms: And
defending one another in this Cause; and continuing therein all the days of
our lives, zealously and constantly, against all opposition; and for promoting
the same, according to our power, against all Letts, and impediments whatsoever.

In pursuance of the solemn League and Covenant, both Houses of the Parliament
have often declared, That they will Establish the Reformation of Religion,
Extirpate Popery, and Prelacy: And suppress Heresy, and Schism, and that they
will maintain the fundamental Government of this Kingdom by King, Lords, and
Commons. And when the Common Enemy being subdued, the Scottish Army was to go
out of this Kingdom in the beginning of the year 1647. And his Majesty by
consent of both kingdoms, was to come to Holdenby: The Houses of Parliament did
declare, both to the king, and to the kingdom of Scotland. That respect should
be had to the safety and preservation of his Majesty's person, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion, and liberties of the Kingdoms,
according to the Covenant. And when the King should be at Holdenby, and the
Scottish forces gone out of this Kingdom; That they would join with the
Kingdom of Scotland, in employing their best endeavors, to procure his
Majesty's assent to the Propositions agreed on by both kingdoms. And in case
the King should not give his assent thereunto: that the Houses were resolved
still to maintain the happy union already settled between the two Kingdoms,
according to the Covenant and Treaties. The Parliament of Scotland did at the
same also, publish a Declaration of their intentions (whereof one Copy was
delivered to his Majesty, and another to the Houses of Parliament) that in the
interim (until his Majesty should give satisfaction to both Kingdoms, in the
Propositions of peace) there should be no harm, prejudice, injury, or violence
done to his Royal person: that there should be noe change of Government, other
then had been for the three years preceding: And that his posterity should be
no ways prejudiced, in their lawfell succession to the Crown and Government of
these Kingdoms.

These being the engagements of both Kingdoms jointly together, and severally
one to another, for the ends aforesaid, We hold it our duty to endeavor, That
Reformation of Religion be settled and established, as is before expressed: And
especially, that the toleration of Idolatry, Popery, Blasphemy, Heresy, and
Schism, be prevented: least we partake in other men's sins, and thereby being
in danger to receive of their plagues: That the Rights and privileges of
Parliament may be preserved: that there may be no change of the fundamental
government: And that there be no harm, injury, or violence offered to his
Majesty's person, the very thought whereof, the kingdom of Scotl. has always
abhorred, as may appear by all their proceedings and Declarations: And the
Houses of Parliament have upon several occasions expressed, a detestation
thereof in their Declarations: Wherefore, we do expect that there shall be no
proceeding against his person; which cannot but continue and increase the great
distractions of these kingdoms, and involve us in many difficulties, miseries,
and confusions.

But that by the free Counsels of both houses of the Parliament of England,
and wih the advice and consent of the Parliament of Scotland (which is now
sitting) such course may be taken in relation to him, as may be for the good
and happiness of these Kingdoms; both having an unquestionable interest therein,

Your affectionat friends and Servants. Signed. Lothian, Io. Cheisly, Will.
Glendoning.

Covent Garden the 6th. of Ian. 1649. For the Honorable VVil Lenthall Esquire
Speaker of the house of Commons.
SIR, We were exceedingly surprised upon Saturday in the afternoon, when we
heard his Majesty was brought before this new extraordinary Court, and that
there should be such have and precipitation, notwithstanding the resolution
taken by the house upon reading of our Letter of the 6 of this instant, to take
into consideration what we had therein pressed, as was signified by you to some
of our Number: Wherefore we have sent you this enclosed paper, to be forthwith
communicated unto them. And in pursuance of the directions which we have
received from the kingdom of Scotland, we do desire, That they will take
effectual course, that we may have free access to his Majesty this day, And
afterward upon all occasions as we shall think fit, without any interuption or
molestation whatsoever, And so we rest

Your affectionat friends and Servant. Signed, Lothian. Io.Cheisly. Will.
Glendoning.

Covent garden the 22 of Ian. 1649. For the Honorable Will. Lenthall Esquire
Speaker of the House of Commons.
By our letter of the 6th of this instant, we represented unto you; What
endeavors have bin used for taking away his Majestyes life; for change of the
fundamental Government of this kingdom; And introducing a sinful and ungodly
toleration, in matters of Religion; And therein we did express our sad thoughts
and great fears of the dangerous consequences that might follow thereupon. And
further: we did earnestly press, That there might be no proceeding against his
Majesty's person; which would certainly continue the great distractions of
these Kingdoms; and involve us into many evils, troubles, and confusions: But
that, by the free Councels of both houses of the Parliament of England, and
with the advice and consent of the Parliament of Scotland, such course might by
taken in relation to him as may be for the good and happiness of these
kingdoms; both having an unquestionable and undeniable interest in his person
as King of both: which duly considered, we had reason to hope, should have
given a stop to all proceedings, against his Majesty's person*

But we understand; that after many of the Members of the house of Commons have
been imprisoned and secluded; and also without and against the consent of the
house of Peers, by a single act of yours alone, power is given to certain
persons of your own Number of the Army, and others to proceed against his Maj.
person* In order whereunto, he was brought upon Saturday last in the afternoon
before this new extraordinary Court. Wherefore we do in the name of the
Parliament of Scotland, for their vindication from false aspersions and
calumnies declare, That though they are not satisfied with his Majesty's
concessions in the late Treaty at Newport in the Isle of Wright especially in
the matters of Religion; And are resolved not to crave his Majestyes
restitution to his Government, before satisfaction be given by him to his
kingdoms. Yet they do all unanimously, with one voice (not one Member excepted)
disclaim the least knowledge of, or accession to the late proceedings of the
Army here, against his Majesty; And sincerely profess, that it will be a great
grief unto their hearts, and lie heavy upon their spirits, if they shall see
their trusting of his Majesty's person, to the honorable houses of the
Parliament of England to be made use of to his ruin; So far contrary to the
declared intentions of the Kingdom of Scttland, and solemn professions of the
Kingdom of England. And to the end it may be manifest to the world, how much
they abhominate and detest so horrid a design against his Majesty's person: We
do in the name of the Parliament and Kingdom of Scotland, hereby declare, their
dissent from the said procee^ings, and the taking away his Maiisties life; And
protest; That as they are altogether free from the same; So they may be free
from all the Evils miseries, confusions and calamities that may follow three
upon to these distracted Kingdoms.

Signed, LOTHIAN, Io: CHEISLY. WILL. GLENDONING.

22. January 1649.
FINIS.

