THE QUAKERS QUIBBLES, IN THREE PARTS.

First set forth in an EXPOSTVLATORY EPISTLE to WILL. PFNN, Concerning the late
Meeting held in Barbycan between the BAPTISTS and the QVAKERS. ALSO The
Pretended Prophet, LOD, MVGGLETON, and the Quakers Compared.

The Second Part, In Reply to a QVIBBLING Answer of G. WHITEHEADS, Entitled,
The Quakers Plainness, Wherein many more of their Quibbles and Equivocations
are manifested, the Comparison between them and Muggleton justified; their
Jesuitical Shifts, Evasives, Confidence, and Grand Mystery in Directing the
Intention, Adverted.

The Third Part, Being a Continuation of their Quibbles, Equivocations,
Riddles, Rounds, and Confusions, in Ten more particulars. With some Remarks on
G.W's. Slight Sheet, and a farther Account of their Mystery in Directing the
Intention.

By the same Indifferent Pen.

London, Printed for F. Smith at the Elephant and Castle, in Cornhill. 1675.

The Quakers Quibbles, Set forth in an Expostulatory Epistle TO William Penn:
Concerning the last Meeting held in Barbican the 9 th of October. 1674. BETWEEN
The Baptists and Quakers.

ALSO The Pretended Prophet and last Witness Lodowick Muggleton And the Quakers
Compared and Considered.

By an Indifferent Penn.

Job 13.6, 7. Hear now my Reasonings, and hearken to the Pleadings of my Lips.
Will you speak wickedly for God? and talk deceitfully for him?

Job 6.25. How forcible are right Words? But what does your arguing reprove?

LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle near the Royal
Exchange in Corhil, 1674.

THE Quakers Quibbles: OR, AN EPISTLE TO William Penn.
SIR,
I Being one of the Auditors, and so often appealed unto by thee sometimes to do
thee Right and Justice; at other-times by several Applications thou wast
pleased to make in thy Discourses, both to thy Friends and friendly Auditors; I
am pressed in mind to acquaint thee with my Sentiment and Observations this
way, (that so thy Appeal might not be idle) not having the convenience nor
admittance to do it there.

In the first place, I do really own that thou have a Voluble Tongue, a strong
Voice and clear, a grateful Utterance, and I believe good Lungs; that thou art
to be commended for an excellent Rhetorician, and a fluent Tongue; and so was
Cicero: But all this as it made not him, so it will not prove thee, a
Christian; and therefore as thou did not deny him to be Wiser than thee, so
it was not over-needful for thee to Query whether he was Better; since sometimes
thou can tells us, that All Men are enlightened with a Saving Light, which
Light is Christ in them, and so consequently Cicero might be a Christian as
well as thee, if he was a Man; and yet when thou thoughtest it would serve thy
turn, thou could call him ignominiously Heathen as others do: But this rather
deserves the name of playing Fast and Loose than Quibbling.

Fine Words may catch Fools, and may take with them that see no further than
th'outside, and let such be taken if they please; But any that are able to
distinguish betwixt Words, and the true Sense of them, and is willing seriously
to consider of them, can never be in danger; and for others they are worthy to
be deceived. I have heard as plausible a Harangue, as eloquent an Oration from
a Jesuit, wherein he painted the poor Protestants in such Colors, that he set
them forth to his Auditors more like some strange Monsters, than Men endued
with Sense or Reason; but yet I cannot believe the Jesuits ever the better
Christians for that.

Had thou had this Gift of a fluent Tongue and a good Voice merely by thy
turning Quaker, (and not partly Natural, and partly acquired at Our Schools,
which now proudly thou contemnest) then should I more highly esteem of it, and
that would more Convince me of the Truth of thy Christianity, than all the
Arguments I heard that day from thee, or could ever hear from thy Friends.

The Members of the True Church in the Apostles time, had the GIFT OF TONGVES
immediately inspired into them, upon their becoming Christians, without
acquiring it by Study: And if thou can show me one in thy Church that has
such a Acts 10.44, etc. While Peter yet spoke these words, the Holy Ghost fell
on all them which heard the Word, and they of the Circumcision which believed
were astonished, as many as came with Pe^^^, because ^^^t on the Gentiles also
was poured out the Gift of the Holy Ghost; For they heard them speak with
Tongues, and magnify God: Then answered Peter, Can any Man forbid Water, that
these should not be Baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we?
And he commanded them to be baptized in the Name of the Lord.

And that this was common, see Acts 19.6. When Paul h^d laid his hands upon
them, the Holy Ghost came on them, and they spoke with Tongues and prophesied,
and all the Men were about twelve.

2 Cor. 12.12, 13. Truly the Signs of an Apostle were wrought among you in all
patience, in Signs and Wonders, and mighty Deeds. For what is it wherein ye
were Inferior to other Churches?


Gift or Gifts given him upon his Conversion to thy Way, it would put a clear
difference betwixt thee and the Baptists, and here thou would go beyond them;
But now I cannot see wherein thou exceedest them in any (truly) Spiritual Gift.

One such Testimony, if true, in thy Church, would Confute the Baptists, and
Convince thy Auditors, more than a hundred such days Disputings as thy last was.

But alas! for ought I can learn, Thy Friends, thy Church is as low, poor,
naked and destitute herein as the Baptists Churches; They in this Matter like
Thee, and Thou like them; The want of which (it is not improbable) may be one
Reason, why you thus Oppose and Contradict one another; One saying he has a
Vision, and the other a Dream from the Lord; One that it is Revealed by the
Spirit within, and the other without, when the Isa, 29.11, 12. And the Vision
of all is become unto you as the words of a Book that is Sealed, which Men
deliver to one that is Learned, saying, Read this I pray thee, and he says, I
cannot, for it is Sealed. A^^ the Book is delivered to him that is not learned,
saying, Read this I pray thee, and he says I am not learned.

Mica 3.6, 7. Therefore night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a
Vision, and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not Divine, and the Sun
shall go down over the Prophets, and the day shall b^ dark over them; Then
shall the Seers be ashamed, and the Di^iners Confounded, yea they shall all
cover their Lips, for there is no answer of God; see Psalm. 34.9. Ezekiel. 13.6, 7.


Vision may be sealed up from you both: and thus whilst you are both in the
Dark, you Wrangle and Fight, Confute and Con^^und one another to little purpose.

But what do fine Words without Charity, or Show without Substance avail, when
good St. Paul says, Though I speak with the Tongues of Men and of Angels, and
have not Charity, I am become as sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal? And
whether in thy Words thou shewedst not more Wrath and Rancour, than Love or
Charity, all might easily see.

Eloquent Harangues are accounted by the said Apostle no better than the
enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, and it was but a Mark of the False Teachers of
Old; and therefore Ephesians. 4.14. The Apostle gives good advice, That we
henceforth be no more Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of Men, and cunning Craftiness, whereby they
lie in wait to deceive.

Now thou have the Words of Man's Wisdom, 1 Cor. 2, 4, 5. My Speech and my
Preaching (says the true Apostle) was not with enticing Words of Man's Wisdom,
But in demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power, etc.
But where is the Demonstration of the Spirit with thee in Power and Mighty Signs?

St. Paul said, when he preached to the Corinthians, He did not come unto them
in Excellency of Speech, 1 Cor. 2.1. It is no new thing for a Mountebank or a
Stage Player to have a grateful Utterance, a fluent Tongue, and perform in
Words as bravely.

But I cannot more commend thee for thy Rhetoric, than I must discommend thee
for thy Logic; for thou did not show thy self more quick in the one, than dull
and sluggish in the other: When thou came to the Reasoning and Disputative
Part, how many shuffles and put-offs? how many pitiful Evasions and poor
Shifts did thou make? how many delays? how much loss of time? I was not only
ashamed to see and hear it, but admired thy self and Friends did not blush at
it, to see you make your Selves and Party so Ridiculous in the Eyes of Others:
What Railing instead of Reasoning! what Clamor! what Noise! what Tautologies!
what Disorder! what Discord and Confusion!

2 Timothy 2.24, 25 The Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto
all men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose
themselves, if God peradventure will give them Repentance. See Gal. 6.1. and
Phil. 4.5.
No Argument to me more fully proved you to be no Christians, than your
unchristian Carriage in that Meeting; Where was the Christian Moderation, the
old and pure Christian frame of Spirit in meekness and gentleness? What was,
nay, what is possible to be vain-jangling, if that was not? Is it not strange,
that you should be no wiser than to give a Challenge, (or Solemn Offer) and
give occasion for thousands of People to meet together, and that to the hazard
of their Limbs and Lives, only to be Witnesses of your Folly, Immoderation,
Rancor, Malice, Obstinacy, Confidence, Unreasonableness, not to say Madness?

For my own part I came thither thinking to have heard some Sober and Rational
Arguings unto Edification and Clearing of the Truth, See 1 Timothy 1.5, 6. and 2 Timothy 2.16, 17, 18. Shun profane and vain Bablings, for they will increase unto
more ungodliness, and their Word will eat as does a Canker, of whom is Hymeneus
and Philetus, who concerning the Truth have Erred, saying, That the
Resurrection is past already, and overthrow the Faith of some.
but I profess I have often heard more Reason and less Railing at Billings-gate:
Is this think you for your praise, or the Commendation of your Way, to make
your selves thus ridiculous?

I would fain know of thee, if thou art not in some degree sensible of it,
ashamed and sorry for it? Does thy Conscience tell thee it was like a Christian
Meeting, or the Dispute carried on thy part in a Christian-like manner, when
thou wast transported with so much passion, and the Discourses so confused and
disorderly, thou many times speaking when thy Opponents were speaking;
sometimes thee and George Whitehead, and at other times thee and Mr. Keith
speaking together, and then crying out to your Auditors, to Hear, Hear, when
they could neither hear you, nor you all understand one the other?

To what end did you appoint a Meeting, if when you come there you resolved not
to argue nor answer in plainness (except in your own Way and Will) any Question
that should be asked you concerning the Hope that was in you, with meekness and
fear, according to the Apostles express Injunction?

1 Pet. 3.15. But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to
give an answer to every man that asks you a Reason of the hope that is in
you, with meekness and fear [reverence.]
If thou wast guided by the Spirit of God indeed, as thou pretendest, what
need thou to have shuffled and boggled so at one single Question? And if
thou wast indeed infallible, what need thou to be afraid (or evaded) giving
an answer to poor Men that are fallible? And if thou art indeed a sober
Christian, why did thou not in plainness and singleness (as your old Phrase
sometimes was) answer directly to the Question, which they cried so often to
thee to answer, and thou promisedst more than once thou would? Do thou
neither regard others Words, nor thy Own?

Sir, I do declare to thee, That I was not interessed in the Dispute any
otherwise than as an Auditor, and that I do not know whether I ever saw Thomas
Hicks before that day, neither did I ever speak to him, nor any from him, and
therefore do conceive my self to be the more impartial, having no undue
Interest, Reason, or Occasion to make me partial, or bias me more one way than
another, for favor or respect of Persons o^ ^arties; Yet I must needs in love
tell thee, that according to the best of my understanding, Thou and thy Friends
did not there deal fairly, heartily, or Christianly in several particulars:

1. In that when T. Hicks had said, that most of the Particulars he would
prove, thou took'st the words out of his Mouth before he had made an end of his
Sentence, and cryedst out, oh then it seems he owns he cannot prove them all,
or words to that effect; whereas if thou had given him leave, as he told thee
afterward, Most of them he would prove from thy Principles, and the rest by
Testimonies: and so here by thy haste, to express it in thy own Language, thou
made thy self the Author of a Lie, and deal'st not Christianly; and therein
thou shewedst thy self not only a Fool but Unjust; for thou ought to have
heard the Matter out, before thou had passed Sentence: and thus all might see
how Solomon's Proverb was true of thee; He that answers a Matter [ Hebr.
returns a word] before he hears it, it is folly and shame unto him, Prove.
18.13.

2. In that thou trifledst away so much precious time, and caused your Auditors
to lose theirs, to the grand disgust of many, if not most of them, before thou
would be brought to agree the Dispute of that Particular which was most
important; which to many was Argument enough that ye were loath and unwilling
to come to it; and thou had a shift for that too, saying, Thou would go
over the whole Book, etc. as if thou did not well know, at least guess, That
it was not likely then thou should come to it at all that Meeting, and so
had rather spin out thy Own and Auditors time about frivolous Things and
petty Stories, and yet at last did agree to it. What reason is there that all
Men must dispute in thy Method, or according to thy Will? Were not the Terms
mutually agreed on before? If not, it had been sober Wisdom to have done it,
and in default to have condescended to the Judgment of the Auditors. Was it not
a shameful thing, that all the sense of so many hours Dispute may be put into
less than half a sheet of Paper, and that in a great measure through your
Refractoriness or Impertinencies?

3. In that there was three or four of you that spoke, three of you very much
by turns, and sometimes more than one of you together at a time; and when thou
sat down, George Whitehead stood up to assist thee, and then Keith, and so
round and round again; and yet if Jer. Ives or another did begin to speak, ye
would cry out Hicks, Hicks, Hicks, it is him we will hear; when as (if I am not
misinformed) in the conditions of the Disputation, thou or thy Friends agreed
Hicks might have two or three Persons of his own choosing, and you the like of
your Election: If so, Then wast thou faithful and just to thy Agreement? Or if
not so, wast thou then reasonable in thy self, to oppose thy self with three
men besides against one? Or did thou intend he might have them with him, but
thou to command them silence, or at best not hear them or answer them; take
which way thou will, it was not fair: Besides, can thou indeed judge that the
Nature of all Men is of a-like strength, or that T. Hicks's Nature was so
strong, as able to hold out speaking and reasoning against three or four? If
so, I think thy Conscience may be as large as a Friars Sleeve: But it seems
with you it is no matter what, how foul or unreasonable soever, so it may but
make for the Quakers Victory or Advantage: This I think was not fair dealing.

4. In that when thy Friends have so often disowned and denied Distinctions,
Thou and thy Friends should then answer by Distinction, and say, Our Friends
Words are to be understood with this Distinction, of Christ in respect of his
Godhead, or Christ in his Excellency, whereas there is no such Distinction set
down by your Friend, or in your Friends Book: And indeed if your Friends Words
have not deceived me, you own nothing but the Divine Nature to be Christ; and
then, How could any such Distinction take place, if it had been there, so as to
make your Friend mean (directly contrary to his own words) That Christ was seen
with Carnal Eyes? Is not this then one of your Quibbles? For although thereby
you make your Friend's words to be double, with two faces, to say one thing and
mean another, Yet your own Principles concerning the Christ, obstructs you
absolutely from clearing them, or proving Hicks a Forger in that Particular:
Neither can that Distinction serve you, except you will alter your Principle,
and hold that there are two Natures, which are both united in One Person, The
Christ, which yet I do not understand you are free to do.

Might not Tho. Hicks then rather have said in thy own language, Thou art a
Forger, and have forged this Distinction, and such a silly one as is impossible
to hold good, if thy Principle touching The Christ hold true? Can thou be
ignorant that this was only an Evasion, or no better than a Quibble? Consider
with thy self, and Thou may see how easily it is seen through.

5. In that when upon the Real Occasion of this thy Distinction, the Question
was asked thee, Whether Christ's Humane Nature was a part of Christ? Or, Whether
the Body that was seen with Carnal (or Corporeal) Eyes, and heard with Carnal
(or Corporeal) Ears was the Christ? Thou so long refusedst to answer; when if
only innocence had been in thee, plain-heartedness, and Christian simplicity,
thou might have done it in one word or two; but instead thereof, I believe
thou made above a thousand, and them to no purpose but to evade an Answer,
(contrary to your former Rule, Let your Yea, be yea, and your Nay, nay; for
whatsoever is more comes of evil); One while thou would tell us that which
was not asked nor desired of thee, That the Body in Scripture was sometimes
called Christ, and yet all the endeavors could not bring thee to say (that I
could hear) that, That Body was Christ; Here Is another of thy Quibbles: Is it
not a pretty one, that thou should tell us, that sometimes the Scripture
calls the Body (or the Humane Nature) Christ, and yet do not believe that it
is indeed what the Scripture calls it? The Word Christ is sometimes applied in
Scripture, to Christ's Body of Flesh and Blood, that was born of the Virgin
Mary, and yet thou will not, or dare not own that Body to be Christ, or
Christ that Body: Oh horrible Perversion! Oh fine Quibbler! Oh strange
Christian!

But for all thou would hide thy self by such subtle Expressions, thou art
easily discerned by any that will be any thing considerate, and not captivate
their understandings; Another time thou would tell us, That thou believe
Christ to be God over all, Blessed for ever, of the Seed of Abraham, etc. But
was this direct to the Question?

1 C^r. 14.^. So likewise you, exc^pt ye utter by the tongue words significant,
or eas^e to be und^^stood, how shall it be k^^wn wh^t is (...)? for ye shall
speak into the Air.
Then thou would ask them Questions, before thou had answered theirs which
was first proposed, which me thinks was not fair. Then thou would rise up and
promise to give a direct Answer to the Question, and yet gave none that I could
hear or understand to be plain; and so thou did two or three times, thy
Passion, or the Interest of thy Party so far transporting thee, that thou did
not mind thy Word: Then the Auditors themselves requested thee over and over
again to Answer. Do thou think this was like a Christian to run out about a
whole hour thus, not only wearying your Auditors, but frustrating their
Expectations, and manifesting either your own weakness, folly, or obstinacy and
unreasonableness, till many of them were constrained to cry out, Away, away
Quakers, or Answer.

Pray Sir deal faithfully and plainly in the thing, Why did thou not answer
it? Or could thou not answer it? Doubtless thou could, if thou had not
feared giving some advantage thereby to thy Opposites; was not this the thing?
Or was it because thou would keep any of thy own Friends still in the Dark
concerning this? Or would thou have thy Doctrine in this Particular remain a
deep Mystery and unintelligible still? If so, why did thou not deal honestly,
and tell us so plainly? Or are you not agreed amongst your selves about this?

What makes thee go about to use Words so subtly, that might seem to make us
think, thou believe one thing, when indeed thou know, that you, or many of
your Friends believe quite contrary?

Is this fair or honest dealing for thee to endeavor to blind our Eyes, or
deceive our Understanding, be we either Simple or Learned?

Or if perhaps thou art of a different mind from some of thy Friends in this
Particular, (as it is reported thou have brought them off from some ridiculous
Fancies) Why would thou not honestly tell us so? Or art thou ashamed to
declare freely and plainly the bottom and whole of the Doctrine thou hold,
in so high a Concern, as of Christ's Person?

You are Charged with, and thy and thy Friends Speeches and Writings give me to
understand, that you Quakers hold this Doctrine concerning the Christ of God.

1. That the And some of the Quakers quibble as much about the word Body, as
thou do about the word Christ, not being willing to own that Christ has any
other Body now then his Church, from Col. 1.24. or sometimes, then the Bodies
of the Saints, from Ephesians. 5.30. mistaken.
Body of Christ is not, nor was, the true Christ, but the Spirit in that Body.

2. That the Spirit in that Body, was none other but God the Father; and so the
Father is the Son, and the Son the Father in very deed, and only nomically
distinct, (and so, God the Christ of himself, and Christ the God of himself;
somewhat like as Muggleton does in this particular, if my memory fail me not).

3. That the True Christ is not a Person without us, and so was not visible to
Corporal eyes.

4. And so of necessity you must hold, that Christ died not, but only the Body
that he assumed for a time, or that was prepared for him, was laid down again.
For how is it possible for you to Believe really that Christ died, when you
hold that Christ is only God, and God is and ever was immortal, and so could
not die?

Now either thou and thy Friends do hold these Doctrines, or the contrary: if
either I or others have mistaken you herein, through your own Friends ill
expressing themselves; or if you have since changed your Opinion in this
particular, what hurt can there be, and why should thou be so nice, to inform
us truly, honestly, and plainly like a Christian? And if thou do hold them,
what is the Reason thou art unwilling to own it?

Therefore I request, I pray, I earnestly desire thee (if thou have any love
for the Truth, or for Men) to tell me, or the World, the plain truth herein; if
not, I must still conclude thou dealest not fair nor heartily, like a
reasonable Man or a Christian, or willing plainly to vindicate thy Religion.

6. In this, that when thou should have Replied, like a sober Disputant, to
the Answer that Jeremy Ives gave to show the invalidity and falsehood of thy
Distinction, instead thereof, thou evadest doing of it by Circumlocutions one
while, and by Addresses to the Auditors another: and sometimes by giving way to
another of thy Friends to begin a Discourse of some new Matter, or to raise
some new Question, before the former was ended, the better to shift off the
old, or bring it in Oblivion, confounding the Minds of your Auditors with other
Words; I cannot so well call this a Quibble, as a base old way of Evasion and
Shifting: Do you think that we do not know this to be no new Device? but sorry
I was to see you use it.

Truly Sir, I cannot but own Jer. Ives's Answer to your Distinction to be very
good and pertinent; and doubtless if you had not found it so too, you would
have Replied to it; but I found all your mouths stopped as to that.

His words as I remember were these, or to this effect, That then I, or any Man
might say, by the same Reason, that Will. Penn, or Geo. Whitehead was never
seen with Bodily or Carnal Eyes, because the Excellency and better part of
them, viz. their Souls was never seen, though their Bodies be seen, which is
not the Man. Now what an absurdity would this be? And yet is it not the same
that you said then concerning Christ's being seen and not seen, and thereby
over-shooting your self, obliged Geo. Whitehead to make a long Discourse to
bring you off as handsomely as he could from a Contradiction: But since you did
not detect the irrationality of this Answer and Similitude at the Meeting, I
should be glad to see it from you any-where else, in words that are rational
and intelligible.

7. In that, Thou first crydest out thy self, (as the Proverb is, stop Thief)
When thou had first made a great noise and stir, then thou appealedst to thy
Auditors for Justice, and to hear thy Answer; whereas thy Self and Friends were
then the most guilty and greatest Offenders in that kin^, in making a clamor
and pudder without giving us a direct Answer.

What need was there for thee to cry out to thy Auditors to hear thy Answer,
when we could hear none from thee, though we had stood waiting and gaping
well-nigh an hour for nothing else; I say, I cannot apprehend this to be fair
and candid Dealing, either with thy Opposites or Auditors, but rather a neat
trick of crying Whore first, as they say, at best but idle superfluous vain
words, which become not a Christian, such an one as thou professed thy self to
be.

Really Sir, I do admire that you should or would carry your selves so, as to
get a name of obstinate, unreasonable, and disorderly Men: I was told
beforehand that you would never Dispute either soberly or rationally, in any
due Order or Method; and notwithstanding you are still confident and ready to
appoint Disputes and Conferences, Yet when you come to it, you must have your
own Will for a Law, and your own Way imposed upon your Opponents, or else you
will not Dispute; So that you give too much occasion to Persons to think and
judge you a perverse Generation, obstinately confident, and confidently
obstinate, without Order or Rule, Rhyme or Reason, Wise only in your own
conceits, whom Solomon Characterises Fools, and so fit for no Man to Dispute
With, except some of Muggleton's Disciples, guilty of the same perverse and
unreasonable Humor with you, even to the making your selves Ridiculous, no
small Testimony whereof this last Meeting proved. Why may you impose on others,
and they not upon you?

8. Titus 3.2, 3. To speak evil of no man, to be no Brawlers, but gentle,
showing all meekness unto all men; For we our selves also were sometimes
foolish, disobedient, deceived, etc.
I will crave leave to mention one thing more at this present of my observing,
and that is thy so often using the gross word of Lying, and Forgery, and Liar and
Forger, especially in thy Books against Tho. Hicks, that it will hardly stand
with good Manners; such Language to be so common and frequent, me thinks suits
not well with a well-civilized Man, much less with a good Christian; and what
does it signify, To say it is a -- Lie, that is neither an Answer nor an
Argument; Therefore in love I should advise thee to leave off all such Billings
gate-Rhetorick, and gross Language, it being more fit for Scolds that are
Duckt, then to be used in Conferences or Writings amongst those that own
themselves Christians, at least so very frequently. But if that be one way of
Confutation, then it will be no hard thing to Confute all thy Writings.

It Is pity so Learned a Person as thy self should be so linkt to a Party, or
blinded with Passion to Eclipse the more noble part of thy Reason, by being
engaged with such a People, and having received their Principles, thereby
think thy self obliged now to maintain them, though therein thou make thy
self Pedantick.

Time and Experience may convince thee better, though I cannot hope nor expect
to do it, believing that when somewhat of the height of thy Fancy, and the heat
of thy Brain is spent and abated, thou will be calmer and wiser, and that is
all the Hurt I wish thee; In the interim I only desire thee to consider of
this, if not now, yet hereafter when thou art cool. For the heat of the Dispute
having so distempered the Humors in thee, and raised thy Spirit, I cannot
promise my self much present good success as to thee herein, though I have
hopes it may have some with Others; So I Rest,

Thy Friend in plainness, Thomas Thompson.

Postscript.
I Hinted in the fifth Particular in the Margent, That some of the Quakers
quibble as much about the Word [Body] as the Word [Christ], as appears by what
one of them told me, That the Church of Christ is his Body; and when I answered
him, That was only figuratively, or by way of Allusion, that as all the natural
Members compacted together and united to the Head, make a Natural Body; Romans
12.5.
So the Church being knit together by One Profession and Baptism as Members of
a Body, become united by Faith to Christ as their Head, and so the Church is by
way of similitude and metaphorically called the Body of Christ, but no
otherwise that I understood; What then, says the Quaker, Will thou make Christ
a Monster, and say he has two Bodies? or words to that effect. Now then after
the same manner of Reasoning and Quibbling, I may as well say Mr. Keith in the
Dispute, by his Distinction, made three Christ's, when he told us more than once,

That Christ was Most properly taken for the Godhead (or Divine Nature) Less
properly for the Manhood (or Humane Nature). And least properly of all for the
Carcass.


Now after this rate may not one say, That the Quaker says, There are three
Christ's in Scripture; A most proper Christ. And a less proper Christ. And a
Christ least proper.
And that with as much truth, as for them to affirm Christ would be a Monster
on the account above?

For what can be thought not only more distinct, but absolutely Different, Then
The Godhead, Eternal God, The Manhood, Living Man. A Carcass, a Dead Body.
Study it as long as ye will.

And further by this, Mr. Keith and thou must understand and mean, Either That
these Three are Three Christ's, in Three distinct Persons. Or that these Three
are but One Christ, in One distinct Person. Or that these Three are indeed No
Christ at all, in No distinct Person.
And when thou have plainly and honestly, declared this, then we shall easily
discern your Quibbling, or understand your Meaning better; in the mean time for
your condemning using Distinctions in others, and yet using them your selves,
you fall under the Apostles Sentence and Condemnation, Romans 2.1. Therefore thou
art inexcusable Oh Man, whosoever thou art that judge, for wherein thou
judge another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that judge do the same
things.

In the beginning of this Epistle Intimated to thee, the Gifts and the Power of
the Spirit indeed, that the Christians, the members of the true Church in the
Apostles days, were Gifted with, viz. Such as were visible and demonstrable to
others, and for the proof quoted several Scriptures, which I thought fit to
alledg, That thou might seriously Consider (and I leave it to the Consideration
of all sober and truly understanding men) When thou come to Condemn or
Correct the Baptist Church, or and Church, with design to set up thy own as the
true Church, Whether thou oughtst not to prove and Demonstrate thy Church to be
truer then their Church which thou Condemnest as false, or Unchristian, or
Antichristian; and that thou ought to pretend to and bring something for
Proof thereof, which they, nor no false Church can pretend to, and produce as
thou do? Is not this equitable, just and rational, agreeing to common
Justice and Equity, and according to the sound understanding of all men? Nay
and is it not what the true Christian Church had, and could and did on all
necessary occasions Demonstrate? Otherwise suppose it be granted, theirs to be
false, that will not prove thine to be true: Thine may be false also: But if
proving theirs alone to be mistaken or False, would prove another Church to be
true, the Romanists and all the Churches in the World might then as well by
this prove theirs respectively to be true, as you yours.

To make this yet more plain (it being worthy thine and every man's serious
thoughts) I will give thee an Instance or two, As for Example.

Here are great Contests and Disputes betwixt the Baptists and your Church: the
Baptists say we are true Christians, and you Quakers are not: The Quakers say
we are the true Christians, and our way is the true way, and you Baptists are
not: Now I and thousands of poor Souls besides, would willingly know which of
you two are undoubtedly in the Right, and which of you indeed are false and
pretenders only.

If any of thy Friends shall tell me, We are in the Truth, and therefore we are
the true Church; Thou know in thy Conscience, that is so far from an Answer,
that it is only a shameful begging of the Question: For the Baptists they
pretend as much that they are in the Truth, as thou do, and it is yet to be
decided betwixt you; so that that is still the Question. If thou say the
Light within me will testify to thy Way, I profess really, I have minded and
inquired of the Light within me what it says in that Particular, and it
testifies no such thing. If thou say it is Demonstrable by the Effects and
Fruits: very well, I have inquired into that also, and I find none among You,
but what may be found amongst the Baptists also, Except it be keeping on the
Hat, and saying Thou and Thee, etc. which also the Baptists, or any others, may
and can do if they please as well as you.

Or if thy Friends should tell me, That ye have the Spirit, and are in the
Power of God; so say the Baptists that they have: And wherein does the Power of
God, or the Spirit show it self more in you, than in them? If thou should say
it is Within, but does not Demonstrate it self Outwardly; Why then, do you
trouble the Minds of People! Can you not let it keep in its place in every one
where you say it is! and then thereby thou would acknowledge the Baptists to
be Externally as good Christians as your selves; and so may be Internally for
ought thou can see, if it cannot demonstrate it self outwardly. So that here
I profess in the fear of God, I see no real discriminating Character that
Demonstrates you to be either truer or better than they; if thou can show
any, I shall be glad to see it.

Another Instance is this (in a higher nature at your own doors also, viz. In
Mr. Maggleton and his Disciples: Why should thou or thy Friends be believed
more than Muggleton, or an Impostor?

THE QUAKERS AND THE Muggletonians Compared.
1. MVggleton says, He has received a Commission from Heaven; and so do the
Quakers that they have; and both much about the same time; but of the two I
think Muggleton's pretense was the first and ancienter.

2. Muggleton says he had it by Divine Revelation; and so do the Quakers that
they had it.

3. Muggleton says, He has (or is inspired by) the Spirit of God, and so do
the Quakers that they are.

4. Muggleton pretends to Infallibility, and so do the Quakers.

5. Muggleton says, He is one of the two Witnesses spoken of in the 11 th
Chapter of the Revelations, that God has given Power to Prophecy; and the
Quaker they say, They are the true Witnesses to the Light, and have received
Power to Preach the Everlasting G^spel, to Prophecy, etc. or to the same
effect.

6. Muggleton denies that the Father and Son are two distinct Persons, and so
do the Quakers.

7. Muggleton pretends to, and produces Scripture, and yet does not really own
it for the Rule of Faith and Practice; and so do the Quakers.

8. And all this Muggleton assert^ with the highest Confidence imaginable, as
great as it is possible for the Quakers to assert theirs.

9. Muggleton has several Disciples and Followers that Believe him, and are
Convinced of the Truth of wha^ he asserts, as a Seal of his Ministry* and so
have the Quakers several Followers that are Convinced and believe them; which
they say are a Seal o^ their Ministry.

10. And yet for all this, Muggleton Curses and Damns the Quakers, and that by
the Heavenly Power and Commision he pretends to have received* And the Quakers
Judge and Damn Muggleton, and that by the Light, the Heavenly Power and
Commission they pre^end is Revealed to them.

See the Book Entitled the Quaker^ Neck broken, writ by Muggleton, and
answered by G.F.

Now then Consider, Is it not highly necessary one should know which of these
two be the Impostors, or whether (since they both pretend with such Confidence,
and yet both Damn one another, and all others that Contradict them) both of
them may not be Impostors, for it is possible?

What can or do thou produce or pretend to more than Muggleton does; Surely
it will be a strange piece of Confidence for you to Claim Credence from People,
if you cannot produce something Considerable, beyond such (as your selves own
to be) a GRAND IMPOSTOR, and a DECEIVER.

Our Savior the True Christ said, John 5.31, and 36.
If I bear witness of my Self, my witness is not true: But I have greater
Witness than that of John, etc. The same Works that I do, bear witness of Me,
that the Father has sent Me.

If I do not the Works of my Father, John 10.37.
believe me not.

If I had not done among them the Works which none other Man did, 15.24.
they had not had Sin.

Ye Men of Israel, hear these words, Acts 2.22.
Jesus of Nazareth, a Man approved of God among you, by Miracles, and Wonders,
and Signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye your selves also
know.

Let all the House of Israel know assuredly, 36.
That God has made that Same Jesus, whom ye have Crucified, both Lord and
Christ.

Heb. 2.3, 4.
How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation, which at the first began
to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him, God
also bearing them Witness, both with Signs and Wonders, and with diverse
Miracles and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own Will?

Sir, Do thou think thy self more worthy of Credit, than Jesus Christ? Or
that your Ministers ought to be believed on easier terms, than Christ and his
Ministers were, you bringing to us New Doctrines and New Revelations? Some of
which yet are not such New Discoveries from Heaven manifest by the Light within
as pretended, being in truth but the old Fancies of Sabellius (manifested by
him without) revived and new vamp't, not heard of till long after Christ, and
then quickly exploded the Church about 1400 years ago, as any one that can read
may see in the Ecclesiastical Histories.

It may be thou may inquire what I am, that writes thus plainly to thee; thou
may answer thy self I am a Man, because I Speak or Write, and heard thee
Discourse the Language of Men; and so consequently thou must Judge me One that
has the Light within me.

If thou would know what I am not, I Will assure thee I am neither Baptist nor
Quaker, nor ever was, though I have had a love for both, and have still for
many amongst you, whom I hope are innocent as to these Mysteriou^ Subtilties
and Quibbles of your Leaders; But such Ridiculous doings as in th'aforesaid
Meeting does rather lessen than increase it.

If thou desire to know why I Expostulate with thee unknown; I answer, It Is
because I was one of thy abused Auditors, thou spending so much time to so
little purpose, to the hazard of Men's Lives; and because I think thou have need
of a Faithful Monitor; If I am mistaken therein, do not blame my Charity, nor
yet my plain dealing with thee in this Epistle.

If thou demandest why I print it, It Is because I would have others see it,
that they might receive benefit by it as well as thee: Prove. 27.5. and 15.32.
Remembering what Solomon says, Open Rebuke is better than secret Love.

And because I would have thee answer it in Print, that so Others may judge as
well as I, whether thou will deal any fairer, more soberly in plainness and
simplicity, and Godly sincerity with me, than thou have done with others.

If I have mistaken thee or any of thy Friends, I assure thee it is not
willingly; and if thou show me honestly wherein without Railing and ill
Language, I Will beg thy excuse and thank thee for it, I not pretending to
Infallibility, my Opinion being still, so long as we are Men in this condition,
Humanum est errare, notwithstanding what Spiritual-Pride, Self-Conceit, or
Melancholy- Fancies may suggest to distempered Brains, or weak Heads, whose
Affections may be stronger than their Reasons.

FINIS.
Mr. Smith,
I Have thought fit to write this to thee, to let thee know, That if thou art
willing to Print this Epistle thou may; if not, return it by this Bearer.
But if thou do Print it, I desire thee to take care, before thou publish any
of them, to send one to Mr. Pen, or to his Lodging, which I presume thou
know, or may easily know, for I do not know where it is.

I am (though unknown) Thy Friend Thomas Tompson.

THE SECOND PART OF THE QUAKERS QUIBBLES, Set forth In a Reply to a Quibbling
pretended Answer of G. Whiteheads, Entitled the Quakers Plainness etc.
WHEREIN, Many more of their Quibbles and Equivocations are manifested.

Also the Comparison betwixt the pretended Prophet Muggleton and the Quakers
Justified; to be True, Rational, and necessary: Whereunto is added an
Advertisement to Mr. W. Penn, George Whitehead, and the Quakers. TOUCHING Their
Jesuitical shifts, Evasions, and unparalled CONFIDENCE; Their grand Mystery
of directing the intention: with their Pope-like Power to Sanctify and
unsanctify words.

By the same indifferent Penn.

Job. 21.34. How then comfort ye me in vain, seeing in your answers there
remains falsehood.

LONDON, Printed for F. Smith at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhil near the
Royal Exchange, 1675.

THE CONTENTS,
THE Epistle to the Vnprejudiced Reader, demonstrating how G.W. has with his
own hands destroyed his own Cause, and plucked up by the Roots, the grand
Principles of the Quakers Religion. The Introduction being some Remarks on
G.W's Preface, and his Treatise in general, SECT. I. Wherein the Author clears
himself of self-contradiction and charges G.W. with several Self-contradictions
or Inconsistences and new Quibbles. SECT. II. Setting forth the Quakers
Quibbles, Equivocations and Confusions about JESUS CHRIST, his Manhood, his
humane Nature, his Person, his Body, and his Flesh. SECT. III. Demonstrating
the Quakers Quibbles about, and Ignorance of the True SPIRITS Evidence and
Demonstration, who deny the Gift of Tongues, and Signs, etc. As also of the
Quakers Miracles, and Pope JOAN. SECT. IV. Justifying the Comparison betwixt
Muggleton and the Quakers, to be both true, rational, honest and necessary.
SECT. V. Touching Sabellius and the Agreement of the Quakers Doctrine, with his
touching the three Persons, notwithstanding their Quibbling. An ADVERTISEMENT
to George Whitehead W. Penn and the Quakers, Touching, I. Their JESUITICAL
Shifts and Evasions in answering their Opponents Books. II. Their unparalled
Confidence in their Vindications of their grand Prophet G. Fox's Falsities, and
Nonsense. III. Their grand Mystery of DIRECTING the INTENTION in matter of
Blasphemy. IV. Their POPE-like Power to Sanctify and unsanctify words at their
Pleasure. The Quakers Character of the Quakers Quibbles. (...)
George Whitehead in his Quakers-Plainness,

P. 14. Speaking of certain true Gifts of the Spirit, which were
Spiritual-Gifts, and Evidence indeed, says thus, And what if God will not
bestow such Gifts and signs NOW, must we therefore be no Christians?

P. 71. Speaking of the Titles that the Quakers use to give to, and write on
some of their Books says thus, Such Titles therefore have been not STRICTLY,
but FIGURATIVELY placed upon some Books.

Quis non ridet? Qui non videt suo se jugulavit gladio.


Unprejudiced Readers,
IT is no small thing but well worthy of your serious taking notice, that G.W.
being by many reputed so close, so cunning and crafty a Man (as no doubt, but
that in some things he is) yet should be so far infatuated and over-sho^t
himself here; as to let fall from his Penn, and publish in Print to the World,
two such Sentences, the one by way of Interrogation, and the other of Position:
Which if duly weighed and applied absolutely destroys his own Cause, and
answers himself (in effect) in all he writes: Argumentum ad hominem.

The first by way of Interrogation, effectually enervates, and plucks up by the
very Roots the whole of the Quakers Religion.

1. For put the Case, the Dispute be about immediate Revelation from God, which
the Quakers assert as one of their grand Principles, and deny others to be true
Christians, that have it not: Why, G.W's words will as well serve for an Answer
against himself. What if God will not bestow such Gifts now, (as immediate
Revelation) must we therefore be no Christians?

2. So as to Divine Inspiration now immediately by the Spirit, as the Apostles
had. Why G. What if God will not bestow such gifts and signs now, must we
therefore be no Christians?

3. So as to being sent and Commissioned by God, and called by the Spirit to
Prophesy and Preach the Gospel as the Apostles indeed were in the Primitive
Church, and the Quakers now pretend to.

Why alas George! What if God will not bestow such Gifts and Signs now? Must we
therefore be no Christians?

4. So for the Light within, which the Quakers so much talk of and pretend to,
as their great Principle; What if God will not bestow such Gifts and Light now,
must we therefore be no Christians?

5. So for their Doctrine of Infallibility: What if God will not bestow such a
Gift now, must we therefore be no Christians?

6. So for their Doctrine and Pretense of the Gift of discerning of Spirits:
What if God will not bestow such a Gift now, Must we therefore be no Christians?

And thus you see, how by this Question he cuts the throat of all their own
Pretensions, and shakes the very foundation of his own and the Quakers Religion.

BUT can any be so ignorant as to think that God will inspire, call, send by
Commission, persons immediately, and give no such Gifts or Signs, that may
distinguish them from others, whereby we may certainly know they are so
inspired, called Commissioned, and sent; and not Pretenders only?

The second by way of Position, puts such an Answer into the Mouths of George
Whitehead's and the Quakers Opponents, that if they please to make use of it in
like manner as G.W. himself has done, He, nor all the Quakers in England, can
never be able either to conf^te or confound their Adversaries. For let W.P. or
George himself, object what they can against them, let them but have, and take
the like Liberty as G.W. himself ^ath here done, which they cannot refuse to
others, they using it themselves; without the greatest injustice and
unreasonableness (not to say impudence) and it will be impossible for the
Quakers to fix any thing upon them: let them but say (as why may they not as
well as the Quakers, if they have but so much confidence) such titles or words
are not strictly but figuratively placed in or on our Books And all is done. And
therefore here I think, I might on this ground of the Quakers (if they will
have that to be admitted) undertake to do Mr. Hicks that service Gratis, and
G.W. also, (though I never promised it to one or other, nor was desired by
either of them to do it) as to answer all G.W's second part of the Quakers
Plainness, or at least to enervate the chief sinews of it, only using of
George's own words, Mutatis Mutandis. As for example, how silly is it for thee
G.W. to take exceptions against the Title of his Book (and that was one of the
chiefest matters of the Charge at the first, till the Anabaptists had pretty
handsomely handled you and beat you off from that, by producing a Book or Books
of your own Friends, who writ after the same manner;) A DIALOGUE betwixt a
Christian and a Quaker: why cannot T. Hicks tell thee (like as thou thy self
art so silly in thy own case to tell him) that such a Title was not STRICTLY
but FIGURATIVELY placed on his Book? and then for all the rest of his words,
wherein W.P. and thou chargest him with Forging, and Forgeries, Slanders and
Lies; Thou have here taught him a short way to the wood, and so may Answer thee
if he please, all in few words. Such Titles, such words or sayings, are not
strictly, but figuratively placed and put down in his Dialogues: and thus
George himself has taken the pains to answer and confute himself, and has
with one blast of his mouth, blown away those dismal great charges of Lies and
Forgeries laid on his Adversaries. Oh! kind-natured Man! But I dare say it was
against his intention, only he could not tell how to clear his Friends
otherwise (from other Men's charge of Blasphemy) viz. for preferring their
pitiful Pamphlets to the Holy Scriptures; and so by shunning one Rock, he has
split himself on another.

I am of the Opinion that when T. Hicks comes to understand this, he will say
that he is as much beholden to G.W. for making his way so easy by this one
Sentence as by any advice twenty of his Friends could give him.

Now I would not have any Quaker mistake me, and say I deny all figures, for I
own that there are some Metaphors in the Scriptures and that some Parables are
therein written, which must necessarily be interpreted Metaphorically and
Figuratively; but this I deny, that therefore the whole Scripture is a Figure,
or all of it to be figuratively interpretted. This I only hint, on purpose to
prevent the Quakers mistake who when they please I find will wilfully mistake
others if they think they can make any advantage by it though never so base:
But this I say,

1. That the Quakers have excluded themselves from using of Figures, they
having so long and so often witnessed that all Figures were ended, and they
were come to the end of all Figures, and were come to Christ the Light, which
was the substance and the end of all Figures.

2. That if notwithstanding the Quakers (in contradiction to themselves) will
take the Liberty to make use of Figures, in their words and writings, and the
Interpretation of them, then they cannot (without gross injustice and impudent
partiality) deny to others the same liberty and the use of the same thing they
take themselves, and so the matter will hold good all along. The Apostle says,
Romans 14. and 22. Happy is he that condemns not himself, in that thing which
he allows.

And thus, Courteous Readers, you see, that G.W. has furnished such weapons
for his Adversary. That if he will but make use of them as he may, he must
mortally wound the Cause of G.W. and all the Quakers. And thus G.W's Discourse
in so many Pages may be effectually enervated in these few lines. Now this
being so, I cannot but foresee (though I pretend not to be any such Prophet as
the Quakers do) that the Quaker will wind and twine, kick and winch, flatter
and flutter to extricate himself out of this Net and Fetters which he has so
(ingeniously) caught and locked himself in. But I think now he has put himself
there, I shall be able to hold the Leviathan, and the more Rope I give him, the
less danger. (But still I intend to keep him fast).

I cannot but expect there will be great pulling and drawing here by the
Quakers to Wiredraw, Draw-in, or draw-back; these words again. Surely some
curious mincing and mangling we must expect about this good time; Now some
new-invented QUAKERS QUIRK or QUIBBLE might serve at a dead lift, to extenuate,
divide, distinguish, or extinguish it into Atoms. What can they find better
now than a Jesuitical equivocation? But if they served seven years at Rome for
it, yet it is a Question whether it will quit their cost; for G.W. knows (it
seems) it is a scornful fellow he has to deal withal; that will believe no
more of the Quakers pretenses than other men's, without BETTER PROOF. It Is ten
to one if the more they flutter, they do not more be-fetter themselves; they
cannot thus dance in in a Net, but some Body will see them, and they are as
easily seen through as they boast they can see through others.

G. Fox in the Epistle before G.W's Divin. of Christ, has these words [We
Charge thee, show us a verse in Scripture that speaks such Language, and where
one word may be put for another by Metalepsis? and so leave People in doubts
and Questions.]

Thou may see, Courteous Reader, the intent of this Epistle is not to praise
or commend the following Discourse to thee, let it speak for it self, and as
thou find, so Judge; but not without thoroughly considering of it, laying
aside all Partiality and private Interest to particular Sects; otherwise if
thou art biased either to the Quakers or Baptists, or any other, more than to
Reason and Truth it self, it will prove the more difficult for thee to Judge
aright, For the first thing a Man must do (according to wise Charon's advice)
that would find Wisdom and embrace the Truth, is to disingage himself and
discharge his understanding of all his former (and prejudicate) Opinions; yea,
though in themselves some of them may be true, and take no more of them up
again, than what he shall find sure evidence, good Authority, or sound Reason
for: and as to the rest, I have for many years thought it better either to
suspend ones judgment, or to acknowledge ones fallibility or Ignorance, till
better and certainer evidence presents; than vainly to dogmatize and proudly to
pretend a certain knowledge of things or principles where we have not so clear
and undoubted evidence, as if we should (so weakly) think, that our own fancies
and mere pretenses must indeed be or serve for reason and evidence to all
others, especially if it be well considered how strong and strange impression^
that one humor in Men's Bodies, viz. melancholy alone, will sometimes make in
peoples fancies and imaginations, which humor many think was very predominant
among the Quakers at their first coming up, and may be yet among some of them
though others of them are grown pretty Jolly, and will take a Cup of the
Creature as other Men may do in a Civil way to refresh their hearts:

Therefore to conclude, if any will Judge with sound Judgment they ought to lay
aside all Prejudicate Opinions they have received, either by Education or
otherwise; and so if you shall think good, you may please to read on, and I
shall subscribe,

Your true Friend, Thomas Thompson.

ERRATA.
READER,
THE Authors Distance not admitting him to attend the Press, there has
happened some small faults and omissions of Interlined words, the most material
of which he entreats thee in the first place to correct with a Pen. p. 3. l. 4.
dele no, l. 5. r. shall. p. 13. l. 33. r. give. p. 17. l. 6. r. however. p. 28.
l. 7. r. Quakers. p. 35. l. 1. f. may, r. should. p. 36. l. 18. r. as has
Essentially. p. 37. l. 26. r. some of themselves. p. 49. l. 31. ad 20th. p. 52.
l. 29. f. Sign, r. Signs. see p. 51. l. 6. f. Prophecy, r Miracles. p. 54. l.
10. r. pay andrad. p. 55. l. 30. r. Call. p. 60. l. 21. add 8th. p. 61. l. 18.
r this opposers. p. 64. l. 29. dele can. and add () p. 66. l. 10. add () p. 67.
l. 10. r. this (so called) p. 81. l. 21. r. Quakers in their conceits. p. 86.
l. 24. f. may be, r. not be. p. 87. l. 6. f. Plumbs, r. Plums. p. 93. l. 5. f.
this, r. this in it self.

The Second Part OF THE Quakers-Quibbles.
The Introduction containing some remarks on G.W's Preface and his Treatise in
General.
WHereas the Author of the Pamphlet (Geo. Whitehead) pretends to Answer an
Epistle directed to Will. Penn, styled, THE QUAKERS-QUIBBLES, and therein to
demonstrate the QUAKERS-PLAINNESS; I find he does nothing ^ess, but instead
thereof, has set forth many more QUIBBLES of his own, and the Quakers; as I
shall presently evince to you: So that if any Person should have doubted, when
only they saw them set forth in my Epistle; Surely they cannot now, that so
eminent a Quaker himself has published a New Edition of Quibbles and Quirks
too.

And whereas G.W. would appear a very plain meek and moderate Man, stiling
himself and the Quakers [US HIS [Gods] PEOPLE] and though he be a Quaker, yet
would make you believe (if you would be no wiser) he is a more impartial-Man to
his own Sect, than that indifferent Person, which is neither Baptist nor Quaker
(who writ the QUIBBLES): But now to use his own words, (which serve better
against him, than for him) let the serious Reader consider, and judge of this
man's Moderation and Ingenuity; wh^^ in his pretended Answer, instead of
impartially relating matters of Fact (for others to judge of) all along bears
upon the Baptists and me, with hard Language, Taunts, and Quibbles: comparing
(...) and them to Papists and Jesuits, as if we had served seven years at
Rome; calling us a Stingy Generation of Hypocrites and Apostates; styling my
Epistle Abusive* a very partial and scornful Pamphlet, accusing me with
Injustice, Wickedness, a dark Spirit, Canting, Quibbles, deceitful Dealing, and
Hypocritical Pretenses; absurd, unjust, partial, scornfully aggravated,
scandalous and wicked; savouring of mere Ignorance and Envy; Idle Quibbling
and envious Canting; Irreverent Quibbling, Socinian-like; Faithless Demands*
being in the Unbelief; A partial and self-contradictory Pen, smiting in the
dark, envious, and unjust; with falsehoods, traducing, and Canting-Language,
etc. By which one may perceive, the Man has learned to Cant, for in his Book
you have this Canting-Quibbles, Envious Canting, and Canting Language; and much
more of the like Nature.

How now Quakers! Is this your impartial plain Man? Is this one of your US
GOD'S PEOPLE? As though your Sect ALONE, had a Patent to be God's People; Or is
it not an Impropriation? Can you think he has well palliated-matters, either
with indifferency, moderation, or impartiality between us? or that such work
will make a Pacification or end the Controversy? No, No. Such deceitful
dealing, and Hypocritical pretenses, will stand you in no stead. And yet I must
think he has dealt kindly with me too, that he has not been pleased to afford
me some of his, and his friends Old Language of Conjurer, Sorcerer, Blasphemer,
Serpent, Sott, and thou Reprobate, thou Dragon, thou Antichrist, thou accursed,
thou Cain, thou dead Beast, thou art unredeemed from thy vain Conversation, and
so art not justified, (...), nor never shall be. Oh! thou dark Beast and
Conjurer; with much more which Ed. Buroughs did use in the compass of about
three Leaves; the like I never heard in my Life before, from one Man: And what
think you, should be the occasion of all this; no more but a Ministers sending
or proposing twenty Questions to him, whereas he and they have put hundreds and
hundreds of Questions to others. I am of the Opinion, that any sober Man which
shall read this, would hardly think it credible, but that he may see it in Ed.
Buroughs work pa. 29. and so on. And Reader, that thou may know that George
Whitehead himself has been no ill Proficient in this Quaking School of Quakers
Complements (and by the way note these are the men that are offended at using
the word Sir or Sirs) I will give you but a taste, only what you may find in a
leaf and two lines more, in one of his Books; I dare affirm you will say it is
proof enough and too much for a thousand leaves of any sober man's! The Book is
entitled ISHMAEL AND HIS MOTHER CAST OUT INTO THE WILDERNESS among the Wild
Beasts of the same Nature, in Answer to Mr. Townesend Minister in Norwich, set
forth by G. Whitehead and three other Quakers, which they say, was GIVEN FORTH
FROM THE SPIRIT OF THE LORD IN THEM; p. 11, 12. THOU PRIEST OF BAAL, FOR THAT
IS THY NAME; thy lies are made manifest: sham^ covers thy face; THOU FULL OF
ROTTENNESS* and most FILTHY Dreams, THOU BLIND SOT, SEE thy Confusion. They
that are not stark blind may see thy Rottenness and thy Foundation, to be in t^
m^re and dirt, and may see Thee to be a SENSLES^ NATURAL BRUIT-BEAST; Who with
thy li^ art MADE to be taken and DESTROYED. OH THOU BLASPHEMER, and Slanderer
of the Ju^ when will thou cease from thy LIES and BLASPHEMY -- Priest, to
conclude thy filthy rotten stuff, the say they that make not the Word of God
the Rule f^ their Actions, are led either by their own Fancies, or t^ Devils
Temptations, or both. Thou PRIEST TOWN^ END, art here laid open; and thou art
uncovered, and he^ thou art found to be a denier of the Word and Rule, an^
Foundation; and thou art led by thy Dreams, and Fa^cies, and thy Foundation is
in the Dust and THOU AR^ RESERVED IN EVERLASTING CHAINS UNDER DARKNESS, FOR
EVERLASTIN^ FIRE. And here thou in all these thy Lies, AR^ SHUTOUT FROM GOD,
and all the Children ^ God, among the DOGS and SORCERERS, and THE LAKE IS THY
PORTION, which is the portion ^ all Liars. THUS have we returned a FVLL Answer
unto thy senseless stuff, etc. Page 10. THO^ BLIND BEAST -- Thou that say
that the SCRIPTURES REVEAL GOD, THOU ART A LIAR.

These are his words, and much more (which I a^ weary of Transcribing) in two
Pages, and two line^ only; and the rest of the Book is much of the same sort:
And what do you think all this was for, that should be so high a Provocation?
Only, the Ministers saying that the Scripture was our Rule so long as we live
on Earth, or to that effect.

Now for G. Whitehead and his fellows, to entitle and Father on the HOLY GHOST,
such Beastly rotten stuff on SUCH AN OCCASION, and say, that this their railing
cursing and damning a man everlastingly, for such a cause, was given forth by
the SPIRIT OF GOD, as they audaciously do, how nigh it borders on BLASPHEMY
INDEED, I leave the serious Reader to Judge; and consider, whether these Fruits
do not more resemble those of the FLESH, than them of the RIGHT SPIRIT; do but
compare them with the notes the Apostle gives you, Gal. 5.19, etc.

Let the Quakers at other times make what fair pretenses they will, By their
Fruits you shall know them, and our Savior says, out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaks.

This was not done in haste, only on a sudden surprise of passion (which might
have been the more excusable) or upon the highest provocation; but upon such
deliberation as Men use to take in writing of Books, and upon a Consultation
and Approbation of three or four Quakers together, UPON NO OTHER OCCASION THAN
WHAT YOU HAVE HEARD, which seems so abominably gross, that I am doubtful while
I am writing, my Reader may suspect it; and some Quakers pretend, I have
wronged G. Whitehead, Wherefore that all doubtful persons may be satisfied that
I have not wronged them, it is my intention (if conveniently I can) to procure
the Bookseller to let G. Whitehead's Book be shown at the Shop for their
satisfaction. If this be their Spiritual Heavenly Doctrine, their immediate
Revelation, and infallible Inspiration, God preserve me from it, and from
spiritual pride; and keep me humble and little in my own eyes, still to confess
my fallibility, whilst it pleases him we should be in this state and
condition. Possibly one may find the worst of the Rabble, the very dregs and
wickedness o^ the World, INSPIRED with suchlike RAILING and damning language
upon slight occasions: But hardly any where else, that I know of, except among
the Quakers, or Muggletonians, who have used it so frequently as if they took
the greatest Pride in it: As though they think themselves set over all others
to to judge and damn them in a serious manner at their pleasure. If I should
believe such a cursing damning Spirit in the Quakers to be the Spirit of God,
then on the same ground, I must believe Muggleton's Spirit to be the Spirit of
God; for his is likewise a cursing damning Spirit, to such as oppose him. But
in this respect Muggletons spirit is the more charitable of the two, that he
curses only the Ministers, and such as pretend they have a Commission to be
teachers; But the people that hear them, he says, may be saved i^ they do not
personally oppose him or his Commission. Then judge, sober Reader, where you
think the^ malicious Spirit reigns most now? which is the best language, and
which sort of Complements is unfittest to be used among civil persons and sober
Christians? Oh! that men should strain at such a term as Sir, and yet can open
their black mouths in such foul terms, and Titles as you have heard.

Now if all this (which is my chief aim herein) will not bring them to
Repentance for, nor persuade them to leave off, such censuring and
hard-speeches, or sham^ them out of the so common and frequent use of it; to
those that see not ground sufficient to believe them, I do here let them know,
from henceforward, I shall nor tie my self up, from using such a Liberty of
Speech as I shall judge meet; however I Will endeavor to use as little as
conveniently I can (not being over-fond of it) I being still of opinion that to
tell a Man he lies, is no good Answer nor Argument, and that the frequent use
of it (as the Quakers do) becoms not a well-civiliz'd man overmuch

Where he begins to his unprejudiced-Reader, p. 3. his words are General, and
will serve the baptists turn, or another Profession as well as, if not better,
than his: They can write this against thee G.W. and thy Friends, viz. [If the
TRUTH could have been overcome by falsehood, or buried under reproaches, or
stopped with Popular Cla^ors, or undermined by the secret Combinations of its
Adversaries, or suppressed by Injustice or Partiality; I confess these implacable
and envious Men, who are chiefly concerned against us, would have had the day;
and their Iniquity been triumphant, and remained uncontrollable. But such their
Weapons and Engines, have not prevailed, nor ever shall effect the Enemies
Designs against God's Cause or Heritage; Had they been Men of Tender
Conscience, or respected the Honor of Religion more than Interest and Popular
fame, they would not have given us occasion for these public Contests,
neither by abetting a manifest Forger, nor by lying Pamphlets or false
Relations, that they so frequently bring forth, and cause to be spread against
us: But their hard Hearts, their fretful striving Spirits vent forth their
Envy, and declare their Spleen and i^^-will toward us, only that they want
Power to effect their Revenge upon us: to evince this, I could give diverse
Instances, that an Inveterate Persecuting Spirit has long been, and yet lives
and works in diverse of these Quakers, Teachers and Leaders.]

They can if they please, call you as you do them, a stingie Generation of
Hypocrites and Apostates, many of you having (as they say) been but Apostates
from their Church, and they can tell you, that many such of late do busy
themselves, and take Counsel together like malicious incendiaries against them:
But that God will bring their Counsel to naught, and scatter the proud in their
Imaginations; And that they have a secret sadness and sorrow of Spirit, because
of the great loss, declension, and Apostasy, that diverse even of these Quakers
are fallen into. Oh! the former Zeal, Religion, tenderness of Conscience, etc.
But now at one that is a Quaker himself has plainly told you, The old Serpent
is got up into you again, and you are run into the World, and the fashions and
delights thereof again, and that you are run into outward forms, and have lost
the Spirit and the power that once you enjoyed, and now you are become as
Worldly, Proud, and Covetous, as some others are. As to your Sufferings, if you
would have me guided by that merely, then I must abundantly prefer the Church
of England, and Reformed Churches Beyond Sea; Nay and the Churches in Poland,
to be in the Truth, before yours; for that all their Sufferings for Religion,
have been more and eminenter, than yours, in several respects: First, in the
extremity of the punishment and sufferings themselves; how many of the Church
of England (which you have so much condemned) have expired in the flames for
the defense, and Testimony of their Religion! how many strange, cruel tortures,
and bloody massacres, have they had, which I did not ever hear that you have
sufferred in such a degree! Though I could heartily, with all my Soul wish,
that you had not suffered so much, as heretofore you have done. 2. In respect
to the number of sufferers, how many thousands, and ten thousands, Butchered at
a time! you only had some few happened to dye in Prison, which yet I wish might
have been prevented. 3. In respect of duration and continuance for many years.
Yours but for a short time, and blessed be God that has inclined the heart of
our King to mercy. Thus you see clearly, that in this Proof or Evidence, the
reformed Churches beyond the Seas, and the Church of England does far exceed
you. As for W.P's sincere-heartedness, p. 5. I have not much to say for it;
it is likely, I may have somewhat to say against it if occasion be offered; but
as for his Zeal I am apt enough to believe, that it sometimes outruns his
knowledge. But why might not this sincere-hearted, and Zealous Man, W.P. Answer
this Epistle, it being particularly directed to him? could any person do it
better than one that was sincere-hearted, and Zealous too? If W.P. had Answered
it, and he indeed so sincere-hearted as G.W. pretends, I should have been glad
of it; for then he had saved me much of this labor which G.W. has put me to,
by reason of his unsincerity, and double-heartedness, in his pretended Answer;
Or did G.W. Answer it, that so he might set out the praise of W.P? Because it
was not so convenient for W.P. to commend himself in his own Person, as it was
hinted of Hickeringel. But it seems ( W.G. says) I thought m^^t (whether he
means the Man George, or the Light within, I know not,) to write that brief
Tract though it be not directed to me] Well George, since I could not have an
Answer from W.P. it seems I must be contented with such an Answer as thou will
give me. Or, do thou only intend to Practice here, as I observe thou did in
the late Dispute? first endeavor to throw off all by Circumlocutions and
Evasive words; and if that will not nor do, then W.P. to come in either openly,
or covertly to thy relief: We shall see whether this will be the sequel of thy
undertaking and Answer, and not that sincere hearted Man, to whom it was
directed; and so I perceive I am like but to have an insincere Answer.

[ We find the said Pamphlet subscribed with the Na^^ Thomas Thomson. Whether
this be the real Author's Name (says he) some question. But he does not tell us
who questioned it, though the Bookseller will tell you if you question him,
That G.VV. himself, and others of the Quakers have so much, and often
questioned him about it (as if they had had some power of the POPISH
INQUISITION) that he could not be quiet for them (they more than once gathering
a Multitude of People about his Shop) by their crying, BRING OUT THE MAN, BRING
OUT THE MAN TO US, LET US SEE HIS FACE. Why George, what would thou do with
him? I assure thee he has a Nose in his Face, as well as any Quaker has: What
if the Author, instead of The. Thomson had subscribed M.A. could not VV.P. have
joined N. (after VV.L's way of Addition) and then have read it thus, A MAN? But
since thy friends so MAGISTERIALLY commanded this poor Man (the Author of that
moderate Epistle) to be brought forth to them, it is happy for him that thou art
so ignorant (for all thy boasting Revelations) and that thy Light leaves thee
in so much darkness of the Author, that thou can not tell (when thou read
it,) whether it is the real Author's Name or no; for if he had been brought
forth at the QUAKERS MANDAMUS, he could not tell what QUAKERS SPIRITUAL-COURT,
might have been erected for him; neither could he have hoped to have faired
better there than in the POPISH INQUISITION, if you had but as much power: But
blessed be the Lord that as yet you have not. It appears the Author did not
only believe, but now experiments to be true what he wrote, viz. That he had
ground to question, whether your pretending to Inspiration, and immediate
Revelation, was not only a bare pretense, and self-confidence, without having
ANY MORE to show for it than OTHERS had? Otherwise, if what your great Prophet
Ed. Buroughs said, be true, tha^ the Spirit of Christ gives infallib^lity of
Judgment, and discerning into all cases and things; and that he had believed
you had had it, he could then never have imagined you should at all have
doubted, but have been infallibly assured, whether that Epistle was writ by the
person that subscribed it or not. But what if it happen that you are not
acquainted personally with the Author, are there not a thousand, and a
thousand, that you do not personally know? Is the Author or his Book ever the
worse or better for that? surely no.

Suppose, the Author be a private person, and is not ambitious to seek the
public applause of Men, what have thou to say to it? What if he dwells fifty
or sixty Miles from London, or that his occasions call him to Chester, Ireland,
or any other remote place? Must he come up to London of necessity to be gazed
upon by the Quakers? is this reasonable think you? What does my person signify
to the merit of the Cause? that is that which they ought to mind, if they were
ingenuously Honest, and not my person: Whatsoever that may be to the reputation
of an Opinion, I am sure it is nothing to the TRUTH of it, that such or such a
Man holds it; as one of the Church of England has rationally said (whom
doubtless the Quakers must acknowledge to be an indifferent person, and not
interessed in the late disputes); and therefore it seems very absurd, and
ridiculous in any Argument to meddle with that, which nothing concerns the
Question: Besides, no Cause stands in need of such mean and un^anly Artifices,
but such an one as is extremely baffled, yea desperate; and even then are they
(says he) the worst Arguments in the World to support it; for quick-sighted
men, will see through the Dust they endeavor to raise, and those that are
duller will be apt to suspect from their being so angry and waspish that they
have but a bad matter to manage. I wish the men that I have now to deal with,
were arrived to this degree of perfection, that they had so much ligh^ and
rationality, as even one of that Church (which they have condemned as being in
the dark) to their shame does see and declare.

But to return, at last it seems, George has hit on it when he tells you
[What-ever he be, he writes like a confident Controuler of W.P. and the
Quakers, and would seem to be some body] page 6th. Well said George, a thousand
to one else, but that he was some body, except he was all Spirit, and no Body,
which I am apt to think George himself is no, tas much as he pretends to the
Spirit. [ I! But he writes like a Confident Controuler of W.P. and the
Quakers.] And why is VV.P. such a Gent. that he may not be upon any Terms
controuled? Or the Quakers such ingrossers of confidence that none may use it
but themselves? What Is VV.P. a Pope or a Prince that he must not be controuled?
Oh! daring some Body that presumes so much. What, control VV.P. what control
the Quakers! And which is worst yet, I find Geo^ge is a little angry (for want
of other matter) that some of the Anabaptists have commended it for an
ingenuous piece] How! Is that possible? to be ingenuous and yet control VV.P.?
how can any Quaker admit of that? But says George (another of the most material
things he has to find fault withal) his Complement of SIR, and THOU SIR, and
THOU, as also, Mountebank Fool, etc. with much more such Language to VV.P.
looks but oddly; a strange way of Complementing (says G.)! from such a Person
as would be thought a Moderator.] Now Reader whether this be even or odd, I
have not reckoned up, but I think it was very oddly done of G.VV. to express
himself no evener; for here the Man is pleased to find fault wi^h the word
THOU, as well as thou Sir. When surely he forgets that one of his great
Prophets ( G.F. and others) thought the Quakers such Shuttle-Cocks as that they
had need of so large a a Battledoor for to learn them, HOW MAN THOU WOULD GOD, and
GOD THOU WOULD MAN. Oh pure Language! Is not this Spiritual-Doctrine think you?
Such as the Quakers are likely to be sent with, and Commissioned from Heaven
about? And yet now are these Quakers so faced about, that one may not thou
VV.P. without being worthy of Reproof; whether this be folly or Pride, I leave
others to enquire. But, says G. VV. [a strange way of Complementing!], viz.
Sir, and thou Sir, etc.] well, well, G. gives us hopes then that he will set up
a new and better way of Complementing? For here he does not deny Complements,
or the way of complementing, only gives you to understand that mine is a
strange way, and looks but oddly; but yet if G. had not forgot himself, it is
neither so odd nor strange but that the Apostles used it, Acts 14.14, and 15.
Now what will thou say that Paul and Barnabas used a strange way of
Complementing here? If so, when thou set's up School, and I find I have need to
learn, I Will come to thee; in the mean time I hope thou will hold me excused.
Yet I charge thee to Answer if thou can, whether the word SIR, is a
Complement, and if the Apostles did not use it? See Joh. 20.15. But see how
these Men can when they please, strain at Gnats, and swallow Camels. To say,
Sir, is dangerous, but to call a Man, Sott, and blind Beast, is with them
Religious, and pure Language. As for the Word Mountebank, I did not say VV.P.
was one; but I said and say again, that it is no new thing for a Mountebank or
Stage Player to have a grateful utterance, or fluent Tongue, etc. and so, that
being a natural or an acquired gift in VV.P. proves not him to be any more
immediately inspired, than it will so prove a Mountebank or Stage Player, and
do thou deny it if thou can. But whoever the Author be (G. has it over once
more) his work will further declare what dark spirit it came from, and that it
much resembles that of a Prejudiced angry ANABAPTIST, only disguised, etc.]
This surely should be G 's Masterpiece, though he does not know men's Bodies,
yet he knows their Spirits; yet I wonder how the Man should come acquainted
with dark Spirits, I thinking he had pretended to have no Converse but with
Spirits of Light. However, I can and do assure him, he is mistaken, and as
ignorant of one as he confesses himself of the other; I denying all prejudiced
angry Anabaptists Spirits, as much as he lawfully does or can do. As to this
pretended Answer in General, I do further observe that he craftily all along
takes me for a Baptist, or would jumble me with them whether I will or no
(though I did so ingenuously profess to VV.P. and the World in my Epistle, that
I was none, nay never was) which he does wilfully, that so he might in like
manner jumble his Answer, and so instead of Answering me, as at first he
pretended, he palpably and deceitfully evades it, and shuffles me off,
sometimes to, and sometimes with the Anabaptists; and this I and you must it
seems take for the Quakers plainness. Now how he could possibly think that I,
or if I, that all other understanding Readers, would be so fob'd off, I cannot
imagine: As Dark as I am, I am clear enough sighted to see that, and so some
think I had no need to make a Reply, because he has wrote almost nothing in
Answer to me, but talks to the Baptists: Oh poor shift! Oh pitiful shuffle!
seen through as it runs through thy Book with half an eye! Yet, however that G.
might have no occasion vainly to boast, of his Quibbling undertaking the
QUAKERS-QUIBBLES, I shall endeavor to enlighten him where he is wilfully
blind, and show him where his real Fallacy is instead of Pretended Plainness.
And to take that false Cover from him, and vindicate the baptists as to their
Innocence in that particular; and for further satisfaction to all People, I do
hereby declare once more, and affirm, as in the presence of God, That no
Baptist, or Anabaptist so called, did see that my Epistle to W.P. till after ^
had writ it; nor had I any of their Advice or Counsel for the writing of it, or
in the writing of it, as G. W. would maliciously and falsely insi^^ate to the
abuse of them and me, and the world besides* I say if this be the
Quakers-plainness, it is neither Christian-plainness nor honesty. But I being
one of the Auditors at the Meeting, and really observing, (as I told VV.P. in
my apprehension) a great deal of unfairness, subtilty, and Quibbling in the
words and carriage of VV.P. G. VV. and G. K. it came into my heart to signify
as much in an Epistle to VV.P. not out of Pride, Envy, or Malice, but in
Sobriety, and Love, (yet faithfully) to admonish him; and because I was plain
and downright with them, in telling them of their unreasonableness in some
particulars, and my desire of being informed in Truth and plainness (without
Railing or Quibbling) of their Doctrines in others, Oh how they Censure my
Epistle and me! But I value it not for that I am assured from a better and
higher Authority than theirs, THAT THE CURSE CAUSELESS SHALL NOT COME.

SECT. I. Wherein the Author clears himself of those self-Contradictions, that
G.W. charges him with; and the Answerer charged with several
self-Contradictions, or Inconsistencies.
IN His First Section he is pleased to accuse me, with these four things, p. 9.
1. Partiality, 2. Confusion, 3. Hypocrisy, 4. Envy.
But makes not good one of them: now if alone to accuse would make a Man
Guilty, who shall, nay who can be innocent? As to the First, G. VV. acquits me
himself, p. 14. where he says I have condemned the Baptists as well as them,
for wrangling and fighting in the Dark, etc. And yet if the Baptists promote
the said Epistle, as such an ingenious or excellent piece, it is more than I
desire of them; however, thereby they show more of Ingenuity, in Commending a
Piece, or owning it may be Ingenious, notwithstanding it reproves them, than
you are willing to show, because it reproves you; who are hardly got so far as
to be willing to own any thing for excellent, that reproves or condemns you: So
here is your own partiality demonstrated more than mine. As to the Second, of
Confusion and self-contradictions, He is so kind to nominate but four
Particulars; he might as well have pretended, there had been forty-four, for
who could hinder him? But since the number he finds is so small, I thank him
for easing me, for if he had made ten times as many, they might have been as
impertinent and false, and have put me to the more trouble to blow away the
dust he would raise, to hinder my Readers Eyesight.

I have heard say, That this man has such a rare Art of making Men contradict
themselves, that if one should but say a Groat at one time, and four pence at
another, he would go nigh to make his silly Disciples believe that the Man had
contradicted himself; and much after the same rate it fares with me, as I shall
now clear to you.

1. The first self-contradiction he charges me with, p. 11, is, Between my
commending W.P. for an excellent Rhetorician, and fluent Tongue, and so was
Cicero; and yet telling them, you give occasion to persons to think and judge
you a perverse Generation without Order or Rule, Rhyme, or Reason: says he, was
Cicero such an one then?

Reply. Does it follow, That if one says VV.P. be like Cicero in one thing,
that therefore he and all the Quakers are, (or that I said they are) like
Cicero in all things? no surely; let him show me such a word: Again in p. 6. I
spoke of a particular person, viz. VV.P. and a particular Act, and in p. 25. I
spoke of the Quakers carriage generally, and then did but say, you gave
occasion to persons to think and judge you so: I never had such high thoughts of
the Quakers in general, as to think them fit to be compared to Cicero in many
things, and where is now the Contradiction? Here nothing remains but one of the
Quakers-Quibbles. So this I note for the first Quibble, of his New Edition.

2. The second he Charges me with, p. 11. is for saying, If W.P. had this Gift
of a fluent Tongue and good Voice, merely by turning Quaker, it would more
convince me of the Truth of W.P 's. Christianity, than all the Arguments I
heard that day from him: and my confessing, that St. Paul says, Though I speak
with the Tongues of Men and Angels, and have not Charity, I am become as
sounding Brass or a tinkling Cymbal.

Reply. If there be any contradiction here, it must be in G.W's. Brain, and not
in my Words; For I do still say, That the Gift of Tongues immediately inspired
into those of the True Church, upon their becoming Christians, (which was the
Gift I spoke of p. 7. in express words, without acquiring it by Study) was a
certain Proof of Christianity, yea (and I do now say) so discriminating, that I
do not know, that ever we find in the whole Scripture, any others, but only
Christians, that were endued with that Gift by immediate Power and Inspiration
of the Holy Spirit. And accordingly the Apostle Peter took it for a sufficient
and undeniable sign of their Belief and Christianity, who had received this
Gift, upon his Preaching Christ Jesus to them, and thereupon commanded them to
be Baptized, Acts 10.44. etc. They which Believed, were astonished, as many as
came with PETER, because that on the GENTILES ALSO, was poured out the GIFT OF
THE HOLY GHOST, for they heard them SPEAK WITH TONGUES: Then Answered Peter,
CAN ANY MAN FORBID WATER, That these should not be Baptized, which have
received the HOLY GHOST AS WELL AS WE? And he commanded them to be Baptized in
the Name of the Lord. And do thou G. deny it (against this plain Testimony of
Scripture) or make the Apostle Paul to Contradict the Apostle Peter here, if
thy Conscience can serve thee. Therefore G. thou art so far from proving this a
Contradiction, that thou have committed a great mistake, in saying, That the
GIFT of Tongues is not a certain proof of Christianity: wherefore consider,
what thou have (it is possible, only) rashly and hastily asserted, and be not
ashamed to confess thy Error. But on the other hand, though I owned SUCH A GIFT
(as before mentioned, p. 7. of my Epistle) would be a good Proof to me, of
W.P's Christianity: Yet I do not, nor never did own, that Men speaking never so
MANY, nor so EXCELLENT Tongues by ACQUISITION AND STUDY, (much less that any of
W.P's. Plausible Orations or fine Harangues,) was a certain Proof of
Christianity, no, nor any Proof at all; and those were the fine words without
Charity I spoke of p. 9. and where is then the Contradiction? Surely in G. his
own Fancy; This being natural, mediate and acquired by Study, but the other
Spiritual, and a Gift immediate from God at an Instant. And although it is not
to be doubted, but that the Apostle Paul had learned to speak l^ke an Orator,
and more Tongues than one by Study, before his becoming a Christian, he being
brought up a Scholar; yet suppose it be granted, that he speaks (1 Cor. 13.1.)
of the Gift of Tongues he had immediately, he does not say any such thing, as
that it is no certain proof of Christianity to OTHERS; nay, so far from it,
that in Chap. 14. v. 22. he asserts, Tongues are for a sign to them that
Believe not, that is, chiefly to them; (and in the Quakers sense, such are we,
who do not believe them:) But that Charity which he speaks of, is a Proof of
his, or a man's SINCERITY BEFORE GOD, that he did make use and employ those
GIFTS really in LOVE TO GOD AND HIS CHURCH, for the Planting and edifying of
it, and not to any by, and base ends; which if he should, it would profit him
nothing v. 3. it would signify nothing to his own Salvation, though possibly
it might to others* much like to this you have it expressed again by the
Apostle in Chap. 9. v. 27. But I keep under my Body, and bring it into
subjection; lest that by any means, when I have PREACHED to OTHERS, I MY SELF
should be a CAST AWAY. So that TONGUES IMMEDIATELY inspired by the Holy Spirit
are a SIGN and PROOF to others of Christianity, wherever that Gift was or is
found; and CHARITY is a SIGN and PROOF of a man's sincerity before God, and of
his SINCERE LOVE TO GOD AND HIS BRETHREN in his Exercise of that GIFT OF
TONGUES, and other miraculous G^fts which God has given him for the planting
and edifying of his Church. But what is all this to W.P. who alas is so far from
having THAT CHARITY and SINCERITY in the Use and Exercise of those spiritual
Gifts of Tongues and Miracles, for the love and benefit of the Church, that HE
has NONE OF THOSE GIFTS TO USE OR EXERCISE AT ALL? And where is now the
contradiction? therefore I must note this for G.W's second Quibble.

The Apostles were to stay at Jerusalem till they were endued with power from
on high, viz. with tha^ Spirit whereby they were enabled to speak with Tongues,
being to Preach the Gospel to all Nations, and not only to those that
understood only the vulgar Tongue of the Jews. But W.P. or several of the
Quakers Prophets have been sent to Preach the Gospel (as they pretend) to
Peoples and Countries that did not understand their Language, particularly G.
Fox to America, (where he as I have heard) sent for at once, an Emperor and two
Kings) to Preach to the Indians in English, which they understood no^. Thus
have these Prophets rendered themselves more Barbarous than those Barbarians to
whom they Preached. Had not men the Light within them in the Apostles time as
much as now? If the Light within is now a sufficient evidence of the Truth of
the Gospel, why not then also? why should the Apostles, Peter and Paul have
need of the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost then? and the Apostles George
and William in these days have no need of them at all?

3. He charges this as a self-contradiction, For saying thou made thy self
the Author of a Lie, and shewedst thy self not only a Fool, but unjust; and yet
that I hint for W.P. to say, It is a Lie, is neither Answer nor Argument; and
therefore in Love I should advise him to leave off such Billinsgate Rhetoric.

Reply. Oh excellent Artist! He leaves out part of my words, and then tells me
I have contradicted my self: For these words [TO EXPRESS IT IN THY OWN
LANGUAGE] he deceitfully leaves out; which I did in my very writing the Epistle
think of, and put in on purpose to prevent any such mistake; for thereby I gave
W.P. plainly to understand, that it was his Language and none of mine; I did
express it in his Language and not my own; that so he might be the more
sensible of it.

Now George, call to mind thy own words, p. 68. But if you take this kind of
unfair Curtailing, which destroys the sense -- is this your Care and Justice?
would you be thus served, both to wrong me, and abuse the World or your Reader?
And see how out of thine own mouth thou have Condemned thy self, both as a
partial and self-contradictory Pen.

In his 3d. Sect. pa. 27, and 28. He is up with it again, as if the man was so
taken with talking about Lying, Forgery, etc. as that then only he was in his
natural Element; and rather than he would not make me to contradict my self
(because in the Margent I quoted the Apostles words, Titus 3.2, 3. Speak evil
of no Man, be no Brawlers,) he will adventure to make the Apostle contradict or
be inconsistext with himself on that ground; for in the very same Epistle Cap.
1.12. the Apostle says of the Cretians, That a Prophet of their own said, the
Cretians are always Liars, Evil Beasts, Slow Bellies; This w^tness is true.

And yet to go round again, p. 29. in vindication of W.P. he can tell you the
Scripture proves such Language, and cites Psalm. 52.3. etc.

Reply. what does the Scripture prove such Language for W.P. and not for
others? Or will thou blame others for what thou say the Scripture proves?
But where does the Scripture commend the so frequent use of it, as you make of
it? And where does the Scripture prove the use of it at all on such Occasions,
as many times you use it on? The Scripture commends Wine, and Timothy is
commanded to use a little with his Water, but yet using too much of it may be
vicious, and that was it I condemned in W.P. viz. using such language so
frequently, and instead of Arguments, or a better Answer to his Adversaries.
But that G.W. may take a liberty to say any thing, though never so palpably
false, appears in p. 29. where he says, [ That it seems it is the Language,
Liar, and Forger, etc. that I find faults with, and not the Application
thereof.]

Reply. That Is a mistake also, for that was the very thing I found fault with,
viz. the so very frequent using or applying it to your Adversaries; for thus
are my words, p. 25. I will crave leave to mention one thing more of my
observing; and that is, thy so often using the gross word of Lying and Forgery,
and Liar, and Forger; especially in thy Books against T.H. that it will hardly
stand with good manners; such Language to be SO COMMON and FREQUENT, methinks
suits not well, etc. Which words I should think still were civil and moderate
enough, if they were not prejudiced against all that is against them. Wherefore
this I note for G. W's. third Quibble: besides a double falsehood, first in
leaving out part of my words, and secondly, saying I did not find fault with
the Application of it which I did.

4. In the last place, he would make this a self-contradiction, viz. my saying,
PERHAPS W.P. i^ of a different mind from some of his friends, as it i^
reported, etc. And my speaking of W.P's being engaged with such a People, and
having received their Principles.

Reply. Is it possible that ever any man that is sober and in his Wits, could
have the Confidence to publish his own ignorance so, as to call that a
self-Contradiction, when he himself acknowledges, I say but PERHAPS, and
neither affirm nor deny any thing positively, and how then can this be a
contradiction? and yet my words run more full, if it can be, p. 20. Or IF
PERHAPS thou art of a different mind from some of thy friends in THIS
PARTICULAR, why would thou not honestly tell us so? And besides, if I had
laid it down positively (whereas you see I did it otherwise) yet would it not
have proved a Contradiction: For W.P. might have received the Quakers
Principles at one time, and yet afterward come to vary in some one particular,
though not in all: and I believe I can prove if there be occasion, that most of
the Quakers themselves, have changed, or varyed in some of their Principles or
Practices, from what they at first Practiced and gave forth. Now I do admire
with what face G.W. can Print such stuff as this, and I do speak seriously, I
cannot imagine how he can satisfy his Conscience in dealing so deceitfully, as
he must needs know he does here with me, if he knows any thing: Is it possible
that these words [IF PERHAPS] should be one Member of a Contradiction, as I
writ it? How can I possibly think, he can be a Man truly fearing God, that
makes no Conscience of dealing thus unfairly, and representing things so falsely
to his Reader by perverting the sense of my words? which I leave every Reader
to Judge of, whether this be the Quakers-plainness, detecting Fallacy, and not
rather, The Quakers Fallacy perverting plainness; and this therefore I note as
his fourth Quibble.

And now I hope G.W. will not say it is Forgery, or Slander, if they are
charged as he relates p. 77. That the Quakers endeavor to Render their
Adversaries as Ridiculous as they can, and to make their Friends believe they
do nothing but contradict themselves. But I have this further to say for my
self, That if I had indeed committed a mistake, or contradicted my self, I had
that to plead for my excuse, which G.W. commends me for, p. 44. that my opinion
is, H^manum est errare, and that would have born me out, I honestly and
ingeniously telling him and the World, That I pretended to no such
infallibillity, as the Quakers do.

And now having thus fully cleared my self, I shall try G.W. if he be not more
guilty of what he accuses me, viz. self-contradictions, or at least,
Inconsistences with himself, and whether this man that pretends to
Infallibility, be any more infallible than others, viz. 1. What G.W. says p.
19. That they cannot deviate from Scripture Language in their Creed, and they
must tell us, that until we bring them plain Scripture that says, the Human
Nature is the Christ, they must rather patiently bear our censure, etc. Now
this I humbly conceive to be inconsistent with what G.W. says, (but one page
before, viz. p. 18.) Have we not plainly and often confessed also, That the
Divine Nature or Word clothed with the most Holy manhood -- was and is the
Christ. For I do not find these words [cloathed with the most Holy Manhood] to
be Scripture Language, and yet G.W. p. 18. admits them in his Creed, neither do
they bring any plain Scripture that says so, and yet they believe it, or
confess it, if G.W. says true. 2. Where G.W. says p. 20. Whether Christ's Humane
Nature, be a part of Christ, as it was not a Question in Scripture Phrase or
Language, so it was as abruptly and sillily obtruded. And yet p. 22, 23, and
25. he proposes several Questions, which are not in Scripture Phrase or
Language, viz. [ I ask you if ANY MORE of Christ PROPERLY dyed than the Body?
Do you hold that his Soul, Spirit or Divinity dyed? and p. 44. And if he was
the Son of God, and so Christ before his Incarnation or assuming Flesh? And
many more too long to transcribe. 3. His blaming me p. 10. for comparing W.P.
to a Jesuit, and yet p. 31. He does the same by me, in these words [ Our
present opposers do argue as exactly like the Jesuits and Papists against the
Protestants, as if they had served seven years at Rome.

Reader, Judge you if G. has not now outdone me, and in that very thing for
which yet he accuses me. 4. His blaming me p. 10. for using hard Language and
gross Words, and yet all along his Pamphlet he uses the same Language or worse,
as p. 6, 7, etc. Dark Spirit, silly Drollery, a Stingy Generation of
Hypocrites, and Apostates, Wicked, Absurd and Unjust, Canting-Language, Envious
Canting, etc. Now is he not herein Inconsistent with himself, and accuses that
in another, which he allows in himself; and so condemns himself.

G.W. p. 13, 14. Comes to speak of the gift of Tongues immediately inspired,
which I told W.P. if he had, as the Primitive-Church had, would more convince
me, and confute the Baptists, than a hundred such days Disputing: But instead
of making an Answer to me, or showing that W.P. or so much as any one member of
his Church has such a gift, he falls to asking Questions of the Baptists. Is
this some of the Quakers plainness? of which you shall hear more in the third
Section, he having there reassumed the Answering it again.

G.W. p. 16. As for two of us speaking together at a time, and crying hear,
hear, says, that was to hear him that was to speak] Yea, but you cried out and
spoke much more than those two words, and the thing I found fault with, p. 11.
as disorderly, was W.P. speaking, when his Opponents were speaking, and thy and
his, or G. K's. sometimes making Discourses together, and at other times one
after another, and so confounding your Discourses on purpose to evade, instead
of disputing in a Regular way; and yet when another went to speak for Tho.
Hicks, Mr. Penn or his friends cried out, Hicks, Hicks, Hicks, it is him we
will hear; and this I charged upon W.P. as both disorderly, unfair, and
unreasonable; and let him get off of it, if he can, for thou say nothing to
bring him off.

Whereas, G.W. p. 16. says further, That it is supposed, that ^igh a 100 of
the Baptists would clamor together, and make a hideous noise, and Bawling, to
stop him that was about to speak.] It Is very probable this in some measure
might be true, but whether the number of nigh a hundred Baptists, that I cannot
say; And just so I do witness the Quakers did in their Turns, several of them
standing by me that owned themselves Quakers, and Bawled out after the same
manner: And can it be evil in the Baptists* and good in the Quakers? And
when as G.W. says, they did not shuffle or boggle at one single Question out of
fear, but because it was not W.P's place then to Answer Interrogations and
unscriptural-Questions] a poor shift indeed! Who shall be Judges of that
besides the Quakers? Thou G.W. art no proper Judge in it. The Question was
grounded on their Charge of your being no Christians, and occasioned by W.P' s
own absurd distinction, as I writ him. But then as to the matter of Fact, you
here grant, you did so far boggle, as to make some intermission before an
Answer was given.

And as to W.P. taking the words out of T.H's. mouth, or Answering before T.H.
made an end of his speech, W.P. saying, That then he owned he could not prove
them all, or to that effect.

G.VV. himself p. 17, 28. cannot but own the matter of Fact, it was so
palpable, only he would fain palliate it, by saying, that many apprehended T.H.
made a stop,] What then? G. (supposing that which yet others deny, that he made
any other stop, than what is usual to make a man's words intelligible) would
thou not give a Man Breath, or leave to fetch his Breath? do you not know that
the usual Practice amongst Disputants that will be either fair or honest is, to
ask, Have thou said? Or have you done? Is this all? And then truly to repeat
the Argument. But instead of all this, W.P. lay upon the Catch, and as it
happened, by his rashness Caught himself; and this I apprehended as unfair
dealing. And what G.W. says further, is yet worse, viz. p. 17. [That VV.P. did
not insist on the matter] For indeed he might well be ashamed to insist on it,
he finding he had been too nimble, and spoke that of T.H. which in the Event
proved false, viz. then he owns he cannot prove them all, or to that effect,
whereas T.H. owned no such thing. And suppose, that what you charged T.H. with
had been true, to wit, that he had abused you; will that excuse you for abusing
him? and must VV.P. say a thing of him that was VNTRVE, and then afterward
think it enough to say, he did not insist on it, and not honestly acknowledge
his mistake, Error or Falsehood? No surely, and thus you have a full Reply to
his first Section of Quibbles.

SECT. II. In Reply to his second Section, wherein is set forth the QUAKERS
QUIBBLES, EQUIVOCATIONS, and CONFUSIONS about the [Christ of God,] [his
Manhood,] [his Humane-Nature,] [his Person,] [his Body,] [and his Flesh.]
G.W. p. 18.
THat we have denied distinctions, is false; For true and reasonable ones we
deny not.]

1. Reply. If this man's own words, had not saved me the Labor, I would have
proved it, That they have denied Distinctions: For if he says true, And
reasonable ones they deny not, then certainly he grants, tha^ false and
irrational distinctions they do deny, and so would make my words good: (being
laid down indefinitely by me:) and thus this great man has done two things at
once, both made good what I said, and employed a contradiction to himself, when
he says it is false, that they have denied Distinctions, which if true, then
they have owned false or irrational ones, as well as true and reasonable ones;
but for further Proof, see G.W's own words, if you will believe him, quoted at
the end of this Section* And yet I shall put G.VV. to another task as hard as
this, by desiring him to assign by what Rule he knows those Distinctions are
true, and reasonable which he esteems or calls so.

For that distinction which VV.P. used, I said was absurd ( p. 16.) considering
and with respect to the Quakers Principles of the Christ; and G.W. lets that
alone, being so wise as to say nothing particularly to it, so as to clear it.
For if the body was not the Christ nor any essential part of Christ, (as the
Quakers own it was not) how could VV.P's distinction imply, as it should do, if
it answered the Objection rightly without Quibbling: THAT THE CHRIST WAS SEEN
WITH CARNAL EYES.

For if the person which they did see with their Bodily eyes was not the
Christ, I do not know how they should see the Light within, (as they call it,)
or the Deity with their bodily eyes, and so still then according to the Quakers
Doctrine, the Christ was never seen with Carnal (or Bodily) eyes, and VV.P's
Distinction deceitful only and absurd.

G.VV. p. 18. acknowledges, that they have plainly and often confessed, That the
DIVINE NATURE or Word, clothed with the MOST HOLY MANHOOD, and as having taken
Flesh of the Seed of Abraham, was and is the Christ: Yet, says he, we must own,
that if he was the Son of God, BEFORE he took Flesh, he was Christ. And in p.
19. he grants, he does not own the Humane Nature is the Christ, for want of
Plain Scripture that says so; and says some do conscientiously scruple it, and
pretend it is a deviating from Scripture Language, which they cannot do in
their Creed.]

2. Reply. What a pretty medly of Hypocrisy, Quibbling, and Confusion here is,
I will now show you.

For Hypocrisy, how palpable is it, in that they pretend they conscientiously
scruple owning in their Creed, THAT THE HUMANE NATURE IS THE CHRIST, because,
it is a Deviating from Scripture Language, and they pretend they find no plain
Scripture that says so; when yet at the same time, they tell you, they have
often confessed that the DIVINE NATURE, or Word as CLOTHED with the most HOLY
MANHOOD -- is and was the Christ; and this they do without scruple of
Conscience; And yet there is no plain Scripture that I know of, that says so,
yea, and it is a Deviating from Scripture Language; for where can they show me
this Language in Scripture [CLOATHED WITH THE HOLY MANHOOD,] or such a word
there as [MANHOOD,] and until they have done that, I must charge them with
HIPOCRISY, and their pretended Scruples to be nothing but pretenses and DECEIT.

3. As to their Quibbling, herein it plainly appears, that to blind the eyes of
the simple, they sometimes pretend as in p. 18. to own the Holy Manhood to be
Christ. And yet p. 19. Deny the Humane Nature to be Christ. By the first they
would seem as if they owned the Humane Nature to be Christ, when as indeed they
utterly deny it, as you may see by the Latter.

But since they own, the Divine Nature Clothed with the most Holy Manhood, and
as having taken Flesh of the Seed of Abraham, not only was, but is the Christ;
and yet say that the Light which is in every Man is the Christ, I considered
with my self, whether this most holy Manhood was in every Man, and the Manhood
was the Light in every Man, or a part of that Light? Taking these words in
their proper and common signification among us English Men, but so I could not
find it consistent with their Doctrine of the LIGHT WITHIN; and therefore would
it not appear a pretty Quibble, if some of them do mean by MANHOOD; not MAN
really, and essentially, but only a GARMENT, or a certain quality, as Power,
Fortitude, or Valor? So when they confess Christ Clothed with the most Holy
Manhood, they mean Christ was Clothed with the most Holy Power, Valor etc. or
Clothed with a Garment? Or else, if they deny this, they must confute their
other Principle of the Light within every Man being the Christ, or speak as
absurdly* if they say Christ's Manhood, as he is really and essentially Man, is
within every Man.

4. And then I further enquire of the Quakers; Whether the most Holy Manhood be
indeed the Christ or a real part of Christ? And whether the Flesh that Christ
took of the Seed of Abraham (since AS SUCH, G.VV. sometimes, viz. p. 18.
confesses he IS the Christ) be, or can be the Christ, the Light, or a part of
that Light, which at other times the Quakers say is in every Man? Or will they
say, that Christ's Flesh, which he took of the Seed of Abraham, is in every
Man, or is it another Christ? See their confusions and absurdities.

5. And when they say [before Christ took Flesh] let them deal plainly with us,
and tell us WHEN Christ FIRST took Flesh, and whether they do not Believe he
took Flesh BEFORE he was Conceived and Born of the Virgin Mary? and what plain
Scripture they have that says so?

And if Christ took Flesh BEFORE, whether it was Real Flesh, and what sort, and
whether h^s Flesh that was born of the Virgin Mary was the same, or had Christ
at the time of his Birth, two different sorts of Flesh, not Figuratively, but
Really and Properly so called? and all this will show their Confusion, and the
Ridiculousness of their Fancies; for by I. Pennington's Question p. 20. it
seems the Quakers do hold, that CHRIST's OWN FLESH, BLOOD AND BONES are of an
ETERNAL NATURE; And that the FLESH AND BLOOD which Christ took of OUR NATURE
was only OUR GARMENT, and so of an EARTHLY PERISHING NATURE. And thus would
make Christ's Flesh Blood and Bones to be GOD, for nothing can be of an ETERNAL
NATURE, but GOD. Monstrum Horrendum! hear O Heavens! and hearken O Earth! What
can be either Confusion or Equivocation in the World, (not to say worse of i^)
if this be not!

6thly. G.W. page 19. and in several other places, says, The Quakers must have
not only Plain Scripture, but Express Scripture, viz. Scripture that says so,
or else they cannot admit it into their Creed.

So in G.F. and J. Stubb's Epistle before G.W's Book, entitled The Divinity of
Christ: Their very first Words are, [Whether do the Scriptures speak of three
Persons in the Godhead -- in these express words? Let us see where it is
written, Come d^ not Shuffle, for we are resolved that the Scriptures shall
buffet you about, and that you shall be whipped abo^^ with the Rule: Give us
Plain Scripture for it without adding, or diminishing, or shuffling. We charge
you Presbyterians, to give us Printed Scriptures for these following Words, and
let us see in wha^ Chapter and verse they are Printed, viz. Concrete, Abstract,
Relative, etc. and so in this manner they ar^ giving Names to CHRIST and God,
besides the Rul^ of Scripture, etc. And so they run on with it, over and over
again.]

But now since they Impose, Command, and Charge others at this Rate, and not
only so, but also pretend that they cannot admit of any thing in their Creed,
but what they have plain and express Scripture that says so. How Reasonable
and Just is it to Charge them, and accordingly I do here Charge them, to
produce where it is written in Scripture in these express words, [The Divine
Nature, or Word Clothed with the most Holy Manhood, was and is the Christ,]
which they have admitted into their Creed: Let us see in what Chapter and Verse
it is Printed? So p. 24. The distinction of Father and Son, is Real in the
Divine Relation, known as Co-workers in the Order and Degrees:] Where Is Chap.
and Verse for these words?

Come G.W. Come (Quakers) show me, or any other, the Chapter and Verse, where
these words are written, [ viz. Manhood, entire Manhood, the most Holy Manhood,
Divine Relations, Co-workers in the Order and Degrees?] Or henceforward be
ashamed of your silly doings, and such ridiculous scribbling: I might think
W.P. may yet have so much Ingenuity left in him, as that he would be ashamed of
it when I consider his Learning; but that his undertaking to vindicate G.F. for
notorious falsehoods and nonsense (evident to men's Eyes and Senses and) against
his own senses and ocular demonstration, makes me much to doubt it; see Contr.
ended, p. 39. being sorry to see that so ingenuous a Man, as W.P. once was,
should Sacrifice his own Senses, Reason, Honor and Reputation, to keep up the
Credit of such a Man as G. F. who has written in many things so ridiculously
(that it is impossible for any Man to vindicate him, without making himself more
ridiculous) and by his Tautologies and incoherency a sober Man would take him
to be Crazed: witness his Professors Catechism, Testimony of the True Light,
and his Primmer for the Scholars and Doctors of Europe.

And which is yet more, G. I have this to add, That I do not think, Tho^, nor
all the Quakers in England, can bring Express Scripture for that which is your
First and Grand Principle of all; which you talk of so much above all, viz. The
Light of Christ within every Man, or Christ the Light within every Man] Now to
speak in G.F. and J. Stubb's words, I charge you (Qu^kers) Let us see where the
Scripture speaks thus, in these ^xpress words; Let us see where it is written,
come do not Shuffle, for we are resolved that the Scriptures shall buffet you
(Quakers) about, and that you shall be whipped about with the Rule. Give us
plain Scripture for it without shuffling, adding or diminishing: I charge you
(QUAKERS) to give us Printed Scriptures for all these foregoing words, and let
us see in what Chapter and Verse they are Printed:] and if they do that, I
think I may promise them to turn Quaker presently.

But besides this, their Hypocrisy herein is more gross; For to what end
(except to deceive) should they pretend that they cannot own this or that in
the^ Creed, if it be not expressed in plain Scripture, when they have so often,
and so plainly avowed, That the Scripture is not their Rule, either for Faith
or Pr^ctice? But now for the Protestants to call for plai^-Scripture is but
according to their Principle, because they own it for their Rule.

7. So again, p. 19. G.W. confesses that JESUS CHRIST is MAN: one at first view
might think h^ spoke well, so he does, if he did but mean truly wh^^ he speaks;
But that you may plainly see he does not and may see what kind of Man he means,
in the sam^ Page he gives you to understand, that it is such ^ Man as has not
HUMANE NATURE, and p. 24 such a Man as is not a Person without us: and wh^^
kind of Man think you must or can this be? Is no^ this a fine Quibble Judge you?
That this their Equivocation may appear more plain, even to the Capacit^ of the
Vulgar, consider, That when the Quaker^ say, that Jesus Christ is Man, They
must mea^ either That he is truly and substantially a Man, a created Body and
Soul, or that he is an Imaginary and Fictitious one only.

If the first, then they must own he is a distinct Person, and ha^h (as
essential to him) Humane Nature, For to be a Man, is to have the Nature of Man,
and every substantial Man is a distinct Person. But this they deny of Christ,
and therefore they do not mean he is such a Man. If the other, viz. an
Imaginary or Fictitious Man, let them say so if they dare, and consider how
Blasphemous it would be, and what horrible Consequences would follow thereon:
And therefore to go round again (let the Quakers equivocate as much as they
will) they must hold that indeed Christ is not Man, or else fall into the
BLASPHEMY or Absurdity abovementioned. In plainness G. is Jesus Christ a Man
and not a Person? Seeing thou do define a Person to be a MAN, etc. In the
Introduction of thy Book entitled the Divinity of Christ. What meanest thou by
the word MAN? A Created Body and Soul, or some uncreated thing? Now G. use
plainness and honesty in this particular if there be any in thee: or whoever he
be that undertakes to Answer for thee. Generally all Men in the World, that use
the Term Man as properly an English word, understand by it, a PERSON, or a
RATIONAL CREATURE distinct from all other Men, one that is in some certain
Place, and cannot be in distinct Places at the same time, that has in respect
of his Body, Dimensions of Length Breadth, and Depth, that is visible, one that
began to exist at a certain time, one that has a head and a body so closely
united, that whenever they two are severed, the Man ceases to be; But the
Quakers, they seem to mean quite another thing by the term MAN: sometimes one
thing, and sometimes another; I believe themselves know not well what. By the
term MAN, Do you not mean one that is not a Person or Rational Creature, but
Flesh, Blood, and Bones of an eternal Nature. (J.P's. Qu. p. 20.) an infinite
Soul? One whose Flesh is, and he is in a multitude of Men and Women in distant
Countries at the same instant of time? Mist. p. 68. Christ ascend p. 18. One
that is not in Heaven, as a place to live in remote from Men that live on
Earth? Spir. of Truth p. 12. Christ ascen. p. 21. one that is not VISIBLE?
Christ ascend. p. 37. one that beg^n not to be, for he was eternal? one that is
as far remote from his Body, as Heaven is from Earth, and yet lives? See Quak.
Plainness, p. 23. In fine it seems Jesus Christ is a Man whose Glorious Body in
Heaven is not a Humane [or Man's] Body, see the same p. 23. and does not the
Quaker use now admirable Plainness in his Confession of Faith in
Scripture Language? Does Europe or America afford such Equivocation?

8. G.W. p. 19. says further, That Christ's Body of Flesh and Blood, that was
born of the VIRGIN-MARY, and that suffered, was Crucified, Dye++d, and Rose
again the third day, is called the Body of Jesus. But yet G. thou will not say,
nor own, That that Living Body is Jesus; or that BODY is so much as a part of
Jesus. Consider this, serious Reader, here is still the Quakers Quibble, and a
clear proof of the Quakers Mystery, whereby their poor unwary Hearers are
deluded and deceived.

So they will say, the seventh day of the week called Saturday, and the
eleventh Month called January, and the Scripture called the word of God, and
the Writing or Declaration of Matthew called the Gospel of St. Matthew, and
abundance the like.

Which yet they do not one whit the more Believe it for Truth, for saying it is
called so; But Believe quite the Contrary, as they believe the Scripture is not
the Word of God, though it may be called so: so they can say (by their
Equivocation) The Body that was born of the Virgin Mary, is called in
Scripture, the Body of Jesus, and yet will not own that Body, either to be a
part of Jesus; or do believe it to be that Jesus which the Scripture calls it.
And here I appeal to all sober and understanding People in England to Judge, if
ever they heard such Quibbling before (as the Quakers here use) about CHRIST
JESUS: and this they are constrained ^o do, To maintain that first Principle
they have took up, The Light within; for if they should own that living Body of
Flesh and Blood that was born of the Virgin Mary and that was Crucified and
dyed, to be JESUS and the CHRIST, then they foresee, they should confound, that
their Beloved Principle. The Light within every Man. For how can that Man or
Body of Flesh Bone, and Blood, that was born of the Virgin Mary, be in every
Man; and also upon this Ground, They deny that Person, that Man that was born
of the Virgin Mary to be the Christ; Because they cannot tell how to make tha^
very Person and Man to be in every Man, and in all Persons, and so rather than
forego their Principle of the Light within, They will adventure to fashion and
form to themselves, a new Jesus and a New Christ, and have hid it and kept it
as much as they could in a Mystery, and in Dark sayings, as long as they might,
till at last being pressed by many Contests and Disputes they have been forced
to discover it.

And now, Dear Friends and Countrymen, give me leave to tell you that though I
do not remember that I ever positively said, That the Quakers were no
Christians, yet I have much and often doubted in my self, and do still, whether
they can (according to their Principles) be true Christians: since they do not
own nor believe that Man, nor that living Body that was born of the Virgin Mary
to be the Jesus and the Christ, and so do not believe, that the Christ inde^d
dyed, and if Christ did not indeed Die, he did not indeed rise again. Nay though
they own that the Scriptures call that living Body, Christ and Jesus, yet they
give us at the same time to understand, They do not Believe nor own it to be
what they themselves say the Scripture calls it, and so set up another Christ,
than what the Scripture call's Christ, and declares to us to be the true
Christ, and Messiah of the World. And for this Reason, and out of this
Godly-Jealousy and Fear, (and not out of Envy and wicked malic^ as they
pretend) it is, that I cannot own them, but have thus opposed them: And let all
People consider it, weigh it well, and take heed; It is not for nothing, or yet
a sl^ght matter only, that I set forth their Quibbles; But for their setting up
another Christ, or another kind of Christ, than the Scripture holds forth and
calls the Christ, to wit, that Person, Man, or living Body, that was born of
the Virgin MARY: and what can be of a higher Nature or more dangerous in the
Christian Religion, than for any to set up any other Christ, or any other
Person or thing for Christ?

9. What pla^ner words is it possible to invent, that are intelligible to
Mankind, than are used about this matter in Scripture, if Men would not be
wilfully Blind as to give you an Instance or two, Acts 2.22, 23. Ye Men of
Israel 'hear these words, Jesus of Nazareth, A Man, approved of God among you,
by Miracles and Wonders and Signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as
ye your selves also know, HIM, being delivered by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledg of God, ye have taken and by wicked hands have Crucified and
Slain, v. 36. Let all the House of Israel know assuredly, That God has made
that same Jesus whom ye have Crucified both LORD and Christ observe the Apostle
says, that same Jesus, viz. Jesus of Nazareth A Man, God has made both Lord
and Christ, and if that same, then no other: and again, that same Jesus, whom
the Men of Israel had taken, and by wicked hands did Crucify and Slay! That
same Jesus, (and not any thing else) has God made both Lord and Christ: Now,
it was not the Light within, that the Men of Israel took, and by wicked hands
Crucified, Hanged on a Tree and Slew; But it was that Man, that Person, that
Body that was born of the Virgin Mary, Jesus of Nazareth, that the Jews took,
and by wicked hands Crucified and Hanged on a Tree. So it appears as plain (as
any thing in the World can be by words made Plain) that that same Man, that
Body, or that Person which was born of the Virgin Mary, Jesus of Nazareth is he
which God has made both LORD and CHRIST and not the Light within every Man,
nor any other thing.

Luke 24.39. Behold my Hands and my Feet, that it is I my self; handle me and
see, For a Spirit has not Flesh and Bones, as ye see me have, and when he had
thus spoken, he showed them his hands and his feet. John 20.24, 25. But Thomas
one of the twelve called Dydimus was not with them when Jesus came, The other
Disciples therefore said unto him, we have seen the Lord: but he said unto
them, Except I shall see in his hands the Print of the Nails, and put my finger
into the Print of the Nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not
believe. v. 26, 27, 28. And after eight days, again his Disciples were within,
and Thomas with them: Then came Jesus, the door being shut, and stood in the
midst, and said, Peace be unto you. Then says he to Thomas, reach hither thy
finger, and behold my hands, and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my
side, and be not faithless, but believing. And Thomas answered, and said unto
him, my Lord, and my God, v. 31. But these are written that ye might believe
that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing ye might have Life
through his Name. What Jesus? even That Jesus, that same Person that was not
within but without Thomas, who had the Print of material nails in his hands,
that Thomas put his finger in, is the Christ the Son of God.

Now, G.W. Answer me in plainness once, if thou will be so honest, Was this
Jesus (that the Apostle says here, we are to believe is the Christ the Son of
God,) without Thomas, then when he put his finger into the Print of the Nails?
Or was it only Acted within Thomas his Body? And has the Light within (which
thou ownest for thy Jesus) any Print of Material Nails or hands, properly so
called, of flesh and bone, as this Jesus had which is the true CHRIST? see also
Math, 1.1. with verse 16* and Heb. 2.14.

10. G.W. p. 20. takes notice of Jer. Ives great Question, as he calls it,
Whether Christ's Humane Nature was a part of Christ? But he gives no Answer to
it, but gives it the go-by, by saying it was not a Question in Scripture-
Phrase: But that could be no good Answer from thee, because thou thy self do,
and have asked many Questions which are not in Scripture Phrase: and besides,
that can be but a silly pretense no better than a Shuffle from thee, because
thou do not own the Scripture, or Scripture Phrase to be the Rule of thy
Faith: Therefore Quibble no more about it, but Answer it.

11. Then p. 21, 22, 23. G.W. instead of Answering my Epistle, as he pretends
in his Title, put^ many new Questions to the Baptists, and prays them to agree
upon a consistent Creed amongst themselves, and so slily gives me the go-by, to
which I need only say this, That I am of the Opinion, it may be ^^ easy for the
Baptists to form a Creed wherein they are all agreed, as it is for the Quakers
to Form a Creed wherein they and their writings do all agree: Let the Quakers
do this themselves which they require of others.

Further, I dare adventure to say, that let a Baptist or some other Person,
give but three Texts of Scripture to be interpreted, or put but three Questions
to six Quakers, all apart, and let them answer apart, and that there shall not
three of the six Quakers alike, give the same Answer or Interpretation thereto,
either in form or substance, notwithstanding their pretended inspiration and
unity.

12. Page 23. G.W. says, That though the mere Body of Jesus, was not the ENTIRE
Christ, yet the Name Christ is sometimes given to the Body, though not so
properly, as to the whole Man Christ.]

Reply. But thou-wilt not own that the mere Body was part of Christ; so far art
thou from owning it to be the entire Christ, and though they acknowledge the
Scripture calls the Body Christ, yet they are so obstinate in their own
conceits, that they will not believe it is what the Scripture calls it, but
thus will be wise above what is written. Oh deceit! you think the Body so far
from being the entire Christ, that you will not allow it to be any part of him,
but such as a Garment is that is none at all.

13. Page 23, 24. G.W. says, That the Distinction of Father and Son, is not
only Nominal, but Real, etc.] How then does G.F. say, Mist. p. 142. Christ is
not distinct from the Father, and that they are all one, p. 99? will G.W. and
the Quakers Condemn those sayings and disclaim them? till then they are
Quibblers and Equivocators. G.W. p. 24. and also known as Co-workers in the
order and degrees of Manifestation and discovery. And yet G.W. himself when he
writ against a Baptist, for saying [now as he was God, he was Co-Creator with
the Father] Then he condemned it as nonsense, saying, What nonsense and
UNSCRIPTURAL- LANGUAGE, is this, to tell of God being Co-CREATOR with the
Father, or that God had Glory with God? DOES NOT THIS IMPLY TWO GODS, AND THAT
GOD HAD A FATHER? says G.W. The Light and Life, etc. p. 47.] Oh excellent
George! what difference between Co-Workers, and Co-Creators? Do ye not most
frequently and importunely charge your Socinians with the horrible Crime of
denying that Jesus Christ made or created the World? And yet is there any
Socinian, nay Jew, or Turk, that will deny that one God (whom we call the
Father of Jesus Christ) made the World? And thou say it is nonsense to tell
of God [or Christ as God] being Co-Creator with the Father: oh disingenuous
Man, that endeavors to get repute to your selves by Reviling others with that
very thing whereof your selves are guilty! And the ground of your Reproach is,
that you can equivocate, and they cannot.

14. G.W. p. 24. says, That the Distinction of Father and Son is not only
nominal but real.

Now then let him if he can answer and confute his sincere-hearted and Zealous
Brother W.P. in his Sandy-Foundation, p. 13.

Mr. Pen's Argument is this, Since the Father is God, the Son is God, and the
Spirit is God (which their Opinion necessitates them to confess) THEN UNLESS
the Father, Son, and Spirit ARE THREE DISTINCT NOTHINGS, they must be THREE
DISTINCT SUBSTANCES, and Consequently THREE DISTINCT GODS.] Now G. if this
Distinction of thine, does not make them DISTINCT SUBSTANCES, thy Brother Penn
tells thee they are DISTINCT NOTHINGS. Reconcile this if thou can, and agree
amongst your selves upon a Creed before you go about to Correct others.

15. G.W. p. 24. further says, We own that the Father is in the Son, and the
Son is in the Father, as also that the SON IS THE MIGHTY GOD, THE EVERLASTING
FATHER, the Prince of Peace. But they do not own any such separation between
God and Christ as these words [the Christ of himself and the God of himself] do
imply Socinian-like] For this, let his Brother W.P. Socinian-like Answer him,
and see what he makes of such Doctrine as G.W. here teaches, and let G. W.
refute his Brother Penn's Argument. Sandy Foundation p. 14. he proves the
Ridiculousness and irrationality of such an Opinion, by this Argument, viz. If
that the ONLY God is the FATHER, and CHRIST be that ONLY God, then is CHRIST
the FATHER: So if that ONE GOD be the SON: and the Spirit that one God, then is
the Spirit the SON, and so round, nor is it possible to stop says he. And this
he brings many Arguments to prove to be both an irrational and a Ridiculous
Opinion, and yet now is this the very Opinion of G.W. and other Quakers, viz.
That Christ, or the Son, is the Father, as you see G. W's words above do
confess. Now let us know which of these two Brethren the Quakers will own to be
wrong: For according to these words it is impossible they can be both right:
and let us know in Plainness (if there be any such thing now left among the
Quakers) whether W.P. will own his own Argument, or whether thou G.W. wilt
disclaim him or it, or thy own word^; For they are as contrary as Yea, and Nay.

16. G.W. p. 24. Confesses, that the Title of Person without us, is
un-scriptural, and too low to give to the CHRIST [or the Son], and yet his
Brother W.P. in his Sandy Foundation p. 15. could give the Title of Person to
Christ or the Son: these are his words, Who (speaking of the SON) so many
hundred years since in PERSON testified the Virtue of it. Now then G. thou must
say Christ is a Person within us, or else disclaim and disown W.P. for giving
such an unscriptual and too low a Title, to Christ the Son; if not, do thou
not dissemble? and did not W.P. speak of a Person without us, as his words [who
so many hundred years since testified] do evince plainly enough?

17. The Quakers being charged, that according to their Principle, They cannot
and do not Believe that CHRIST INDEED DYED; G. W. does not deny it, but asks
the Baptists, If any more of Christ properly dyed than the Body? Do you hold
that his Soul Spirit or Divinity dyed? If not, the Charge is foolish and silly.

Reply. No G. the Charge is not foolish nor silly; for as I understand the
Baptists hold that the living Body that was born of the Virgin Mary is Christ,
and that that dyed, and so believe that Christ indeed dyed: But you Quakers not
Believing so, if you Believe that indeed the Christ dyed, you must Believe his
Spirit or his Divinity Dyed, for that only you hold is THE CHRIST, and then are
you like Reeve and Muggleton who have Blasphemously said that the Godhead d^^d,
and thus is thy Charge turned upon thy own head; and thy Quest. proves foolish
and silly, For how can thou ask if any more of Christ than the Body dyed,
when thou do not Believe the Body to be Christ, or any real or essential PART
OF CHRIST: Thus whilst you own the Body not to be the Christ, nor a real part
of the Christ, you must own that not the Christ nor any real part of Christ
dyed; since you agree, only the Body dyed, and the Body of Jesus was not the
Christ, say you, nor any essential real part of Christ, that you will own.

18. As to Jer. Ives Answer to their Distinction, it seemed to me pertinent
enough to manifest their fallacy and folly; and so it does still for ought G.W.
has told me as yet to the contrary; and I cannot without offering violence to
my understanding be so much taken with G's Reply which is on this wise p. 26.
It Is not improbable, that if we had made such a comparison, you Baptists would
have cried out, oh Blasphemy!

This is an improbable or an improper Reply indeed; It Is more probable W.P.
could have told G.W. (if he did not know it) that he had learnt in the Schools,
that may-bee's, can be answered with may not bee's, and so this might be
sufficient for that: But,

1. What if the Baptists would not in such a case, have Cried out, Oh
Blasphemy! where is thy Answer then George?

2. Or, what if the Baptists should, and the Quakers should not, in such a
Case, Cry out oh Blasphemy! as thou do not affirm it is Blasphemy; where is
thy Answer then George?

3. Or, what if there be no such comparison made as thou pretendest is employed,
(as sure I am there is not) viz the name of Christ, to be no more excellent
than the name of George or William? Where Is then thy Answer George? And where is
now thy oh Ignorance in the Abstract? one may well enough see it in the
Concrete, viz. in G.W. when thou set down thy Reply, thou, immediately says
oh Ignorance in the Abstract! now, if thou meanest (as it may be so taken) that
the words of thy Reply is such, I shall not trouble my self to say much against
it; But if thou speak it of me or the Baptists, by thy using that word
Abstract, thou show thy own Ignorance and want of Learning (not well
understanding the word Abstract,) which against the next time thou writest for
W.P he may inform thee, and teach thee so much Logic; Ignorance in the
Abstract Qualitatem notat nulli subjecto inhaerentem, and so not in me; Ask thy
Brother P. else: Besides, how thou will Answer for this word Abstract before
your Prophet G.F. I know not, for in the Epistle before one of thy own Books (
Divin. of Christ:) he condemns that word, as well as others, as coming from our
old Logical and Philosophical Books, and yet behold here a Quaker uses it, oh
what self-contradicting and dissembling Men are they!

And as for the excellency thou now pretendest to own, in the name of Christ,
one may see it to be but Hypocrisy used for evasion-sake only, by what your
friend John Crook says of the name Christ and Jesus. Principles of Truth p. 12.

[Without this Virtue, [viz. The Arm of God] CHRIST and JESUS are but empty
names. We believe and know, by his Grace in our hearts, that as his name JESUS
without Virtue and Power, is but an empty word, etc p. 11. But the name which
saves, is the power and arm of God, that brings Salvation from Sin, etc.] Pray
how much more excellent does the Quaker here make the name JESUS, than the name
GEORGE or WILLIAM? Are they? Can they be less excellent than empty words? Oh
the Hypocrisy of these Men! to say no worse.

19. I said the Quakers Quibbled as much about the word Body as the word
Christ, and G.W. instead of denying it, has confirmed it, p. 29. For though it
be Scripture- Language, That the Body is one and has many Members, and in
another place, That the Church of Christ is his Body: yet it will not therefore
follow, nor is it according to Scripture- Language, That Christ had NO OTHER
Body than his Church, for had he not a Body, that was born of the Virgin MARY?
or was the Church viz. all the Saints in the World born of the Virgin M^ry? Or
had the Body of Christ that was born of the Virgin Mary (the espoused Wife of
Joseph) no other members ( as Arms, Hands, Legs, etc.) but only the Saints?
would not this be rare Divinity! When Thomas put his finger into the Print of
the nails in the hands of Jesus, and put his hand into his side, was that then
the Church, that Thomas put his hand and finger into? Oh excellent Quakerism!

Page 30. G.W. would slily give the go-by, to my discourse about Mr. Keith's
distinction, of making three Christ's, by taking no notice upon what I grounded
the Objection, viz. Now after this rate, or by the same manner of Reasoning and
Quibbling, may not one say that G.K. makes three Christ's in Scripture, and that
with as much Truth as for any of them to affirm Christ would be a Monster, by
saying he has two Bodies? But this he slides by, not Answering a word to it:
Is this the Qu^kers plainness? Is it not indeed a Plain shuffle? But come
George: come back again, take notice what it is thou have to Answer, and then
Answer it, Shufflle me no Shufflles, nor Quibble me no more such Quibbles:
neither does G. tell me (which I also prayed W.P. honestly and plainly to do)
whether G.K. meant, That these three were three Christ's, in three distinct
Persons? Or that these three [and not any thing less than these three] were one
Christ, in one distinct Person? Or whether these three are no Christ at all, in
no distinct Person.


Let G.W. Remember his own words in his Introduction to his Divinity of Christ
[We judge that such expressions and words as the Holy Ghost taught the true
Apostles and holy men mentioned in Scripture, are most meet to speak of God and
Christ, and not the words of man's wisdom, or humane Inventions, and devised
Distinctions since the Apostles days] -- nor in Philosophical terms and nice
School- Distinctions derived from heathenish Metaphisicks,] and now tell me G.
whether this of thy Brother Keiths, is not a devised Distinction since the
Apostles? And whether G. thou have not condemned thy Brother K's Distinction?
Where is there such an expression in the Scripture, as Proper, least Proper,
etc. are not these Philosophical Terms?

SECT. III. In Reply to his third Section showing G.W's and the Quakers
Ignorance, of the true Spirits Evidence, who deny the Gift of Tongues,
Prophecy, Signs, etc. to be such.
1. IN my Epistle to W.P. p. 8. I minded him of the Apostle Paul's words, 2
Cor. 12.12, 13. Truly the SIGNS of an Apostle were wrought AMONG YOU in all
Patience in SIGNS and WONDERS and MIGHTY DEEDS. For what is it wherein ye were
INFERIOR to other Churches?

Here was a Church indeed that had the Spirits evidenee, and here was an
Apostle indeed that had Divine Revelation, the Gift of Prophesying and Tongues,
and Interpretation of Scripture: such an Apostle was one, who indeed was not of
Men, neither by Man, but sent by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised
him from the dead, Gal. 1.1. But no such Apostles nor Friends of the Ministry
can I find amongst the Quakers, who yet pretend to be Apostles, not of Men, nor
by Man, but immediately sent by God, and pretend to have the same Spirit,
Calling and Power that the Apostle Paul had. And yet alas do not EVIDENCE it
any MORE than OTHERS do, who pretend to it, with as much Confidence as
themselves: Nay, and so far are they from that, that I do not see they are able
to produce any MORE or give any better Demonstration of it, than those who do
not pretend at all immediately to it: and therefore I told W.P. if he had had
the GIFT OF TONGUES given him by the SPIRIT IMMEDIATELY upon his turning
QUAKER: Or if he could show but ONE in all his Church, that had such a
spiritual Gift or Gifts upon his Conversion to their way, it would put a clear
difference betwixt them and the Baptists Churches; and herein would the Quakers
plainly then exceed and excel them: and that one such Testimony (if true) in
the Quakers Church would more confute the Anabaptists and Convince their
Auditors, than a hundred such days brawling disputes, where the Quakers showed
no more POWER OF THE SPIRIT than their Adversaries; only fenced with words as
well as they could, as their wits would serve them best to Distinguish, Evade,
or Answer. And therefore I told W.P. I found his Church as Poor and Low as the
Baptists whom yet they condemned. I finding he had the words of Man's Wisdom in
making plausible Orations, but asked him, Where was the Demonstration of the
Spirit in Power and Sign? 1 Cor. 2.4, 5.

2. Now at this I find George is put to a great loss, saying p. 14. What if God
will not bestow such Gifts and Signs now? Being afraid to say, God will, and
yet not daring to say, God will not, what George, art thou in a Maze? Is not
this Scripture Phrase? Is not this according to Scripture Language, 1 Cor.
4.19, 20. I will know, not the Speech of them that are puffed up, but the
Power; For the Kingdom of God is not in Word but in Power; see also Revel. 2.2.
And is not this according to your own Language, G. Foxes Epistle before thy
Book Divin. of Christ, have you the same Power and Spirit, that gave forth the
Scriptures? And such miraculous Gifts are no more than what we find testified
to have been and remained in the Christian-Church about two hundred or three
hundred years after Christ. Irenaeus who lived one hundred and eighty years
after Christ, affirms that in his time the working of Miracles, the Raising
of the Dead, the casting out of Devils, healing of the sick by laying on of
hands, and Prophesying, were in being; and that some that were so raised from
the dead, remained among them alive long after, Niceph. Eccles. Hist. Tom. 1.
lib. 4. cap. 13. Tertullian and Cyprian (which last lived till above 250 years
after Christ) do both make mention of the ordinary casting out of Devils, and
challenged the Heathen to come and see it.

3. But says he p. 31. this is very strange, But what then George? It is not
more strange than true? And I say, Is it not very strange, that you will
pretend to the Power and the Spirit, and talk of being sent immediately by God,
as Paul was, and have a Divine Commission to Prophecy, and yet cannot bring
any Evidence to prove it more than Others? And instead of Producing one such
Apostle, Prophet or Minister in thy Church, the best thing (which yet alas is
bad enough) thou can say for thy self, Oh! our opposers do argue as just like
the Papists and Jesuits, as if they had served seven years at Rome.

Reply. Ah Quibbler! this will not serve thy turn above all Persons, for who
Argues more like a Papist or Jesuit than your selves about proving the
Scriptures not to be the Rule of your Faith? Who uses the Jesuits Arguments to
prove good works the meritorious cause of our Justification more than you?

Was it not one of the most eminent and learned Men that ever you had amongst
you, that positively asserts THE SCRIPTURE TO BE A NOSE OF WAX, yea, and says
it is CAPABLE of being NO OTHER? Sam. Fisher Additional Appendix, p. 21. And is
not this the Jesuits Phrase in terminis? And none but Papists (except your
selves) use it, Andrad. Orth. Explic. lib. 2. p. 104. What had S. Fisher served
seven years at Rome? Nay, I can show you and others may see if they mind it,
that almost all the Arguments that Mr. Fisher uses to prove the Scripture is
not the Rule of Faith, are the very same that the Papists and Jesuits have
used these hundred years; and so G.F. in the Epistle before thy said Book,
says, where does the Scripture say that it self is the Word of God? Just so do
the Papists Argue. What now George? Is the Argument the better or the worse,
because the Jesuits have used it? Do thou think in thy Conscience this is a
good Answer? You can sometimes tell us that the Papists may use good Arguments,
and so the Jesuits make use of the Scriptures, yet never the worse for that;
nay do but see how thou have Answered this matter thy self, in thy own Book,
Divin. of Christ, p. 38. It is but a mean way of Arguing to accuse or miscal
any for owning any Truth, that any sort (if they do err in some things) do
hold; for by that way, I may as well be reckoned a Papist, a Jew, or a Turk,
etc.]

How now George, and yet do thou use this mean way of Arguing against me? For
shame do not forget thy self and shuffle backwards and forwards thus, but use
some Conscienc^ in thy Scribbling! if thou have any tenderness and plainness in
thee, lay thy hand upon thy Mouth.

4. But further I Will tell thee, that I have often used this Argument against the
Papists, and to choose, would use it before any other; and the first and best
thing (as I verily think) that I could use, if I was to Dispute with a Jesuit,
should be to put him to the Proof of his Church, and its Infallibility; That Is
their first Principle and their Foundation, and without doubt any person that
will make Trial, shall find it best there to begin with them; and it is but
equitable, just, and reasonable, that if they say or propose their Church to be
infallible and the only true Church, that they should first prove it to be so;
and there would I begin with a Quaker, it being both necessary and reasonable.
Wherefore this is so far from being only a Jesuite's Argument, that I am of the
Opinion, there can be no better way of Arguing against them: I need no better
Authority, than the Example of worthy Mr. Chillingw^rth, and I would advise all
people to go that way to work with the Quakers, their main Principles being
easily reduced in effect to those of the Church of Rome, and those Arguments
that prove effectual against one, may as effectually serve against the other.
Take but THEIR LIGHT WITHIN for the POPE, and their INFALLIBILITY (which now of
late is run out of particular persons into that) OF THE BODY, for the CHURCH,
and the business is done. For as the Papists calls it the CHURCH, so the
Quakers now call their CHURCH the BODY, the BODY of Friends. So here is only the
difference of words, and who-ever discreetly considers this, and makes use of
it, will doubtless find the ease and Benefit of it, in Disputing with a Papist
or a Quaker: I have already showed it to be both necessary and equitable.

Now Reader, can thou think this was a good or sufficient Answer from G.W.
alas it is a sign he was hard put to it, that he could find no better Evasion!

5. Then he says p. 31, and 32. the Baptists produce no such signs, and I so
told him before; that I found them both a like poor and low in this respect,
(so far as I knew with certainty,) and hereby then he grants, that he stands
upon no better ground than the Baptist-Churches, why then will be condemn them,
since they have, if not better, yet as good, demonstrations as the Quakers for
ought yet appears? But besides, the Baptists here have this to say for
themselves, they do not pretend to immediate Divine Revelations, and such
inspirations, nor to a Gift of Infallibility, nor yet to any such immediate
Commission from Heaven, as the Quakers do, and therefore no wonder if they
hold, there is no need of Miracles or Signs, to Evidence or prove that which
they do not pretend to: Wherefore George is at a loss and beside the b^siness
here by thinking to Answer me, by Quotations out of the Baptists Books: for
what is all this to the Quakers, who do pretend to immediate Divine Revelations,
and Inspirations as the Apostles had, to a gift of infallibility, and to an
immediate Commission from Heaven, to go forth as Prophets, Apostles, etc, What,
because the Baptists that pretend not to this, need bring no Miracles to prove
that which they lay no Claim to, must therefore the Quakers who do lay Claim to
all this, be believed that ^hey have it without giving us any visible Evidence,
Sign, or Demonstration that they so have it indeed? only their bare word, a
very good one! as If I should lay Claim to an Estate, and yet need bring no
more Evidence to prove my Title, than all other Persons that lay no Claim, nor
pretend to it at all.

But yet this is not all; For I find there are three sorts of Persons now in
the World, that do in a more eminent manner pretend a Title, and lay all Claim
to infallibility, a Divine Commission, and a power or Gift of the Right
Interpretation of Scripture; viz. The Papists (or the Church of Rome) The
Quakers (or their Friends of the Ministry, or Body) The Muggletonians, (or
their Prophet)
Here the Quakers have two grand Competitors which lay Claim to what they
pretend to, How will they do here, TO EVINCE THAT THEY HAVE IT MORE THAN THE
OTHER, the least of which viz. Muggleton seems to stand upon even ground with
the Quakers; but the Papists seem to have a grand advantage above them, for
they produce a claim of above a thousand years standing, whereas the Quaker's
is but an Up-start: Besides, they pretend to be in possession of it, and how
the Quakers will dispossess them I cannot tell, since they have now left going
to Rome, and I hear no more of Divine Comm^ssions they receive to convert the
Pope of late years. Now George, Thou had dealt honestly and plainly, if thou
had told me this, and this is it which is both Rational and necessary if thou
expectest or claimest credence before them; and this I expect of thee.

For it is not enough to say, Thou art in the Truth, and they are in Error and
Blasphemy; for they say that of thee, and this I told W.P. that he knew in his
Conscience was but a shameful begging of the Question: For why should thou be
believed on THY BARE SAY-SO, more than they? And this is so honest G. that it
is according to thy own arguing with me: p. 41. say thou, as if they were
all bound to believe his Accusations on his bare word; so say I, are we all (or
any) bound to believe thy Pretensions, and thy Commission from Heaven upon thy
bare word, or if not upon thy bare word, upon what then? Answer this George
plainly.

6. Page 32. G. would mince the matter if he could, saying, Now as we have not
this way imposed our Faith upon our Opposers, so we shall not thus impose upon
this Man or the Baptists. But desire he and they may seek and try further.

Reply. Thanks to thee for nothing George; Thou and thy Friends have been
UNCHRISTIANING of of us these twenty years, and UNCHURCHING all the Churches in
England and Europe, calling the Priests and Professors of all sorts, all the
abominable names that you could invent; and now truly when you are questioned
your selves, and find that notwithstanding all your boasting pretenses and
Braggadocio's, you can produce NO MORE than others, whom you have condemned and
unchristianed, oh truly then thou say, we shall not thus impose our Faith
upon the Baptists, or this Man: Pray tell us which way thou will impose it; or
what way do thou propose for a Discrimination, and a Rule to try you by,
since you have disowned the SCRIPTURES fit for that? see S. Fisher, Addit.
Append. p. 21. which Transcriptions and Translations WERE THEY NEVER SO CERTAIN
and entire by Answering to the first Original Copies, yet are not CAPABLE (to
be to all Men) any other than a Lesbian Rule, or Nose of Wax, etc.

If you say the SPIRIT shall be the Rule to try you, The Papists and Muggleton
say you have it not, but each of them are as certain as you they have it,
therefore it will be absolutely requisite for you to Evince and give some such
Demonstration that you have the Spirit, which neither they nor others can give,
before you can be tried by that; because that is the question, whether you have
the SPIRIT and the POWER OF GOD or no, MORE than others.

7. And then let me tell George: That if he could Demonstrate it this way, it
would not be, nay it could not be any Imposing upon me; if G.W. did visibly
Evidence and demonstrate to me, by Power and mighty Deeds, that he had indeed
that Power and Spirit that he says he has: Therefore thou talkest deceitfully
as if that would be an Imposing; But now yours is imposing, when you condemn
Men for not-believing that you have immediate Revelations, or in that you
assert and would have us believe, you are MORE inspired than other Men, or
other Societies and Bodies of Christians. And you tell us you have the Spirit
and are in the Truth MORE than others whom you Condemn as false, and yet you
produce NOTHING except YOUR BARE SAY-SO, MORE than others, who SAY SO of
themselves as you do of your selves. Now here is the IMPOSING; you pretend you
are Infallible, and yet produce no more or other effects of your Infallibility,
than other Men can or do: Nay on the contrary the same effects of Fallibility
are evident among you, as among others; and yet if any deny it in you, you
Censure and Curse them for not believing you, and this is your way of Imposing.

And you Quakers say you are immediately sent of God, and commissioned from God
to deliver such or such a Message or Curse, and that this, and that is given
forth by the Holy Ghost in you, or from the Spirit: and yet you show no more
certainty to prove to us, and for us infallibly to build our Faith on, that you
are so sent, and SO Commissioned from God, than Muggleton does or other
Churches, which yet your selves say, ARE NOT SENT OF GOD nor Commissioned by
him.

Now here is imposing upon Men's beliefs, and this I say you are guilty of, yea,
and most eminently guilty of, next to Muggleton or the Pope, of any Person or
People I know; and this is the thing George, thou should have Answered, if
thou had Answered me to the purpose and main bent of my Epistle to W.P.; But
this thou pitifully evadest and sl^ly would slide from.

But now, since you pretend to such high things, if you had the visible
Spiritual Gifts that were amongst the true Primitive Churches and Apostles to
evidence and demonstrate the Truth of what now you ONLY SAY and pretend, I
should never (nor I suppose any Man in his wits) call or esteem it any imposing
on my Faith: But the other is so indeed as I have showed you, and therefore G.
I would take thee by the hand, and lead thee back again, praying thee not to
shuff^e and Cut also, but Answer this, and not that which I never desired of
thee, nor W.P. That Is the very thing I found fault with you before, viz. That
you would Answer to that which was not asked you, instead of returning Answer to
that which was; and yet still thus thou servest me, but it will not do. For my
design is, that I may know you better, what Real Power, Evidence and Authority
you have BEYOND others, that so I may have a good Foundation for my Faith, and
give Credit to it and you: Or that for want of it, you may be brought to a
better fight of your selves, and see your nakedness and Poverty, (though you
say (as the Church of Laodic^a) that you are rich) and so may learn to be
humble, and not Censure others, except you can better evidence your own.

9. And yet why will thou say, you have not imposed thus your Faith on others?
Was not, and has not your Language been such as this? viz. It Is true, that
Timothy, Titus, and others, WHO HAD GIFTS IN THEM for the Ministry, were
approved by Paul and others of the Primitive Elders for the work, but this is
no Proof that these opposers, Ministers, are either so gifted or approved, G.W.
Enthusiasm above Atheism, p. 5.] And so say I, neither is it any Proof that the
QUAKERS MINISTERS are SO GIFTED or APPROVED; and the Words before-cited of G.F.
before thy own Book: Have you the SAME POWER and SPIRIT that gav^ forth the
Scriptures?

G.W. Will thou believe thy own words? Then see thy Answer to Mr. Richard
Baxters two sheets for the Ministry, p. 16. We never understood that they that
set up these Priest^, were called as Peter, or Paul, or the Elders, who had
Power to lay on the hands, that the HOLY GHOST FELL ON THE PARTY ON WHOM THEY
LAID ON THE^R HANDS] and show me any ONE of thy MINISTERS CALLED SO George.

G. F. To all People in all C^ristendom says thus, p. 2. All Sects -- have the
words of the Apostles, but out of the Power and Life.

A Paper sent forth into the World from the Quakers, p. 5. [We are against --
the Pastors that NOW STEAL the words of the Prophets, of Christ and his
Apostles] W.P. Reason against Railing, p. 115. Many may run into the Practice
of several outward things, mentioned in the Scriptures to have been the
practice of Saints in former Ages, and yet not be led into the Truth, for all
that is but will worship, Imitation, and unwarrantable.]

And all this I may say against you, which you have said against others, and if
they were good then, why not still? For you have but the Names and Images of
things, you have got the words used in Scripture, [the Power] and the [Spirit]
[the Gifts of the Spirit,] the Demonstration of the Spirit and Power] But alas
where is the thing it self, viz. the visible Power and Gifts of the Spirit, the
Demonstration of the Spirit that the true Apostles had, and the Scripture
speaks of? To this George can poorly say, what if God will not bestow such
Gifts now? why then, George, I say thou have them not, only have stolen the
words out of the Scriptures, thou have got the Name, the Image and words, as
thou say the Baptists and others have done: but alas, art as barren of the
Gifts themselves as they are, only art got into a Form, but denyest the True
power of God and Demonstration of the Spirit in Signs and mighty Deeds.

10. Pa. 33. G.W. has this further to say, That he doubts not but where the
Spirit of God lives and Rules, it will manifest it self by its Fruits, for it
is self-evidencing, and that they have a record in Heaven, and also in many
Consciences of the blessed Power of God with them and in them.]

Reply. And cannot the Baptists say all this, nay, and do not they many times?
They can say they have a Record in Heaven, and in many Consciences also, who
believe them; and pray tell me G. how thou will get up to Heaven to search the
Record there and disprove them? Did one ever hear such silly stuff as this man
writes? did he indeed think to shufflle it off with such ridiculous words as
these. I could tell the Quakers that some of them have a Record somewhere else,
bebesides the Court of Heaven, viz. in the Court of Chancery for Swearing or
Oaths.

I told W.P. That if his Church be the True, and the Baptists Church false,
(rightly to convince others thereof upon good and infallible grounds) he must
pretend to, and produce some such discriminating Evidence or Sign for Proof
thereof, which the Baptists nor no false Church could in like manner produce,
as he does. I prayed W.P. to show wherein the POWER of GOD or the SPIRIT
DEMONSTRATED it self MORE in the Quakers than the Baptists, or a false Church?
And that he must do, and say something for his Church (if he would say any
thing to purpose) which they could not do and say for theirs as an Evidence or
Demonstration thereof; and that this was NO MORE than what the true Primitive
Church had, and could, and did on all necessary occasions visibly produce and
Demonstrate. Now what does the Quibbler Answer to all this, he says nothing but
what the Baptists can or do say, that they have a Record in Heaven, and in many
Consciences also, and that they doubt not but where the Spirit of God Lives and
Rules it will manifest it self, for it is self-Evidencing: Then by that Rule
the Quakers should not have the Spirit of God, at best, no more than others
have; because it does not manifest it self in them more than in others.

11. P. 33. says G.W. This seems to be a hard task,] and I believe so indeed,
and too hard for all the Quakers, though I was so reasonable as to demand but
one such Testimony or Gift in all their Churches, and they never read of any
Christian-Church in Holy Scripture, that had not some and many such Gifts. Yet
G. undertakes to say, that it is no difficult matter for W.P. and many more to
produce or demonstrate some such effects of that living Testimony, presence and
power of God among us, as no false Church CAN PRODUCE: although herein neither
W.P. nor any of us will ADMIT OF PREJUDICED and ENVIOUS SPIRITS to be our
JUDGES or WITNESSES in th^se matters.]

Reply. Bravely said George, if it were as well done; but for all thy boasting,
that not only W.P. but many more among you could; yet the poor Man, does not
dare produce, or so much as name one of them: is not this excellent? What must
all Men believe it, because thou say it? Is IPSE DIXIT come to Town, and the
Quakers bare word all the Evidence they have or can produce?

Now it would have been a great piece of this Quakers-plainness, if he had
produced one or two of those effects, only, which he boasts he (...), (and no
Church which he Condemns for false) can produce. I charge him to do it, if he
will not prove himself a MERE PRETENDER and VAIN-BOASTER speaking high swelling
words, like them in Jude. But this Man is very timorous I I perceive he would
do it with Caution enough, though so silly, that he makes himself Ridiculous by
it. 1. Where did the Apostles or the Churches ever make such a Proviso in their
producing the Testimony and Power of God? Did they not do it before all, and in
the presence of Envious and malicious Spirits as well as others, and left them
to judge as it had operation upon them? And 2. May not the Baptists say so, and
make this Proviso as well as you, that they will not admit of prejudiced and
envious Spirits to be their Judges or Witnesses in these matters? and then no
doubt, they will be able to produce as many such effects as the Quakers: Oh
silly and absurd! But 3. well G. produce those effects, and that Power thou
talkest of in W.P. however, and I am contented with thee for this time, that
you shall not admit of Envious, or Prejudiced Spirits to Judge of it; but
produce it, that others may behold it, though not Judge of it: or will thou say,
that there is not one person in all England (except Quakers) but what are
Envious and Prejudiced Spirits? Poor Evasion!

12. As for them which thou say in whose Consciences there is a Record, many
of which were gathered out from Baptists and other Churches. They say such are
but Apostates from their Church, and some such you have had in your Church
(which you call Apostates) when they leave you, and go to other Churches, so
that all this is nothing for proof of the thing; nay several of your grand
Prophets (so once esteemed among some of you for true Prophets of the Lord) did
and have left you, Witness CHARLES BAILEY, JOHN PARROT, etc. and the Baptists
have gathered amongst them several out of other Churches as well as you: and
what then? The Baptists may tell you, that if the Quakers see no such thing
amongst them, as the Blessed Operation and effect of the Power and Ministry of
Christ Jesus, That is because the Quakers have not honestly made Trial, b^t
stood in Prejudice and gainsaying, as many did against Christ, the Apostles and
Primitive Church of old, and what can the Quakers say to it, ONLY DENY IT and
so may the Baptists. Besides, the Baptist. Churches have this to say for
themselves, which you have not, (being you have denied and disowned it) viz.
They own the Holy Scriptures for the Rule of their Faith and Practice; and
pretend to no such extraordinary immediate Inspirations and Revelations as you
do.

13. But above all, you ought not, you cannot, in good Conscience, complain
against others for Questioning whether you are Christians, you having first not
only Questioned others, but pronounced them all, both Ministers and People, and
Professors also, unchristian. See G.F. Professors Catechism, his very first
words, are, come you UNCHRISTIANS, let us talk with you, etc. Therefore look at
home and rebuke your selves first for this.

14. And whereas G.W. p. 34. says, That a foolish and Adulterous Generation
seek a Sign: It Is true, our Savior did so upbraid the Jews and might very
well, they having had Sign upon Sign, and Miracle upon Miracle wrought by our
SAVIOR amongst them, and such mighty Deeds almost innumerable, wrought before
them; and yet to cry out for more, when they saw so many from him, was foolish:
but what is this to the Quakers, who have not wrought one true Miracle, nor
produced so much as ONE such Sign (notwithstanding all their Pretenses) among
us, that ever I heard of? must we therefore be a foolish Generation that ask a
Sign of them to prove such their pretenses? No surely, it follows not, I am
certain, from that Text: and yet notwithstanding that the Jews were such an
Adulterous Generation, and had had so many Miracles wrought among them: yet
Jesus Christ said, they should have one Sign more, and that was doubtless the
greatest Miracle and Sign of all: By this Text then, if the Quakers will stick
close to it, they may lawfully give this Adulterous Generation one Sign, and
that is all I ask of them.

15. And thus G.W. says amiss, when he talks as if I did not acknowledge the
sufficiency of the Spirits Evidence and Teaching: for I do fully acknowledge it*
where it APPEARS indeed to be (and do more fully own it than yet the Quakers
seem to do (who are loath to own Real Miracles and the Gift of Tongues to be a
certain EVIDENCE of the SPIRIT) But must I therefore own that to be the Spirits
Evidence which every one calls so? or will G.W. himself acknowledge it so? I
dare say not, why; then it remains that G.W. and others must Evidence to us,
That that is indeed the Spirits-Evidence, which they call so, Before that
either he or they can justly call us UNBELIEVERS, or accuse us for not owning
the sufficiency of the Spirits-Evidence; and this G.W. and all the Quakers in
England must confess, or else I may as justly accuse them, for not
acknowledging the sufficiency of the Spirits Evidence and Teaching in the
Church of Rome, or in Muggleton, and let them clear themselves of it if they
can.

16. Now since the Quakers will not produce any of their Miracles, I would not
have them angry with me, if I should produce one or two; that are the likeliest
that I know of, if that which they say be true. I never found any upon Record
in their own Writings, except this may be Recorded for one: viz. in G.F's
Professors Catechism, p. 13.

And is not the POPE the MOTHER of all your observing of Days, Saints days as
you call them?

According to this it seems G.F. their Grand Prophet, Converted a MAN into a
WOMAN, and that a POPE too! which if true, must needs be a Miracle; and that it
was not the Printers fault, his next words assured me, [And is not SHE your
Example, and not the Scripture?] And again in another place in the same Page
[is not the POPE the MOTHER?] Then I considered what Pope this was, whether it
might not be Pope-JOAN, that did first Institute Saints Days, and so G.F. the
Prophet by a strange impulse speak more Truth than he thought of: But my
Authors assure me, 'twas not Pope-JOAN; but that it was a MAN- Pope, and the
name Pope signifies as much as FATHER; and yet for all this, G.F. has turned
the HE, into a SHE, and Converted the MAN into a WOMAN; and yet this is the Man
that has helped to set out a whole Book in Folio, showing the sinfulness and
impurity of saying you and not thou, to one in the singular. What a Prophet?
What a Scholar is this? that cannot tell the MASCULINE Gender from the
FEMININE? was he (can any one think) skilled in so many Languages as he has
set his Name to, that does not write true English?

17. The other thing which I shall leave to your own Judgments, whether it be a
Miracle or not, is what is Recorded of them in the Court of Chancery, THAT THE
QUAKERS CAN TAKE AN OATH, AND YET NOT SWEAR AT ALL; If this be so, some think
it must be miraculous: That they cannot swear, that they swear not at all, is
their Principle; That several of them have taken Oaths and have been sworn in
Chancery, is upon Record in that Court, as Jer. Ives has satisfied the World
by Certificates, in his Questions for the Quakers; and yet the Quakers still
say, they did not Swear nor take an Oath, which if true, must be won^erful at
least. But these are not such Miracles and Evidence as lie necessarily
incumbent on the Quakers, to produce for the better Evidence and Proof of what
they say and pretend to, and therefore I shall say no more of it here, but
refer them to produce such Evidence as will indeed prove them to be sent of God
to go forth as Apostles, Prophets, etc. more than all others, and be
satisfactory in Answer to the foregoing Particulars.

SECT. IV. In Reply to his fourth Section, showing the Comparison betwixt the
QUAKERS and MUGGLETON to be both Just, Rational, Honest and Necessary.
G.W. P. 35. TO compare Muggleton and them (he says) is both Idle, Quibbling
and Envious Canting: What if W.P. does not pretend to more than Muggleton does,
will it therefore follow, the Quakers are Impostors, or like him, who holds
many Blasphemies? The Baptists may be ashamed of such gross and abusive
Insinuations as these.]

Reply. Stay George, be not so hot, run not so fast, give me leave to call thee
back again, and tell thee, that if the Comparison in my Epistle was any abuse,
that it was not the Baptists that did it, but I; and therefore if so, I am to
bear the blame of it: But neither they nor I need to be ashamed of doing it,
that I see as I shall now show you; and if you had exercised a good Conscience
you might have seen it your self and spared me the Labor.

1. Then I say, That if W.P. does not pretend to more than Muggleton, yet if he
or the Quakers pretend to have received immediately a Commission from Heaven,
and Divine Revelations, and inspired by the Spirit of God to go forth as
Apostles, Prophets, etc. as Muggleton does, and yet he be an Impostor as he is,
then if the Quakers can produce no more for theirs than Muggleton does for his,
it will follow, that the Quakers are also Impostors: And do thou Answer it if
thou can, and so thou have thy idle Quibbling and envious Canting returned on
thy self.

2. And for thy accusing Muggleton with Blasphemies, it is as certain that he
accuses you with Blasphemies, and many others have condemned you also as
holding apparent Blasphemies: then by this thou art as well condemned as
Muggleton is condemned by thee, so that this will be no Proof; and besides; How
will thou evidence to others, That all what thou say and call Blasphemy,
is such indeed? or do thou think thy bare word is sufficient for all others
to give Credence to and build their Faith on? so that here the doubt and
Question will remain still.

3. I am verily persuaded in my heart, that many Quakers have censured several
Doctrines for Blasphemy, (which yet are not truly so) as if they had the Romish
Authority, and every one of them a Pope within him.

Take an Instance out of G.W. himself, Ishmael, p. 9. For a Man's saying, That
it is all one to say the Scripture says, and God says:] G. calls him, thou
Blasphemous Beast, do thou make no difference between the Scripture and God?
-- here let all that reads this, see thy Blasphemy: Now George, let me ask
thee, if a Man should affirm, it is all one to say thy Book Ishmael says, and
the Spirit of God says, whether this would be Blasphemy? (since, in thy Title
Page thou asserts, it was given forth from the Spirit of the Lord in us,) and
was not that given forth by Scripture, Writing, or Speech? If thou say no,
then thou have condemned the Man wrongfully, unless thou will say that that
Book of yours was given forth more, by the Spirit of the Lord, than the Holy
Scriptures are: If thou say yes, it is Blasphemy, then thou provest thy self
a Blasphemer by Intitling that, as given forth by the Spirit of the Lord in
you, which he did not say, and give forth.

4. Would thou not think it very hard and unjust, if one should accuse the
Quakers of Blasphemy, for saying, That the Church of Christ is his Body, and
that there is but one Spirit and one Body, which is the Church, and so deny
that Christ has any other Body, than that whereof the Saints are Members and
united to him, as thou talkest to this purpose? p. 29. Now some look upon this
as Blasphemous, would thou not say it is very hard and uncharitable? and why,
because this is according to Scripture Language say thou: And yet thou have
accused Muggleton, p. 37. as a Blasphemer and Impostor for holding this
Blasphemous Doctrine; That the Soul of Man dies or is Mortal. Now may not
Muggleton tell thee, ^^at the Scripture says in express words, The Soul that
sins it shall die, Ezekiel. 18.20. God shall deliver my Soul from the Power of
the Grave, Psalm. 49.15. Thou have delivered my Soul from Death, Psalm. 56.13.
Thou have delivered my Soul from the lowest Grave, Psalm. 86.13. Keep back his
Soul from the Pit: his Soul draws nigh to the Grave, Job. 33.18, 22, 28, 30.
Then says he unto them, My Soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto Death, Matthew.
26.38. spoke of the Resurrection of CHRIST, that his Soul was not left in Hell
[or the Grave,] Acts 2.31. Is not this Scripture? Is not this according to
Scripture Language? Thus then thou condemnest something as Blasphemy, which is
according to Scripture Language, and so it seems it is all one to thee, be it
according to Scripture Language or not; thou joynest them all together as alike
false and Blasphemous. Besides there is no Protestant Church in Europe that I
know of, but what can approve the third Doctrine in thy 37. page (which thou
call Blasphemous) for True, in the indefinite Terms thou have expressed it,
viz. That the Soul of Man is Mortal, i. e. Subject to the second Death, if not
Redeemed.

And because G.W. has a Multiplying-Glass when he writes against his opposers,
he has made here (to lengthen them out) eight several Doctrines, which indeed
can be reckoned but one or two in effect or much the same: and as for those
other Blasphemous Doctrines of Muggleton respecting the Godhead Life, and that
the Godhead died; thou G. according to thy Principles must hold so too, or else
thou must run into another Blasphemy; by holding that THE CHRIST INDEED did NOT
DIE, only put off HIS GARMENT with which thou say he was Clothed, but was
not THE CHRIST nor no Real part of HIM. And therefore upon this account your
Predecessors, (who held much the same Doctrine with you concerning the TRINITY
of PERSONS,) found a necessity on them to hold that the FATHER Died, as
Muggleton does, and therefore were called PATROPASSIANS; for without that they
found they could not Really believe, that THE CHRIST HIMSELF DIED, and this
Dilemma (if not Blasphemy) the Quakers are got into; and if the Quakers did not
come very near this Blasphemous Doctrine of Muggleton, What is the meaning of
Isaac Pennington's words, Quest. p. 20. But he [CHRIST] is of an Eternal
Nature, and his Flesh and Blood and Bones are of his Nature, [that is, then,
his Flesh, Blood and Bones are Eternal; and so must be GOD, for nothing is of
an Eternal Nature, but GOD] and now let the Reader Judge how far this falls
short of Muggleton's Blasphemy; and let them clear themselves of it if they
can, so that it appears, this is only a Pitiful begging the Question still,
betwixt the Impostor Muggleton and you, which cannot be granted you by
Muggleton, nor yet by others, without your producing better evidence: for you
see he can speak according to Scripture Language as well as you, when he has a
mind to it.

5. Whereas thou say the comparison is unjust and wicked, Thou do not so
much as Instance any one particular of the ten, that is unjust or false: But
thou wilfully mistakes me, when thou insinuates, as if I did basely design by
the Comparison to make others believe, that the Quakers were Muggletonians or
the Muggletonians Quakers: No, that was never my intent, but thy own
perversion, on purpose to Evade and shuffle it off where thou foundst it lay
too heavi^ upon thy Shoulders; neither can thou find any such word in all my
Epistle, but well to the contrary, as the tenth particular witnesses, That the
Quakers Condemn Muggleton, and Muggleton damn's the Quakers; therefore any Man
might see (except G. who is wilfully blind) that I never thought them all one
or alike in all things, and G. might have spared all his needless labor to set
down wherein the Quakers differ from Muggleton in other Doctrines, but that the
poor Man could easier do that, than Answer what I demanded of W.P. But this is
the old Shift that I have formerly told them of, they used in the Dispute,
Answer that which was never asked them, to give the go-by and evade Answering
what is asked, and thus he serves me here.

The thing that I demanded of W.P. was this; in my Epist. p. 32, 33. Why
should thou or thy Friends be believed MORE than Muggleton or an Impostor?
Since Muggleton says he has received a Commission from Heaven, that he had it
by Divine Revelation to go forth as a Prophet, etc. That he is inspired by the
Spirit of God, and is infallible, etc. and so say the Quakers that they have.
And again, in my p. 35. Is it not highly necessary one should know which of
these are the Impostors? Or whether (since they both are such confident
Pretenders) they may not both be Impostors? What can or do thou produce or
pretend to more than Muggleton does? Surely it will be a strange piece of
Confidence for you to claim Credence from People, if you cannot produce
something considerable beyond such (as your selves own to be) a GRAND IMPOSTOR
and a DECEIVER. But very deceitfully G. gives the go-by to all this, which was
the only thing in Question, and yet calls his Treatise an Answer to my Epistle:
Is it possible, that the Quakers that pr^tend so much, should be Men of no
better Conscience? How can any look upon such to be tender, and Men fearing
God, and hating deceit and falsehood? Is this think you for the Credit or
Commendation of your way? will such unfair dealing, shifting and shuffling of
Answers, convince the Baptists or me, or any other sober and discreet Men that
you are immediately sent and Commissioned for to go forth as Apostles and
Prophets from the most Holy God? No surely. Do thou call this the
Quakers-plainness, detecting Fallacy? It is the Quakers own Fallacy it then
detects. Let thy own Conscience (if thou have any that is not hardened) Judge,
and let all intelligent Readers Judge. This is then the thing that I did, and do
still demand of thee, Why should thou or thy Friends be believed more than
Muggleton or an Impostor, that thou speak immediately from the spirit of
God, and that thou have a Commission from Heaven, and he not? What can or
do thou produce, say or pretend to more than Muggleton does, whom yet your
selves say is AN Impostor and a Deceiver.

6. Instead of that G.W. p. 36. weakly tells me, that some of the Baptists have
denied the Father and Son to be two distinct Persons, and then cites Hicks
Dialogue, p. 9. What Is this in Answer to my Epistle? And yet for ought I
understand, he has falsely accused Mr. Hicks therein; for on the Contrary, he
does expressly own the Father and Son to be two distinct Persons; and then G.
would basely come off, by saying, wherein they Imply the Father and Son to be
one Person without us; whereas I do not find one such word in all T.H.'s
Dialogues, and I dare say the thought never entered into his heart: but what
falsehood will not this Man use? Not regarding either his own Honor or
Reputation, nor that of his Religion (which yet he pretends to) whilst he
defends it by such base means: To accuse a Man positively, and then when he
comes to prove it, he does but barely say it is implied, when indeed it is not
implied; and I know not why my Testimony should not be as good as G.W's.

7. G.W. p. 36. What if Quakers pretend to these viz. that they have received a
Commission from Heaven, that they had it by Divine Revelation, that they are
inspired by the Spirit of God, that they are infallible? Says he, the Apostles
and true Church did not only pretend to, but experience the same, does it
therefore follow that they must be compared with the Muggletonians and be
deemed Impostors?

Reply. That ever any Man in his wits should make himself so Ridiculous in
Print, as G.W. here does! For, 1. Because the Apostles and true Church did
pretend to these things, and did EXPERIENCE the SAME, and could visibly
demonstrate them, and so were no Impostors nor like Muggleton: Must therefore
the Quakers and Muggleton who pretend to these things, but do not experience
the same, nor can visibly demonstrate them as the true Apostles did, be no
Impostors? on the contrary it directly follows, that the Quakers and Muggleton
pretending to these things, and not experiencing the same, nor visibly
Demonstrating them as the true Apostles did, are Impostors; and get off of it,
if you can.

2. Cannot Muggleton also say, what if he as led by the Spirit of Truth pretend
to these things, the Apostles and true Church did not only pretend to, but
experienced the same, does it therefore follow that he must be compared with,
and deemed an Impostor? What Answer would thou make to Muggleton? Take the
same to thy self and thou will be Answered.

8. And thus have thou made thy self Ridiculous, and thy deceit and Hypocrisy
apparent to others; and therefore George since thou have undertaken for thy
Brother Penn to Answer my Epistle, I will not let thee go free so, no no, I
cannot be satisfied with thy shuffles and such poor Shifts. I intend now not to
leave thee, till thou have indeed Answered to the MATTER in Dispute, or made
thy own Folly and vain-boasting, manifest to all Men of sound understanding;
still asserting, That it is a strange piece of Confidence for you to censure
and condemn others, or to claim Credence from People, if you cannot produce
something considerable BEYOND such (as your selves own to be) a GRAND IMPOSTOR
and a DECEIVER.

And I do still demand of you, What can or do you produce, say and pretend to,
more than Muggleton does? Or why should thou in particular, G.W. be believed
MORE than Muggleton or an Impostor, in thy Pretenses of having Received an
Immediate Commission and Ministry from Heaven, Infallibility and immediate
Inspirations from the Spirit of God, to go forth as an Apostle, or a Prophet?
And this lies at thy door still, notwithstanding all thy pitiful Evasions and
deceitful equivocations And this is sufficient for thy fourth Section.

SECT. V. In Reply to his fifth Section, about SABELLIUS and the Agreement of
the Quakers Doctrine with his touching the three Persons.
G.W. P. 41. Tells me, that because I did not lay down particularly what those
old exploded Fancies of Sabellius were, I am smiting at them in the dark.

Reply. Is not this indeed Ingenious? I writ my Epistle to W.P. who is
generally known to be a Scholar, and a Man of Learning, and could not well be
thought so Ignorant, or of so little Reading, as not to know who Sabellius was,
and what his Opinions which were exploded; therefore it was altogether needless
for me to lay down what I concluded he knew as well as my self. But now a Man
who is unlearned, or no good Scholar, comes in his Ignorance, and undertakes to
Scribble me an Answer, and for want of so much Light and Learning in himself
accuses me of smiting at them in the Dark.

2. To Inform this Man and enlighten his dark mind in this particular: I
understand that Sabellius was one who denied there was a Trinity of Persons he
denied there were three persons, saying all three were one, Epip. haer^s. 62.
Aug. lib. haer. [as the Quakers now do] And so confound the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, and impiously imagined three Names in one thing and in one Person,
therefore not without Cause we forbid them the Church, etc. Soc. Schol. lib. 2.

These and the like were the Exploded Fancies that were long since revealed by
SABELLIUS without, rather than by the Light within; and suchlike are now the
Quakers Fancies which they pretend are revealed to them by the Light within,
notwithstanding all their plausible Quibbles and equivocating pretenses
sometimes to the contrary, as is manifested in this foregoing Discourse.

3. G.W. p. 42, 43. instead of answering my Epistle tells me, that some of the
Baptists have denied the Divinity of Christ.

Reply. Quid hoc ad rem? I never requested that of him or W.P. I matter no more
what some of the Baptists hold, than what some of the Quakers do hold: But it
seems G. found it much easier for him to set down what Doctrines some of the
Baptists have held, than to prove and make good such Doctrines as himself
holds. If he has any thing to say to the Baptists, it is likely enough they
may be able to Answer for themselves, as well as he can for himself if not
better, because they own the Holy Scriptures to be their Rule, and not their
own Spirit or Fancy within. But if not, what is all this to me? I am no
Baptists, and so I told W.P. before; Therefore this is no better than a
Quibbling Evasion in lieu of an Answer.

4. G.W, p. 44. seems to like the Close of my Epistle better than the rest.
It Is well if any thing (that is not a Quakers) can please him. I assure him I
thought on it at the beginning of that and this also and do wish that he h^d
been so ingenious as to have considered of it in his Answer, and that he would
honestly confess with me humanum est Errare rather than only to commend it as
some kind of Ingenuity in another; and I believe the same humility and
submissiveness may become him and all the Quakers as well, and better than high
and empty pretenses without greater proof.

I have all along purposely avoided forming the Arguments into Syllogisms, and
used this plain way of discourse, that so it might the better suit with the
Capacities of the Vulgar and be the more beneficial to the understandings of
such well-meaning persons, who yet notwithstanding, may not be well acquainted
with a Syllogistical method, neither understand rightly what Mood and figure
are no more than Hebrew or Arabic, and therefore can be no competent Judges
thereof, when they read it in that Form.

Now no Quaker ought to (or can honestly upon his own Principles) blame me for
what I have Writ, because they say, every man has the Light within him, and
ought to Act according to that light within himself, which I have here done;
and I can seriously tell them, that the Light and Spirit within me bears
Witness to it: and then although the Quakers should think amiss of it, or say
it is bad, yet how could I help it, according to their principle, teaching me,
That that ought to be my grand Rule to square all my Actions by? And would they
have me disobey tha^? Or have a better Light than I can have? or would they
have me attempt to Invalidate the Light within me, or Gods Immutable and
absolute D^cree, within? which would be a great Impiety but to think of, they
they should either Change their Creed, in (...)cular, or seem less concerned at
what I have be (...) now thus writ, it being confessedly a Duty: her (...) hope
will the Quakers blame me for arguing (...) it being no worse way of arguing
than what (...) Pen has thought good to use against twenty (...) Learned
Divines, p. 22. nor can the Quakers tell (...) upon their own Principles
without Blasphemy (which yet some of them have been so weak as to do) that the
Light within me is Da^kness; for they say that the Light within every Man is
Christ, and Christ is God, and GOD and CHRIST, I am sure are not, nor can be
Darkness.

In short, I do truly profess that I have done nothing herein, but with a good
Conscience, and an honest Design. 1. With a good Conscience, I not having
either wilfully or knowingly wronged the Quakers in any one particular, and if
unwillingly there should happen any mistake to be committed by me (as possibly
there may be, considering the weakness that all men are subject unto (unless
Quakers) and Ber^ardus non videt omnia) which yet I think there will none
appear, I having used the greatest Care and Circ^mspection that my occasions
and time would give me leave, to prevent all: however I have that freedom of
mind, that I should not be ashamed honestly to acknowledge it in Print and beg
their excuse for it. If they would be so Ingenious with me, and acknowledge the
wrong that G.W. has done me (as well as himself) in his pretended Answer. 2.
With an honest Design, it being plainly to inform and Caution others to prevent
their being deluded with such vain pretenses, and high swelling words amongst
the Quakers, when it does not appear they have any thing in reality (...)g
them, MORE than many other Chur^^^ ^e, but a great deal less in many things,
and (...) the Quakers (if it may be) into a better sense (...) sight of
themselves: that they may consider their (...) Poverty, nakedness, weakness and
formality, ^^^withstanding all their vain boasting, and high pre^ences of
Revelations more than others; and might be shamed out of their unm^asurable
Confidence and quibbling equivocations. The Quakers say they have the Spirit
with measure; but ^t is certain many of their leaders have Confidence without
measure. I shall conclude with this serious Expostulation (of the Psalmist) to
them, Psalm. 4.2. Oh ye Sons of Men, how long will ye turn my Glory into shame!
how long will ye love vanity, and seek after Leasing? Selah! And my Prayer
shall be that of the Apostles, 2 These. 3.2. That we may be delivered from
[absurd] UNREASONABLE and WICKED Men.

Many more of their QUIBBLES I could (and may if I think there is necessary
occasion) intimate to you and them; but having herein exceeded the brevity I
first intended I will now forbear, and if they please to return an Answer to
this, in plainness INDEED, singleness of heart and honesty, without RAILING
EQUIVOCATIONS, or MENTAL RESERVATIONS, to the particular and very MATTERS in
question, (without BEGGING the question) I shall take it heartily and receive
it kindly; but if instead thereof, they shall revile, huff, or Hector, I shall
the l^ss value and regard it.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO G. Whitehead, W. Penn, and the QUAKERS.
1. TO prevent any more of your needless Scribbling and that neither the World
nor my self be pestered and troubled with such stuff so little to the purpose
for the future, but that if we have any Answer, it may be AD REM, plain indeed
and more satisfactory, I do here before hand give you, or any other that may
undertake for you, NOTICE, That if any of you do, (or pretend to) make a Return
to this my Reply, and instead of speaking directly to THE THING that I have
objected against you (and which G. W. has undertaken to Answer, and so is
engaged thereby to do it, since it yet remains undone) you make Answer to
SOMEWHAT ELSE, that I never mentioned nor desired of you: Or if in lieu of
Answering to THE MATTER in direct and plain Terms, either by affirmative or
negative Procations, you shall propose NEW QUESTIONS before the former are
decided already by you undertaken, which can be only designedly and deceitfully
to draw us away from the MATTER in hand, (Both which shifting evasions, G. W.
has all along used, as I have already often hinted to him, and acquainted the
World,) that then I shall look upon all SUCH WORK to be no SATISFACTORY or
PLAIN ANSWER, but a MERE EVASION and SENSELESS SCRIBBLING; yea, and I shall
take it to be a manifest Sign of the DESPERATE weakness and baffling of your
CAUSE, if you are still constrained to use such mean and base Artifices and
pitiful Shifts to EVADE an Answer notwithstanding you are NOW forewarned to
AVOID them: And so shall* look upon my self not much (if at all) concerned in
any such like pretended and Evasive Answer, as I have (I hope) sufficiently
demonstrated this of G. W's to be hardly worth a Man's time to take notice of,
(it being in the Judgment of many understanding and Judicious Persons, no more
a real Answer to me and the main intent of my Epistle, than if he had in effect
said just nothing) except to show the VANITY and FOLLY of it to prevent (if any
thing will do it) their TRIFLING so for the future.

2. As once again to instance (because I would beat it into their heads, though
not so, as they beat (or pinch) persons out of their meetings) I told Mr. Penn,
that he had the words of man's wisdom indeed, but did ask him where the
Demonstration of the Spirit was with him in POWER and mighty Signs; and told
him that if he could show but ONE in his Church that had such Spiritual Gifts
upon his turning Quaker, as was immediately inspired into those Members of the
true Church in the Apostles times, upon their becoming Christians, it would put
a clear difference betwixt them and the Baptists, and herein then they would
EXCEED the Baptists, but now they did not.

Now what is G.W's. Answer to me in this, he does not say, It is true, nor
dares affirm it is false; nor does he produce ONE such in his Church, nor yet
plainly and honestly say, he cannot: now any one of these had been a plain
Answer, For that was it he pretended in his Title, viz. the Quakers plainness,
etc. But instead thereof, (alas nothing, but asks NEW QUESTIONS, viz. What if
God will not bestow such Gifts and Signs now? And who is it can tell G's
meaning or Answer in these words? does he mean God will, or God will not? I
challenge him to say if he dares, negatively, That God will not-now bestow such
gifts on his Church, or if he had rather, Positively, That God will now, and
yet surely one of them he must mean; but how shall another Man know which, for
if I should say he means affirmatively, he may say nay, I do not say, God will
now; and if I say negatively, he may say nay, I only queried it, but did not
say, God will not now.

Now then let all unbyassed Readers Judge, how this then can be either a C^rtain
or Plain Answer: this is like indeed the Quakers Plainness; for here is
Equivocation and the Quakers Quibble still, yea and another Question, What say
you Baptists to this Proposal? And yet another, must this conclude the
Controversy? nay, and one more, Who then shall escap^ your Censure? nay and
another upon that, Have not the Jesuits in this wise Argued? And two or three
more such Questions, p. 13, 14. I would fain know of any sober Man in his right
Wits, whether this be a plain Answer, or any Answer at all to me? he speaking
to the Baptists and asking Questions of them, that is nothing to me.

3. And so about Muggleton, when the thing I requested of Mr. Penn, was, Why he
or his friends should be believed MORE than Muggleton or an Impostor? and what
he could say, pretend to, and produce more than Muggleton or an Impostor could
say, pretend to, and produce as he did? They both pretending an immediate
Commission from Heaven and to be true Prophets, etc. G.W. does not once go
about to show me why, nor wherefore, nor does so much as SAY or produce ONE
thing which Muggleton or an Impostor cannot: no, not a word, but instead of
that tells me, Muggleton and the Quakers are not one, and that he hol^s many
Blasphemous Doctrines which they do not, and that they had writ against him.

Who ever doubted of this? I did not, I knew it all very well before, and
therefore did not ask Mr. Penn any such thing; and I can as well tell G.W. that
Muggleton has writ against the Quakers, will that prove him to be no Impostor?
If not, why should their writing against him prove them no Impostors? And if
Muggleton holds Blasphemous Doctrines, will it therefore follow, that the
Quakers may not hold Blasphemous Doctrines, and so may be Impostors also? no
surely: the Quakers may be Impostors, notwithstanding Muggleton's holding
Blasphemous Doctrines. One would think the Quakers should be ashamed of their
so silly Arguing, it is a sign they stand but upon a Sandy Foundation when they
have no other and better Arguments to produce for themselves. But I did not,
nor do yet know what Demonstrative Evidence and Reason you can give, why you
should be Believed MORE than the Baptists, or looked upon by any, to be a truer
Church than they, nay nor yet, why your pretended Commission from Heaven should
be Credited MORE than Muggletons: and therefore I prayed W.P. to tell me that.
Now can any man think this of G.W. to be a plain and satisfactory Answer to
that: As if when I talk of REASONS, G.W. he presently thinks of PLUMBS, and
much at that rate he Answers me: Oh strange Quakerism! That it should sometimes
bereave men both of their Consciences and Wits at once! And yet make them so
strangely confident as to appear wilfully blind (if not impudent) in such their
palpable Evasions, and notorious Equivocations, in the face of the World.

4. My Epistle was but very short, and let it be remembered it was
Expostulatory, and yet G.W, in his Plainness, gives the Plain go-by, to one
whole Paragraph in it, viz. the third in p. 14, and 15. where I expostulated
and demanded of W.P. if he was faithful, and just to his Agreement, or if he
was Reasonable in himself, to oppose with three men besides against one, etc.
He takes not the least notice of it, and p. 16. I inquired of W.P. whether T.
Hicks might not then say in W.P 's own Language, Thou art a Forger, and have
forged this Distinction for thy Friend, it not being set down in thy own
Friends Book: and that it was such a silly Distinction as was impossible to
hold good, if the Quakers Principle touching the Christ hold true: and many
more such Expostulations that G.W. says not one word to, and yet this it seems
I must take for an Answer and the Quakers-Plainness* (and it is very likely
most of their poor Disciples take it as SUCH, and willingly believe it upon the
Credit of their Leaders, or the bare Report of some of their Friends as if it
was so indeed, without ever reading it judiciously and examining it thoroughly:
Ah poor d^ceived and deluded Souls!) THEREFORE that you may not pretend
Ignorance, nor unnecessarily employ your selves to no purpose, except it be to
EVADE AN ANSWER, whilst you hypocritically pretend to GIVE ONE: which will but
Evince your Cause to be foul and desperate that needs such a Cloak to hide it,
(which yet you have worn now Thredbare by your so often using it in your
Answers to other men's Books) I have thought good here to give you NOTICE of
it, and acquaint you what will be honest, plain, and satisfactory, but that
such Shifts and Quibbles as you have already used, are not, will not, nor can
be so.

5. After all I have already said, I freely declare, I stand almost astonished at
the Prodigious CONFIDENCE of the Leading Quakers (of the Foxonian Tribe)
audacious Attempts in such Evasive Replies to their Opponents, daubed over (to
beguile the simple-hearted or deceived Quakers) with seeming Vindications, when
their dreadful accusing Consciences (if not absolutely seared) at the same time
cannot but tell them how greatly the sincerer sort of Quakers have been
burthen^d, yea grievously afflicted these many years, (under the sense of Guilt
that rests on those called the BODY) I may say even to the highest Degree of
Perplexity, witness, J.P. W.M. J.O. W.G. T.M. M.S. T.F. J.F. M.P. A.M. with
many more; and although some of them may have tr^ckled under the TYRANNICAL
power of this BODY (so called) i. e. their Church (though it be indeed
Principally, but of G. Foxes Building) yet their Consciences cannot but bear
Witness to what I have said in this Respect. Here Is all that can be said in
favor of such wicked Practices, that it seems they must by Decree (to uphold
their Cause as long as they can) set SOMETHING forth in Print as an Answer, or
that bears the Title of an Answer, to all that comes out against them.

6. It must be a very strong and notorious Delusion, these Leading-Quakers are
under, if they do not see themselves manifestly Guilty of Abominable
Equivocations and Quibbling in the greatest matters of Faith and Religion
controverted between them and others: Insomuch, that notwithstanding their now
loud pretenses of professing Christ, according to the Holy Scriptures (so long
as they do not nor will disclaim their For^er Professions to the Contrary, and
their former abuses, put upon the Scriptures) and notwithstanding their loud
Clamors against the Socinians, as denying the Divinity of Christ; yet
themselves must know, that they deny CHRIST to be either God or Man in the
sense that Christians acknowledge him to be so, see Contest for Christianity, p.
115, 116, 117. and Controv. ended, p. 44. to 54. And consequently they
Introduce into the profession of Religion and the Scriptures such Equivocations
and ambiguous Quibbling, as Renders the most Religious Confessions, Profound
Deceits, and the Words of God Recorded in Scripture, no better than a Nose of
Wax, most dangerous and false.

7. There are five or six little Books that do very ingeniously and fully set
forth and give an account of the Deceit, Impostures, intolerable Pride,
Hypocrisy, and Tyranny, with the Popish Principles and vile Practices of some
of your Leaders and Ministers of the Foxonian party, chiefly in Matters of
Fact, which are visible to the Eyes and subject to the Senses of Men, viz. The
Spirit of the Quakers tried, Controversy ended, The Spirit of the Hat, Tyranny
and Hypocrisy detected, Questions for the Quakers,
to which may be added The Quakers Spiritual-Court.
The which, or some of them at least, I should advise all Persons Judiciously
to peruse, that would be infor^ed concerning them: For notwithstanding that the
Quakers have Printed something that bears the Name of Answers, I do seriously
think and hereby advertise them, that those Books are IN EFFECT as much
un-answered as if they had not writ twenty lines about it, for indeed what
these Quakers have writ in Reply, is but ABOUT it, not TO it. They beat about
the Bush and that is all, they make the greatest noise like the Lapwing, when
indeed they are farthest off.

What shall I say to your poor pitiful, slight, shifting evasive and
equivocating Replies to these Books? What shall I say to that heavy Charge of
TYRANNY and HYPOCRISY exhibited against you in the Book bearing that Title?

What shall I say to that equal, just, and fair Proffer made to you therein?
and your not-accepting of it? p. 49. and Title Page. It Is offered over and over
again to the Quakers: To refer the Judgment of matters of Fact to the verdict
of twelve impartial and honest men, EQUALLY to be chosen, and that in case the
Quakers and the others should not agree in the choice of the Persons; it was
proposed, that the Vmpirage should be referred to the LORD-MAJOR of London or
any Alderman on the Bench, or to any one of twenty Common Council-men, and if
the Quakers would put it to this just honest and fair Issue, that they should
signify it in writing, and leave it with Francis Smith Bookseller ( dwelling
in Cornhil) and they should find their Accusers ready to comply therewith.

Now, why dare and do you not thus adventure the Trial of it? And why will W.P.
notwithstanding Cry out for Proof, and exclaim that you are horribly belied and
slandered; and that they are all Lies, Slanders and Forgeries, (and this is the
chiefest part of your Answers:) If they are so indeed, or ye Quakers so
innocent therein as you would pretend, nothing could possibly more honor and
advantage the Quakers and their Cause here, as clearly to Evince it and have
this Judged for them by honest and impartial Men on both sides; and it being
only matter of Fact, such men are capable to judge of it: for shame then W.P.
and ye Quakers do not any more cry out Gross Lies, Slanders and Forgeries, till
you have agreed to this fair propose, and have had the matters indifferently
heard, as so long profferred you, and it be proved so: what will ye thus
decline the Proof and Trial, and yet exclaim as wronged? oh unreasonable!

8. What shall I say? What can be said to such Men? What can be expected from
them? Or who (that is not infatuated) can believe them or approve of their
Confidence, whereby they make themselves ridiculous, and manifest to the world,
that some of them have neither tender Consciences nor shame in them, to stand
in things with such perverseness of Spirit (not to say Impudence) against not
only Common Sense and REASON, But OCULAR DEMONSTRATION, saying any thing
Backwards or Forwards as they please, and that without Blushing: I will name
but three Instances now.

1. Witness those many Texts of Scripture perverted, ^ltered, changed, and
corrupted by G. Fox, when he charges others with falsehood, corrupting and
perverting the Scriptures, for doing the like or less as is set forth in
several particulars in the Spirit of the Quakers tried, where in some places G.
Fox puts THEM for HIM, Col. 3.10. Conscience for Thoughts, Romans 2.15. he puts
Christ's Belly for the Believers Belly, John 7.38. puts another person into the
Text, John 10.29. Leaves out the SPIRIT, in 1 Cor. 2.10. puts IT for WE, in 2
Cor. 2.16. IS for WAS, in 2 Cor. 5.19. Leaves out the word WILFULLY, in Heb.
10.26. puts speaking for Prophesying, 1 Cor. 14.31. etc. Now as that Author
says well, any one that can but Read and understand English, and knows that A
is not B, or HIM is not THEM, or that IT is not, nor can be WE, may know that
G. Fox has committed Falsehoods, altered, changed and corrupted several
Scriptures, and yet Mr. Penn has undertaken to vindicate him in these matters,
though against his own and other Men's Eyes, and yet if you will credit W. Penn,
this is the Spirit of Truth, or the Truth that he vindicates.

2. Nay, let G. Fox their grand Prophet not only speak the greatest NONSENSE,
but Write it and publish it also, to the World in Print; yet Mr. Penn will
vindicate it and Justify him also; G. Foxe's words are these, [And so to the
word Christ Jesus, him by whom the World was made before it was made] and this
G. Fox says SEVEN times over in his Book; and another time thus, [By which the
World was made before it was made] Now if any Man that understands English and
Sense except a Quaker) will not say this is absolute NONSENSE that G. F. here
ascribes to CHRIST, and not fit for any Man of Ingenuity, and that is a
Scholar or regards his Credit, to vindicate, then I am wonderfully deceived
and know not my Mother Tongue; and yet if you will believe W. Penn, this is the
Truth or Spirit of Truth still which he vindicates, oh horrid!

3. Nay more, Write and Print BLASPHEMY, and then stand in it and Justify it
when they have done: Witness, Solomon Eccles (one of these Quaking Ministers)
in his Book, called the Quakers Challenge; he says of GEORGE FOX, whose name
thou art not worthy to take into thy mouth, who is a Prophet indeed, and has
been faithful in the Lords business from the beginning. It was said of CHRIST,
That he was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him
not; SO IT MAY BE SAID OF THIS TRUE PROPHET, whom John said, HE WAS NOT; But
thou will feel this Prophet one day, as heavy as a Millstone upon thee, etc.

And yet G. Whitehead undertakes to vindicate this BLASPHEMOUS SPEECH, and
says, it is a LITTLE FAILURE in Syntax, (for so his Conscience will serve him
to call BLASPHEMY, when it is utterred and published by a QUAKER, though
against the Lord CHRIST) ah George! can thou call it but a LITTLE FAILURE, is
that a Truth? At the best, surely it is no less than a GREAT FAILURE.

9. And as for George's DIRECTION of Sol. Eccles INTENTION in G.W's. serious
search p. 58. I pray my Reader and you Quakers, but to peruse the MYSTERY of
JESUITISM, (particularly Letter ninth, Letter seventh, and Letter sixth,
beginning at p. 122.) and see whether it may not be concluded George is almost
as good an Artist at it as they, or at least, if he be not fit (and a towardly
Youth) for their School, to teach people how to equivocate (not to say ^ly)
neatly, by DIRECTING the INTENTION: and if George or Solomon Eccles may direct
the Intention in THIS, why not in OTHER things: And if George, why not the
Jesuits? Or if the Jesuits, Why not George? And this being once set thus on
foot, who has power to stop it, or who can tell where it may center, except
GEORGE FOX, or the POPE? For if George or SOL. may in DOCTRINALS; or Cases of
BLASPHEMY, why may not the Jesuits in MORALS and in Cases of THEFT, LYING and
ADULTERY? I desire you Friends seriously to weigh and consider this, and what
can certainly satisfy you and others herein. When the Quakers shall speak or
write one thing, and tell you themselves they mean another, or do not intend
all they speak or write.

But here is the misery on it; If Mr. Hicks or any of your Opponents do but write,
A for THE, or do but say a DIALOGUE, and not BY WAY OF DIALOGUE, or do but say
YOU for THOU, or the like, Oh then it is Forgery, Lies, Blasphemous Slanders,
Sinful, impure, and Corrupt: then it is not a little Failure in Syntax only,
which the Law of Charity would not take notice of. But let a Quaker say or
write that which is a hundred times worse, nay though it be in it self
Blasphemy against Christ; Yet then it is only a little Failure in Syntax, and
against the Law of Charity to reflect on a Man, etc.

10. Upon this occasion I could not but lament ('it is not unlikely another would
have smiled) to see that G.W. in his serious search, p. 24. has such a rare
Invention (I will not say Black-Art) that if Jer. Ives does but say, if you
dare appoint time and place [to discourse about the Quakers Religion and
Ministers] George can and has transformed, (I will not say Conjured) it, into
an Insolent frothy Challenge, and like the common Hectors and Swordmen of the
times. But three or four Challenges that three grand Quakers viz. G. Fox. E.
Buroughs, and Sol. Eccles made, wherein the very same words are, and
abundantly more audacious, as a Challenge at two Weapons, Name, Persons, Time
and Place, a Duel, and if you DARE, (as is worth your seeing more at large in
J. Ives Quest. for the Quakers) yet George's Holiness has Pope-like sanctified
them, and they are serious Challenges, on a serious Religious Account. Oh
excellent Religion! But the other he Condemns, (as if it were Cursed with Bell,
Book, and Candle) in p. 19, 20, and 23. Oh wonderful George! that has such a
POWER to Sanctify and unsanctify words with a small dash of his Pen as he
pleases.

Here I say is the Misery, and this is the most gross abominable Hypocrisy,
unreasonableness, Partiality, and uncharitableness that can be heard of,
against the Light of Nature, the Light of Conscience and the Light of
Scripture: That the same things or ten times worse should be no faults or but
little trivial ones in Quakers, and yet gross falsehoods, horrible lies and
Forgeries in other men. The Lord open your eyes, that you may first learn to
Judge your selves, and Cast the Beam out of your own eye, before you go to cast
the M^^e out of another.

11. Now for your saying and unsaying, Backwards and forwards, I have
particularly manifested it in this my Reply, G.F. condemning what G.W. uses,
and G.W. condemning what G.K. used, and W.P. condemning what G.W. Teaches, and
sometimes G.W. condemning and confuting G.W. himself, and so round and round
again: But now notwithstanding all this (considering what their Practices above
related have been, and that they are generally such) I do expect and must not
doubt in the least, but that they will have that stupendous Confidence, as to
deny all this, (or not confess it,) yea, and will say, it is false and horrid
Slanders, though we read it, we see it with our eyes, and hear it with our
ears, yet our senses must be all deceived; and the Quakers only in the Truth:
and if any will, they may, believe them not only before (but against) their own
Eyes, I cannot help it, neither shall I concern my self much at it, But only to
express my real sorrow for to see any one so strangely deluded.

What else may I? What must I? nay what can I expect from such Men, that have
in this manner so often declared themselves in Print already, who can undertake
to vindicate falsehoods and nonsense, and their grand false Prophet G.F. and
call this a vindication of the Truth, or Spirit of Truth. (Is G. Fox the Truth,
or Spirit of Truth? no certainly, much less then, are his Falsehoods and
nonsense, the Truth or Spirit of Truth) and who will vindicate such words as
are in themselves no less than Blasphemy, asserting, it may be said yea, and SO
said of George Fox, as it was said of CHRIST, That he was in the World, and the
World was made by him and the World knew him not, whom John said he was not:
nay, and this is not only set down without exception; but on the contrary, a
parity or likeness affirmed that SO it may be said of this true Prophet [G.
Fox:] now we believe it was truly said of CHRIST.

12. I doubt not but that I may with safety say, That Mr. Penn, and G.
Whitehead (if either of them please) may with as much Truth, Honor and Sense,
and with as little BLASPHEMY undertake to vindicate and Justify POOR ROBINS
Position and Allegorical Proof, That the Moon is made of Green Cheese.

And though this at first may seem strange to some Persons that may read it,
yet I speak it considerately and not rashly, and do really think that if any
Judicious Person does but duly weigh the one and the other, he will find it so;
and yet these are the Pretending Divinely-Commissioned and Inspired Prophets
and Ministers, and the Infallible Doctors of the only True Church; which
undervalue and Condemn all the World besides.

Surely, had they instead of this Arrogance and Pride, but a little Humility
and Charity, it would make them quite of another mind; and thus all that will,
may see how they RESPECT Persons among the Quakers, and what DIVINE HONOR,
some of them give, and DIVINE POWER they ascribe, to their grand Prophet George
Fox.

God in his Infinite mercy, open the eyes of all sincere-hearted (though not so
discerning, yet) well-meaning Christians, That they may understand and see that
it is absolute FOLLY (if not MADness) for any one to turn from another Church
to the Quakers, since they do produce no real or certain Discriminating
Testimony and Evidence (but only their bare say-so) nor do SAY any MORE than
others can, no nor yet so much as many other Churches in some things do.

And this I leave with you and all, seriously to consider and judiciously to
weigh in the Balance of true Judgment.

T.T
THE Quakers Character OF THE QUAKERS QUIBBLES.
1. IN the first place, I was given to understand that Mr. Ed. Billing (having
been at the Quakers Cabal) was first pleased to bestow this Character on it,
viz. That it was the Quibblers Quibbles, and that was Answer enough to it.

Reply. -- Honest Ned has hit the Nail o'th head: For the Quibbles I am
certain were the Quakers; and thus then (by their old Friends confession) the
Quakers are still the Quibblers. But I suppose he did not there find any of
these Quibbles. Oh if thou could but see my heart within, as plainly as thou
see my Face without, Thou would not deny -- as I am a man, as I am an
English man, as I am a Christian I will -- However, if this little Epistle be
any, yet certainly, not such a Quibble, as modest Ned B's little Paper, Printed
for satisfaction of -- There was a Quibble indeed, a grand Quibble with a
witness, so loud that it was heard through the Kingdom; thus he might have been
silent, or better Answered himself: And it is no small Quibble of the Quakers,
to own any Persons privately, whilst they pretend to disown them publicly.

2. Thomas Taunton a Quaker, Characterized it on this wise, That that Pamphlet
was made by a Cabal of Anabaptists, and was a mere Forgery, etc.

Reply. This Man I declare to be a false Prophet, and that his Revelation
herein was a mere Forgery, (to speak in his own Language) for there was not one
Baptist or Anabaptist did see it or know any thing of it, till after it was
written and delivered to the Bookseller; as I have before declared as in the
presence of God, and therefore this Quaker was herein led by a False Light, or
a False Spirit, and has abused and wronged the Baptists with a matter
absolutely UNTRUE.

3. Lastly, it past it seems the Censure of one Tho. Rudyard, which I hear was
on this wise: He being ask^, if he did not think it was an ingenious piece,
answered No, and that he Believed a Boy of ten years old might write as
Rational a thing, and that the Author designed to make a piece of Drollery, but
not having Wit enough, brought it forth an Hermophrodite.

Reply. If T.R. thinks good, to call (his Brethren) the Quakers Quibbles,
Drollery, I cannot help it, let them call him to an account for that; but I am
much of T.R's mind, that their Quibbles want wit enough (though not Confidence)
to make a piece of Drollery, and so come forth but an Hermophrodite: Witness
T.R's own Quibbling Answer, to Jer. Ives sober Request, who therein Quibbled so
finely and Drolled so long with Jeremy about Oaths, and being that Jeremy, etc.
till at last he brought that Jeremy in good earnest upon all their Backs, who
has given some of the^r Grand ones their Bellies-full of Swearing and Oaths
too, in his Questions for the Quakers.

Now this of T.R's might be such a rational and ingenious piece indeed, as it
may be a Boy of ten years old might not, and yet a Boy of about thirty might
Write: And I have heard that some of T.R's own Brethren have looked upon it, as
a very Ridiculous and silly thing for him to write so about Swearing as he did,
but that he deals so much in it; and a Quaker may be Foolhardy, as well as
others, why not? Had I been John Osgood, or Gerard Roberts, I would rather have
given T.R. fifty pounds, than to have had my Name brought upon the Stage in so
gross a matter, as here T.R. by his over-self-conceited-Ingenuity has wondrous
well occasioned, to no small shame of the Quakers.

Let Thomas Rudyard compare his Practice of SUEING people with James Naylors
Doctrine [ Possession of the Living Faith, p. 7.] It was never the Faith of
Christ to SUE, Contend, etc. and and T.R. may see, what an Hermophrodite-Quaker
himself will appear.

Besides, one might take notice here of a Quakers Belief; but let that pass, as
not being worth taking notice; For they manifest sufficiently, they regard not
much what they say or write, so it may but undervalue others and arrogantly
lift up themselves.

FINIS.
Mr. Smith,
YOU having so well and carefully published the former, I have thought fit to
send you by this Porter, and do Recommend this second Part of the
Quakers-Quibbles to your like Care; and desire you to ask no Questions. Only I
must request this favor of you (if without too much trouble to you it may be
done) That if any sober Person, or Civil Quaker, shall suspect or doubt whether
I have truly cited the Quakers words out of their own Books; That if they come
to you, and desire it, you would procure such of the Quakers Books as they
shall make question of (if you can find, or have them) and show them at your
shop, for their better satisfaction, that so they may believe their OWN EYES at
least. And that you send one of this second Part to Mr. Whitehead, and another
to Mr. Penn. So farewell,

Thy friend though unknown, T.T.
Jan. 1. 74/5.
THE THIRD PART OF THE QUAKERS QUIBBLES. BEING A Continuation of their
Quibbles, Equivocations, Riddles, Contradictions, Rounds, and Confusions, set
forth in ten several Particulars.

Whereunto is Added Remarks on G.W 's. Slight Sheet, given forth by him as a
Reprehension (for want of an Answer) to the Second Part of the QVAKERS
QVIBBLES. With some further Account of their Grand Mystery of DIRECTING the
INTENTION.

By the same Indifferent Pen.

If [ye] Build again, the things which [ye] Destroyed [ye] make [your selves]
Transgress^rs,

Gal, 2.18. Diruit, Aedificat, Mutat Quadrata Rotundis.
Erroris Matter fuit Aequivocatio semper.
LONDON, Printed for F. Smith at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhil, near the
Royal Exchange. 1675.

TO THE Free Spirited Impartial READER.
AS it is left us upon Record in Holy Writ, that GOD at sundry times, and in
diverse manners has spoken unto his Prophets and People for the Salvation of
Men; so we are thereby likewise assured, that SATAN at sundry times, and in
diverse Forms has spoken to, and deceived many Souls, by pretending great
Light, great Knowledge, high things in words and semblance, Imitating (as near
as might be) the works and ways of GOD, but still without that true Divine
Power which enabled those immediate Men of God VISIBLY to outdo all the
deceiving Pretenses, and Ape-like Imitations of the Devil's Instruments, in the
sight of all Men present; as Moses's Serpent swallowed up all the Egyptian
Sorcerers Serpents; and Paul being filled with the Holy Ghost, was able to
overcome, and strike Elymas the Sorcerer with outward Blindness. Now, this was
IN DEED, and not in TALK only, to be in the Power, and filled with the Holy
Ghost; and the Text says, Then the Deputy, when he saw what was done, believed.

And no sooner had our Glorious Lord JESUS CHRIST Visibly Ascended to Heaven
without us, and fulfilled his great Promise of sending his Holy Spirit upon his
Apostles and Disciples, which was in a visible manner, enduing them with Power
(not only the Name, but the Thing) to speak with Tongues, to Prophecy indeed,
and to work visible Miracles, for the Confirmation of that Word and Doctrine
they Preached to the World, Heb. 2.4. (and this is in Scripture Language true
Spirit Baptism, or the Bapti^^ of the Spirit (and this is it which was for
Persons to be Baptized indeed with the Holy Spirit, as it is expressly called,
Acts 1.5) and of Fire, There appeared unto them Cloven Tongues, like as of
Fire, and it sat upon each of them, and they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost.)

But Satan (that Old Serpent, not willing to be long idle) did quickly raise
up, even in those true Apostles days, many Pretenders, false Prophets, and
false Apostles, some of the first whereof. Ancient Records tell us, were called
Nicolaitans and Gnostics, who pretended high and strange Light, Knowledge, and
Illumination beyond others.

And it is Observable of all the Forms into which Satan Transformed himself,
it seems none is, nor was more taking, than what he used in the true Apostles
days, viz. Transforming himself into an Angel of LIGHT; and therefore no marvel
if such as are false Apostles, are found Transforming themselves into the
Apostles of Christ. Nor is it any great thing (as the true Apostle Intimates to
us) if such as are indeed Satan's Ministers also be Transformed as the
Ministers of Righteousness.

If the wicked one could play such pranks and be so bold then, how much more
may we expect and suspect it now; and it is no strange thing, if some of his
Ministers and Instruments now be Transformed into Angels, or Messengers of
Light: Pretend the Light, Talk of the Light, Preach up the Light, Own the
Light, Witness the Light, and Cry out, the Light, the Light.

And whereas a certain sort of People lately sprung up among us, did pretend to
high Illuminations, and talked much of the Light they walked in above others; and
of the Power, immediate Calling, and Gifts of the Spirit that they had, as in
the Apostles time: And as they pretended to higher things than others, so I did
set my self more especially and seriously to hear, consider, weigh, and try
them, their Doctrines and Principles, for about these Twenty Years. But alas,
in lieu of finding any such thing amongst them, as the same Light, Power, and
immediate Commission and Gifts of the Spirit that the Apostles, and Apostolical
Churches had (and which they then did pretend to, and blame others for want of)
I could see nor hear nothing among them, but the mere Words, and bare
Pretenses, and taking up some such things by Imitation, as they fan^ied in
themselves, and as they found the Apostles wrote, or the Scriptures spoke of,
as many others do (whom yet they did once Condemn for that very thing,) yea,
and in^tead thereof I have Observed the greatest Inconstancy, Uncertainty,
Turn, and Change amongst them, that I think ever was to be found among any
People that pretended to so refined Sublime a Religion, in the space of Twenty
Years, and yet all this while to talk of, or pretend to INFALLIBILITY, which
has Occasioned them (to defend themselves from those who have taken more
notice of their Inconstancy, Uncertainty, and Changes than they were willing
should be) to use the greatest Quibbling, and grossest Equivocations that have
been used in Religious matters, ever since the Jesuits new modeled the Art,
the better to hide it, and themselves.

Some of their most Considerable Quibbles in their Doctrine touching that Grand
Principle of our true Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, I had Occasion given me by
them, to set forth more particularly in my Second Treatise, beginning at p. 29.
But my intended Brevity not permitting, and not knowing but that these Persons
might learn to be somewhat more humble, meek, moderate, and civil, when they
should rightly reflect on it and themselves, then prevented me of proceeding
any further therein: Yet since I understand it is very much desired by others,
and the Quakers as much to want it, they being as Confidently outrageous as
before (for in the midst of all their Inconstancies in their Practice and
Doctrines I find them chiefly constant in these two things in their Practice,
viz. their egregious Confidence, and their Railing, Reviling Language to
others; and in that it may be truly said of them, Can the Ethiophian change his
skin, or the Leopard his spots?) wherefore here is set forth more of their
Quibbles in several particulars, and that in some most weighty and important
Points; as those of the Church, the Anointing, the Holy Spirit, and the Holy
Scriptures; and in other Matters which by the Quakers were at first made very
weighty also, however now they are Declined from what they once Pretended.

And if that be admitted, neither themselves nor others can have any Certainty
in them, or of them, for they may pretend the Spirit leads them to this to Day,
and that to Morrow, and to a third thing quite different the next Day; and they
may say (as some of them have done) that they had not a clear Discerning of the
Lord's Voice in this thing then, nor in that thing now; and so they may as well
pretend seven and seventeen Years hence, for it depends only upon their bare
Word to others; and thus they make their Religion as unconstant as the Moon,
and as wavering as the Wind. But how all this should be, and yet the Quakers
all this while pretend to INFALLIBILITY, and That such their Writings and
Doctrines were given forth by the Spirit of the Lord in them, though thus
Contradictory, is such a Quibble and Riddle, as would puzzle Oedipus himself
(were he here) to un-riddle.

I should not delight in this threatening day to be uncovering their Nakedness,
did I not judge it a Duty to warn you (and endeavor to lead them out) of all
False Coverings, which in vain they would hide themselves under in their
Defiled State, rendering themselves by so doing but the more Naked in the sight
of God and good men, and giving the Enemy greater Occasion against them.

I have mentioned but some of those many that might be Collected by any that
does but seriously Observe them, and their Writings; I had a large Field to
walk in: For who is it that knew them formerly, and does not see their palpable
and grand Alteration now, in their Gestures, their Words, their Salutations,
(for now they will greet one in the Marketplace, (which they use to tell us the
Pharisees did) asking in the Market, How do thou do?) In their Freedom in
Eating and Drinking; the Furniture of their Houses, their Clothes, both for
Fashion and Fineness of the Stuff; minding the World, and the things of the
World; their heaping up Riches, and particularly in their now going to Law, and
having one or more Lawyers, or Attorneys of them, besides their Swearing in our
Courts, or if not, doing therein something that is worse; and almost in their
whole Practice and Conversation, as well as in many of their Doctrines and
Principles? Which if some abler Pen should undertake to set forth, it might be
the better, and not unnecessary, as it is possible hereafter some one may be
moved to do.

Neither I think should I have done thus much, but that I find they are grown
of late Years so excessive High, Proud, Imperious, Scornful, and Hardened in a
strange kind of Confidence and Quibbling Equivocations, beyond the bounds of
Modesty and Reason, that they have need of something to make them sensible, if
it may be, and better to know themselves, that they may not thus proudly
Despise, Curse, and Condemn everlastingly others that are not of their Body,
Church, and Way.

Certainly the Old Serpent was the first Equivocator, Evasive Quibbler, and so
the grandest Hypocrite that ever was, when he deceived our great Grandmother
Eve, and it is as certain by what we see with our Eyes, and hear with our Ears,
that he has not yet forgot that Old Trade; no small instances whereof, the
Quakers late Practices, and many of their Pamphlets (which you will find here
cited) most evidently appear to be.

I beseech you therefore give me leave in the Bowels of Love and Compassion
seriously to warn and admonish you (and such of them as will hear) to look well
to your goings, and consider upon what it is you stand; whether it be not very
much upon Men's bare words, or your own Fancies, or at best, in Naked
likenesses, and mere Imitations, after you have been so long crying out against
all Humane Traditions, Literal Imitations, making of Likenesses and Figures to
your selves, of what you find was once the Condition of others, and beware of
such uncertain, variable, changeable Lights and Doctrines, as have no certainer
basis than Geo. Foxes Light, or Mr. Penn's Sandy Foundation. Be not
High-minded, but Fear, and let the Royal Law of CHARITY continue above all,
amongst all, and I shall subscribe my self

An Unfeigned desirer of thy Souls Welfare. THOMAS THOMPSON.

THE CONTENTS.
SECT. I. THE Quakers Quibbles about their Quaking and Trembling, and
discerning the Lords voice. SECT. II. Their Quibbles about Set-days, and Set
places. SECT. III. Their Quibbles about their Body (alias the Church) and
Forms, as the Hat and Hand. SECT. IV. Their Quibbles about Flesh being Silent.
SECT. V. Their Quibbles about the Anointing. SECT. VI. Their Quibbles about
the Spirit. SECT. VII. Their Quibbles and Hypocrisy about Scholarship and
Languages. SECT. VIII. Their Quibbles and Hypocrisy about punching People, and
thrusting and haling them out of Meetings. SECT. IX. Their Quibbles and
Hypocrisy in their former Practice of Disturbing of Ministers, in Parish
Assemblies, with Reference to their Practice now. SECT. X. Their Grand Quibbles
about, and gross abuse of the Holy Scriptures, Collected out of their Own
Books. The Conclusion.
Sam. Fisher Transposed on the Precedent Occasion.
Remarks on G.W's. slight Sheet, containing SECT. I. Of G.W's. Title, and his
false Suggestion. 2. Of the Authors Name and Letter. 3. Of Socinianism, and the
Divinity of Christ, which the Quakers own. 4. Of Scornful Reflections. 5. Of
the Miraculous Gifts of the Spirit and Prophecy. 6. Of the Manifestation of
the Spirit. 7. Of the Discerning of Spirits. 8. Of Unbelievers and Muggleton,
etc. 9. Of the Quakers Jesuitical Art of Directing the Intention. G.W's. Letter
to the Author, and the Author's Answer.
The Third Part OF THE QUAKERS QUIBBLES.
Being a Continuation of their Quibbles, Equivocations, Contradictions,
Riddles, Rounds, and Confusions, in several particulars.

THAT Flood of Follies and Absurdities, that Cloud of Confusions, and Self-
contradictions, which shatters it self up and down by Plats in sundry Showers
throughout the sundry Pages of those Men's Books, every Eye that Reads them (as
they there lie at a distance) it is possible may not so easily set sight on
them. Therefore I shall cull some few of them only out (for the whole Number
passes my skill to cast Account of) and clap them a little closer together, not
so much to shame them, as to honor the Truth which they would shame. That they
may be the more Ready to be Read, and apparent to the view of every Ordinary
Reader, (That any, save such, as seeing, will not see) may see the Sword of the
Lord already laid on the Arm and Right-eye of the Idol-Prophets, to the drying
up of the one, and the darkening of the other, for perverting the right way of
the Lord; so that they see not the Sun of Righteousness, nor yet the Moon of so
much as Common sense and Reason; but grope about in the mist of their own muddy
minds, so as to need some to Lead them by the Hand, and show them whereabouts
they are, and what a shaking Sandy Foundation they stand on. Sam. Fisher's
Addit. Appendix, [Transpros'd] p. 2.

SECT. I. The Quakers Quibbles concerning Quaking and Trembling, and Discerning
the Lord's Voice.
Sect. 1. ABout sixteen Years ago, this was their Doctrine; A Paper sent forth
into the World from them that are scornfully called Quakers, p. 5. Moses, who
was Judge over all Israel, feared, Quaked, and Trembled exceedingly: And the
Son of Man was to eat his Bread, with Quaking: And Daniel the Man of God
trembled, and was astonished. And Jeremiah, the Prophet of the Lord, all his
Bones did Shake: And David, who was King, Trembled and Quaked: And Habakkuk,
who was a Prophet, Trembled; his Belly shook, his Lips quivered. And Isaac, in
whom the Seed was called, Trembled exceedingly: And Paul, a Minister of Christ,
Trembled: But they [viz. The Priests and Teachers] make a scorn of Trembling
and Quaking, and show themselves ignorant, and strangers to the Life and Power
of God, as their Generation ever was -- But the Seed of God and the Prophets,
and the Servants of the Lord we own, and their Conditions we witness; and
therefore all the Priests we utterly deny.

Sam. Fisher, in his Rusticus ad Academicos, second Exercitation, p. 18. As for
that Holy Duty it self of Quaking and Trembling at the Word of God, which as
blind a Guide, and brute a Beast as thou [viz. Dr. Owen] art in speaking evil
of what thou know, as also of what thou know not; thou both ownest and
acknowledgest the Holy Men of God were taken with of Old, when moved to utter
his Word, as it came to them, (witness thy own words, the coming of the Word to
them filled them with dread and Reverence of God, Hab. 3.16. And also greatly
affected even their outward Man) -- yet we own it (as thou in word do) etc.

And accordingly then was their Practice; it was a very frequent thing among
them, almost in every Meeting, one might see One or More of them, Quaking,
Shaking, and Trembling.

Sect. 2. But now to wheel about again; about Ten Years afterward, Observe how
the Quaker would Quibble and mince the Matter, in Patrick Livingstone's plain
and down right dealing with them that were with us, and are gone out from us,
p. 10. I will here give you his own words, he being (as I understand) one of
the Quakers Ministry.

Now, those that were with us, and are gone from us, they pretend to own the
first coming forth, and they cry, where is the Power that was at first? -- But
here we see the subtilty of the Enemy, because the mighty motions of the Bodies
of Friends are ceased, and Friends are still, cool, and quiet; therefore these
Persons are made to think that the same Power is not in Meetings; but Oh ye
Foolish Ones, and beguiled by the Enemy! Can ye not discern the Times; That
time, and this time? When Physic is given to the Body, is it not to work
terribly, that it may purge the Body? And when all is purged out the Physic
leaves working, and the Body is still? Were not all the breakings and meltings,
and terrible Shakings and Quakings of Friends Bodies, to purge ^ut sin, and to
bring to stilness, coolness, and calmness of mind? -- Now, when these terrible
Shakings, Breakings, and Meltings were, they were but for a little time, and so
were quickly gone again; and the Voice of the Lord was not distinctly discerned
there; but these were that thereby Sin might be purged out; and then the Cause
of Terrible Potions was taken away, and the stilness being come, that is a
durable thing, a Solid Condition; and here the Mind is brought into a CAPACITY
to discern the Voice of the LORD; whereas in the time of the violent Motions,
the Mind was so hurried, and tossed with the Rage of the Enemy, so that there
was not a clear discerning what might be done, or left undone in many things.
So far he: And what Concords here? Does not this sound like Harp and Harrow?
Let any one Observe how the Quakers are changed, both in their Doctrine and
Practice, and yet I am almost of the Opinion, that the Quakers will have the
Face and Confidence to deny it, though it be thus palpable to our very eyes and
Senses.

Sect. 3. P. Livingstone, one of their Ministers, would here Quibble indeed,
mince and extenuate the Business, and yet alas, all to no purpose, except to
render themselves both more Ridiculous, and Hypocritical; For,

When the Quakers opposed the Ministers, then Quaking and Trembling was to
continue for Thousands of Years, even from Isaac, Moses, etc. to our time, and
the Ministers not witnessing in themselves that Condition of the Holy men of
God, was then by the Quakers urged as ground enough for the Ministers utterly
to be denied. But to turn round again, when now within this seven Years the
Foxonian Quakers are Questioned by other Quakers for their Quaking being CEASED
among them; Oh then! [ it is the subtilty of the ENEMY, and they cannot discern
times, and Quaking was but for a little time, and was to purge out sin:]

And that you may yet further see the Vanity of all this Quibbling, do but
consider, or let P. Livingstone tell you if he pleases.

1. Whether the Son of Man's Trembling and Quaking was to purge out Sin?

2. What, had the Son of Man Sin to purge out, and the Quakers now none? Had
Isaac, Moses, Daniel, Jeremiah, and those Holy Men of God, Sin then to purge
out more than the Quakers have now?

3. But how do those that have within these seven Years been Converted to
Quakerism without such terrible motions of Body and Quakings as was at first
among them? What, had they no Sin at all to purge out? Or, are they still among
the Quakers with their Sins unpurged?

4. Now, when these Terrible shakings were (says the Quaker) [The VOICE of the
LORD was not distinctly DISCERNED there] Oh Excellent! what, did not the Son of
Man, Isaac, Moses, Daniel, and Habakkuk, etc. before, and when they Trembled,
and Quaked, distinctly discern the Voice of the Lord? Surely they dare not say
so: and if they say they did, but the Quakers did not, then the Quakers
Trembling was not like the Trembling of those Prophets and Holy Men of God of
Old.

5. Besides, whereas this Quaker tells us, That when these Terrible Shakings
were, the Voice of the Lord was not distinctly discerned. He thereby confesses
that the Quakers THEN (notwithstanding all their talk and high pretenses) did
not distinctly discern the Voice of the Lord; which I think may be a great
Truth, though he has given himself and Party a desperate blow by it, which he
can be never able to recover, (and I Challenge W.P. to do it, without shameful
begging the QVESTION, or having others to believe it on his bare word, if he
can.)

For, if when they pretended so high, and to such strange Power among them, and
had such mighty motions, they themselves now confess, that notwithstanding all
that, (and all their Preaching up, and confidence of the Light, Spirit, and
Voice of the Lord WITHIN them,) they yet had not a distinct discerning of the
Lord's Voice, not their minds brought into so much as a CAPACITY to discern it,
how can they be MORE confident, and Infallibly evidence they are MORE certain
of it now? Or, why may they not be mistaken, and mistake the Lords Voice now,
as well as fifteen or sixteen Years ago, or not well discern which, or what is
the Lords Voice? And why may they not change again and again, fifteen or
sixteen Years hence, and say then they had not before a distinct discerning of
the Lords Voice? If the Quakers say, but they know now they have it, so the
Quakers formerly said, they knew it, they felt it, they handled it, they
witnessed it IN themselves, and yet the Quakers now say, they were so far out
then, as not to have a distinct discerning of the Lords Voice. And so then may
the Quakers now, for all their pretenses and confident talk.

Let my Reader take Notice, and they Consider, what is become of their Quaking
and Shaking, their mighty Motions, and pretended Voice of the Lord within.

And I think this may be enough for Quaking, to show that the present Quakers I
deal withal have little more than the Name now, in this particular. Sic
mutantur.

SECT. II. The Quakers Quibbles about Set-days and Set-places.
Sect. 1. PRinciples of Truth, p. 42. per E. Buroughs, We believe his True
Worship required and accepted of him, is not by the Tradition of Men, in
outward Observances, or Set-days, or Places, but he is Worshipped only in
Spirit and Truth without respect of Times, Places, or Things. And this was (one
while) the Quak^rs general Doctrine, that they should not run, nor be enjoined
by others to come to Meetings, but as they ^re moved of the Lord thereto, and
that without that, it was but Will Worship: See Principles of Truth, p. 24. and
51. Every Man ought to be left FREE as the Lord shall persuade his own mind in
doing, or leaving undone this or the other practice in Religion.

Sect. 2. But to whirle about, and run round again, at other times, P.
Livingstone can tell you, Idem, p. 5. It is a dark Spirit, clearness and
FREEDOM is not in it, but it has, and does lead into Bondage. -- And here
Satan by Transforming himself has obtained his End and purpose in such, for
which cause he first Transformed himself in the matter of the Hat and the Hand,
and not coming to Meetings, until they should be moved of the Lord, until at
last he obtained his end to get them not to come at all, and not to let them
rest therewith, but also made, and makes them believe lies; as namely, that
they be moved of the Lord to cry against Meetings, etc. And we are certain
enough what that Spirit leads to in the end (for all its fair appearance) if it
be followed to the end, etc.

And who now Observes more their set-days and hours too, their first, and
fourth days meeting, and set places Built on purpose (a^ the Bull and Mouth,
and Grace Church Street, etc.) than the Quakers? And thus are they run into
Forms as those whom they once condemned, and now deny that FREEDOM they once
allowed and cried for; which is all but a Quibble.

SECT. III. The Quakers Quibbles about Forms and the Church.
Sect. 1. THat the Quakers at first did cry out against Forms and several
external Ordinances, and all Formality in Divine Worship and the Church of God,
is so generally known, that I think I need not trouble the Reader with
Instances; yet if any should doubt it, see G. Fox Mystery, p. 65. Paul brought
the Saints off from things that a^^ seen, and water is seen, and it is Baptism:
Here is a few words will serve for all.

Sect. 2. But then to go round again, when others of the Quakers Object against
them, That taking off the Hat in prayer, and taking by the Hand are but Formal,
and that by setting up this, Friends were setters up of Forms; now, hear the
Quakers Quibble, P. Livingstone, Idem, p. 12. in Answer to that Objection. The
Form of Truth we own; that which Truth appears in, that is the Form of Truth:
Friends do not choose a Form for the Truth, but Truth chooses its own Form, and
moves in it at its pleasure. Oh Excellent! then it seems taking off the Hat,
or taking by the Hand is the Form among the Quakers that Truth appears in, and
this is the Form that the Truth chooses for its own; Oh rare Formalists!

Sect. 3. Then P. Livingstone goes on, p. 13. And we know those that do the
contrary, pretend what they will, it is by and in that Spirit which is
opposite, and opposes the Truth of God, and its Children, and we know if they
were lead by the Spirit of the Body [ id est, the Church] they would be led to
the same things it leads the Body, and acts the Body in, for the Body is one,
though many Members, it being guided by one Life, and they agree in these
things, and one stands not with the Hat on, and another with it off; nor one
does not give the Hand, and another refuses, which is a contradiction; but we
see further into the thing than the Hat and Hand. We see and know the Spirit of
Enmity in the ground -- and it is truly testified against, to be that Spirit of
ANTICHRIST, against CHRIST: and the Spirit of Truth in the Body [ i.e. the
Church] bears this Testimony against that Spirit and them Acted by it: Oh,
what Rents and Divisions this evil Spirit has made! How many poor simple
Hearts have been drawn aside by it! So far he.

Now, is not this exactly like the Doctrine and Practice of the Church of Rome?
Nay, the Quakers are got so far, as to say, Friends that stand in the Life, and
are the Body, know that there is not, NOR CANNOT BE preservation out of the
Body [meaning the Body of Quakers] For they that are out of the Body, are out
of the Faith, ^^d are not of the Body, Pat. Livingstone, p. 20. Just as the
Papists say there is no Salvation out of the Church: Yea, and more; that they
must believe as the True Church (meaning the Quakers Church) Believes, or else
positively they cannot be saved: For these are his express words, viz. I bear
my testimony for that People, in scorn called Quakers, that the Lord has
chosen them a peculiar People, above all People upon the Earth, and we are to
turn to no other People, etc.

And they that believe not as the true Church-Believes CANNOT BE SAVED -- But
this we know of an INFALLIBLE certainty, that WE being faithful in the Truth,
those that are gone from us are of another Spirit, and not of the Faith of the
True Church. P. Livingstone, p. 22, and 23. (this is like the very topstone of
Popery) and that in such low and external things too, as in giving the Hand,
pulling off the Hat, and coming to Quakers Meetings.

Sect. 4. Is not the Hat and the Hand SEEN? Is it not a strange thing, that
giving the Hand, and pulling off the Hat should be Ordinances to CONTINVE in
the True Church, but not Water Baptism, and Material Bread and Wine in the
Lords Supper? Note, Readers, I pray you; Weigh this seriously, and what their
Reasons can be, Remembering G. Fox's words at the beginning of this Section.

Consider well whither it is these Quakers are a Running, laying such a
Necessity on such a Ceremonial and external thing, as giving the Hand; do they
not in this of the Hand exceed the Church of Rome* in her impositions? I have
Transcribed the more of this, that you may see how far the Quakers themselves
are now come to own Forms, and disown the Spirit in particular Persons, and are
already got to the Spirit IN the Body, yea, and OF the Body of Friends: that
is* the Spirit in and of their Church: Like as the Pope and Church of Rome; and
thus you may understand how the Quakers are, and have been Divided amongst
themselves, one pretending the Spirit, and others pretending the Spirit, one
against another, and that which one calls the Spirit of Christ, the other
Quaker calls the Spirit of Antichrist, and that which one calls Light, the
other says is Darkness, and if they will continue running round, and groping up
and down in that Darkness, notwithstanding this Faithful Admonition, so let
them.

SECT. IV. The Quakers Quibbles about Flesh being Silent.
Sect. 1. IT is as generally known that this was at first the Quakers Doctrine,
and they used to cry out to others, Cease from Man, let all Flesh be silent,
and so would stop the Mouths of other Men and Teachers, and draw People away
from hearing of others.

Sect. 2. But now, when other Quakers tell them so, then hear how they wheel
about again, P. Livingstone, Idem p. 14.15. You that cry, let all Flesh be
silent, and yet not silent in your selves, you but mock God, and belie him, he
has not bid you cry so, -- For it is seen in the eternal Light, that such
would have the Truth silenced and its Children.

And the Prophet said, Cease from Man, but HE taught, or the LIFE in and by him
taught, but all teaching that comes not from the LIFE, are M^n's teachings,
that is, the Flesh to be silenced: But such as be taught of the Lord, and sent
of him to Publish his Truth, this is not to be denied, nor is denied by them
that know its teachings in themselves, etc.

Oh Excellent Quibbling, but pitiful begging of the Question, for they still
take that for granted, which never was, nor can be granted them, That that
only in them is the Life and the Lords teaching which they call so, MORE than
that in others, who oppose them.

Sest. 3. Thus you see, one while they would have us cease from Man, another
while (to go round) we must not cease from Man, nor the Light and Life in the
Man; another while to face about again and meet in the middle, we must cease
from the Man, but not from the Light in the Man; and one while the pretended
Light in the Man is Light, and at other times it is Darkness, and all this as
they (the Men, or the Life in them) fancy and please, when they please, how
they please, or what they please. One while all Flesh and Man is to be silent,
but another time (to dance the Rounds) the Prophet (who was a Man, and Flesh)
Taught, or the Life in and by him Taught, one or the other, or both; or he
knows not whether: Oh! the profound Riddles and Quibbles of these Quakers!

Sect. 4. For that is a great Mystery and a Riddle, that deserves unriddling
upon all Occasions, that when a Quaker says, I say this, or, I write this, or,
I Act this, or, I thought good, or, I thought meet, as G.W. said (to write an
Answer to the Quakers Quibbles,) whether he means the Man George, or the Light
within, or both, or neither? And pray George be so favorable to thy
Contrymen and me, as to let us know when it is the Light in thee or the
Flesh, that speaks or writes, when thou (or any for thee) writes again.

SECT. V. The Quakers Quibbles about the Anoyntting.
Sect. 1. THat the Quakers one while did most frequently cry out, the Anointing
which they had Received, abides in them, and they need not that any Man teach
them, but as the same Anointing teaches them all things, etc. I think
themselves should not have Confidence (though they have abundantly too much) to
deny; and that their Doctrine was at first: This is the New Covenant, I will
put my Laws into their Minds, and Write them in their Hearts, and they shall
not teach every Man his Neighbor, and every Man his Brother, etc. G. Fox
Testimony of the True Light, p. 37.

Sect. 2. But now when others among themselves have Objected this very thing
against them, then hear the Quibble, P. Livingstone, p. 15. Here indeed is a
subtle Bait of the Enemy to stop Truths Testimony through them that are called
to bear it, and to Publish it to the Nations: And ye need that no Man Teach
you, but as the same Anointing Teaches you ^^ all things, say they; But why
did HE Teach both by writing and speaking, who spoke or wr^t these words? Or
rather, was it not the Anointing in him that wrote unto them, That they needed
not the Teaching of Man, who was merely Man, and was not come to the Anointing
in themselves, but this forbids not the Anointing to Edify the Church -- as it
does move through either Son or Daughter, and this is not Man's Teaching, but
this is the Anointing which is Truth.

Sect. 3. Excellent still, the Old begging of the Question, and Quibbling; it
is when they please, not the Man, but the Anointing in the Man, that writes and
Teaches, and when they (Pope-like) please; it is not the Anointing in the Man,
but the Man that Teaches or Writes: But how came this Foxonian Quaker to have
this Popedom and Infallibility of Judgment MORE than these other Quakers? Who
gave it him? has he not arrogantly assumed it to himself? most certainly.

No Quaker can justly blame me, if I require satisfaction of them in this
particular, or for asking them (to show them how they run round in a Circle)
about the Voice of God, the Word, or Anointing, and Light within them; one of
their own Teachers and Learned Men having not thought it uncivil, nor abusive
to ask and publish the like concerning the SACRED SCRIPTVRES (except they will
be so hardy as to say now, what, or to the like purpose, some of them
heretofore have not much stuck at, That the Voice of God and the Light IN
THEMSELVES is better, higher, and more certain and infallible than the Voice of
God, and Light in the HOLY SCRIPTVRES, and is not to be Questioned by others,
though the Holy Scriptures may be Questioned by the Quakers or Papists;) you
will find it in Sam. Fishers Addit. Appendix, p. 21. an Eminent approved
Quaker, whence I take it, mutatis mutandis, viz.

Tell us then, how may it be known assuredly, uncontroulably, infallibly ( that
the Scriptures, says Fisher, but say I) that that which the Quakers call the
Word, Anointing Voice of the Lord WITHIN THEM, is at all of GOD, and not a
cunning devised FABLE, or their own Invention and Fantasy?

If they tell us by the Testimony of the Spirit WITHIN which (say they) is
only All-sufficient to that purpose, and they have the Witness in themselves,
the Spirit bearing Witness with their Spirits; Then we ask them, But by what
shall we Try, and find assuredly, and infallibly, that that Testimony and
Spirit is of GOD, and not a false one, that tells us ( that the Scripture is of
God, boldly, says Fisher, but say I,) that that Light, Word anointing, or Voice
WITHIN, is of GOD?

Sect. 4. I request and desire Geo. Whitehead, W^ Pen, either, or both, or any
Quaker in England to give a Visible manifestation, or a Direct and
demonstrative Answer to this, without going round in a Circle, or basely
begging the Question: If not, for shame let them be silent, and Learn to be
humble, and not arrogantly Contradict and Condemn OTHERS, if they cannot say,
and evidently produce MORE for themselves in their Pretensions* and Motions,
than OTHERS do or can, that make no such pretensions; For it is not enough to
say, that John Witnessed the Anointing, or the Church then enjoyed it, or the
Apostles had it, for that John and the Apostles and Churches then had such an
Unction as empowered them with many and several Excellent SPIRITVAL Gifts; as
the Gifts of Healing, the Gift of Tongues, the Gift of Prophecy by Imposition
of Hands of the Presbytery, etc. which they have not now, for all their High
pretenses, nor never had, that I have heard; and besides, to say, that John and
the Saints, and Churches of Old witnessed it, does no more prove that the
Quakers now have it, than that the Baptists, or some other Churches (which they
disown) now have it. This then is so far from a Proof, that it is but a silly
Quibble.

Sect. 5. But the Anointing that the Lord JESUS and the True Apostles had, was
with ^he Holy Ghost indeed, and with Power (and not the Word or Name only of
it, which is all that yet appears the Quakers have) enabling them to go about
doing good, and HEALING ALL that were oppressed of the Devil, and curing their
BODILY Distempers, Acts 10.38. How God Anointed JESUS of NAZARETH with the
Holy Ghost, and with Power, who went ^^out doing good, HEALING all that were
Oppressed of the Devil, for God was with him, and WE are Winesses, etc. But the
Quakers, and the Christ within them, do only (for ought yet appears to
others) go about with words and talking, but demonstrate no more Power, than
the Papists when they Convince, and bring over some Persons to them by their
Words and Doctrine, as sometimes the Jesuits, and sometimes the Quakers, both
do, according to the Ignorance, or weak Brains, or the private Ends and
Interest that the Persons they meet withal, may happen to have. Simplicibus
facile Imponitur.

SECT. VI. The Quakers Quibbles about the Spirit.
Sect. 1. THat no Persons in England have talked more of the Spirit, and
pretended more to the Spirit, nor cried out the Spirit, the Spirit, so much as
the Quakers did at first: I suppose none that knew them, will, or can deny; and
that they blamed others for calling it a private Spirit, or whining Spirit, and
for saying that it lead them into private places, and to creep into Houses.

Sect. 2. And yet behold the very same Accusation have some of the Quakers took
up now against others of them. See P. Livingstone, Idem p. 19. Now, you that
are led by that private Spirit, though you pretend it to be Universal, you draw
into secret places, -- for you absent the Meetings of Gods People; Mark (says
he) here is a deceitful whining Spirit, that would be counted a Sufferer, and
would be counted Innocent and meek, but this is truly seen not to be the Spirit
of Sion's Children.] And what was all this for, think you? but because one that
was of the Quakers, writ thus, Tell the Daughter of Zion, behold thy King
comes unto thee, meek, and sitting upon an Ass, though it be smitten on all
hands, yet it bears it all, and suffers it, although it be smitten in the House
of its Friends yet grudgeth not, nor repineth.] And this is the Language, that
P. Livingstone cries out, mark, here is a deceitful-whining-Spirit.

Sect. 3. So that it appears they have Learnt of their Adversaries; the word
Whyning, and Whin^ing-Spirit, and thus now the Quakers cry out (as their
Adversaries did formerly against them) a-private-whyning-Spirit, instead of the
pure-living-powerful-Spirit of the Lord. Here you may Observe, That if others
(though Quakers, that own the same Principle with themselves, of the Light
within) pretend to the Spirit, or talk of the Spirit, Oh, then it is a
dark-Spirit, a whining-Spirit, private-Spirit, the Spirit of Antichrist: and
the Spirit of the Body only is the Spirit of Christ: See more of this in the
third and fifth particular before, and thus still, stat pro ratione voluntas,
and ipse dixit is all, and must be sufficient to others, or nothing, for ought
yet appears.

SECT. VII. The Quakers Quibbles and Hypocrisy in their Doctrine about
Scholar-ship and Languages, with reference to their own Practices.
Sect. 1. ONE while this is the Quakers Doctrine, that is, when they Cry out
against Learning in others, (because they would have all People come to be so
silly and Ignorant as to believe them, or not to have Learning enough to
Confute them) then thus; The Word, which is the Original, which the Apostles
Preached amongst the Hebrews, and Greeks, which was before Tongues were, and
your Original; which will break all your Tongues and Original to pieces; Pilate
had your Original of Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, who Crucified Christ: He that
draws back into many Languages, as into Hebrew and Greek^, draws back into the
Naturals, and so draws into Confusion. But the Ministers of God, who Preach the
Everlasting Gospel, which endures for ever, draw up into one Language, and so
the Priests and all that Trade into Natural Languages, we UTTERLY deny. A Paper
sent forth into the World, p. 3.] and much to this effect we had formerly from
them, That the Light within is able ALONE to reveal to them the Truth, and
maintain it against all others, and that they receive their Doctrine by Inward
Revelations, and not by any outward means, etc.

Sect. 2. Another while (that is, when the Quakers are either to maintain their
own Principles, or confute others) then to go round again, It is Lawful and
good to draw back into many Natural Languages, as into Hebrew and Greek, yea,
and Latin too, as G.W's Practice evinces in his Introduction to his Divinity
of Christ, ( though it is probable He understands as little Hebrew as G. Fox
does Greek;) and many more Natural Languages you have (and more abundantly) in
W.P's. Vindication of G. Foxes Falsities, and Nonsense. See here according to
their own Verdict, they are drawing back into the NATVRALS, and so draw into
CONFVSION, and are not the Ministers of God, who draw up into ONE Language, for
they now draw down into MANY Languages, and therefore are utterly to be denied,
if Quakers themselves may be Credited.

Sect. 3. And not only so, but also in their Practice it is to be further
Observed, that when any Public Dispute is with them appointed,
notwithstanding all their Talk and Pretenses to others of Immediate Revelation,
and Divine Inspiration, and the sufficiency ALONE of the Light within, yet they
dare not trust to that, but commonly they will have one, if not two that are
Scholars, and that have been bred Scholars at our Schools; as Sam. Fisher
formerly, and G. Keith, or W. Pen, of late Years, and the like; the Discourse
or Dispute is for the most part managed by them, and most commonly lies wholly
upon such, whereas if their Light within every one was ALONE sufficient, and
they had it Divinely Inspired into them by the Spirit at that very Instant,
then any other of the Quakers might be as able to manage such Disputes as them
that have been brought up Scholars at our Schools. But alas, when some such
come to the business, we have seen what pitiful work they have made on it, and
how quickly they have been Non-plust for want of some of those
School-distinctions, that G.K. and W.P. can furnish them withal, better than
all the Light G.F. their great Prophet appears as yet to have.

Sect. 4. Yet to turn half round back again, see G. Foxes words, Testimony of
the True Light, at the beginning of p. 42. It Is too long and too full of
Tautologies here to Transcribe.

But to dance the rounds, and face quite about, once more; at last G. Keith can
tell us, and reprove Jer. Ives for Transgressing the Just Laws of Dispute, by
an Error called in the Schools (...), a Transition from one kind of Matter to
another. Did G. Keith speak and know this Just Law by immediate Inspiration at
that instant, since he assured us all along in that dispute he found the
Presence of God assisting him? Or had not he before learnt it at the Schools? I
Challenge them to nominate but ONE Quaker (amongst them all) that could have
made that Answer to detect Jeremy, by the ALONE sufficiency and Revelation of
the Light within at that very Instant, that had not first heard of it from some
others, or learnt it at School; I press and urge any Quaker in England to
Answer, and Witness this in plainness, if he can: But alas, poor Men! if they
would be ingenuously honest, they must grant they cannot, and that G. Keith did
not there (and therein) speak ANY MORE by immediate Revelation than others, and
so was not Infallible in all he said.

Sect. 6. However now it seems ou^ ^chools have the Just Laws of Dispute
amongst them, by a Present Quakers Confession; thank thee, George, thanks
kindly. It is hoped W. Pen, and thee Geo. may come to bring the silly Quakers
(off from some of their Old Fancies) to own more of ours, and amongst us e're
long, though to give you your due, you are come a pretty way already, and fall
in softly by degrees, even whilst you pretend the Contrary, that so the People
might not take too much notice of it.

Sect. 7. And some do Observe, that notwithstanding all the Quakers former
hideous Out-crys against Schools of Learning, Universities, against Hamane
Learning, Philosophy, Logic, Scholastical Divinity and Doctrines; yet now
notable Mr. Pen is framing and setting up, both a Formal, Scholastical, and
Philosophical Divinity amongst the Quakers (whether they mind it, understand
it, or can see through it or no) in his writings and Vindications of Resolves,
Decrees, Rules, or Aphorisms, Bodies, or Systems of Principles and Doctrines,
with Genus, Species, Proprium, accidens, and differentia in Communem, propriam,
maxim propriam, formaliter, simpliciter, Relative, Secundum se and secundum
quid, or the like; as Substance, Accidents, Essential, and Descriptive, Simply*
and Relatively, most proper, proper, and less proper, abstract and Concrete,
and much more of the same Nature, that Great Geo. Fox so long since Challenged
the Scholars and Doctors of Europe about, inquiring what was their Root,
Ground, and Derivation, and if they were not all begot in the Fall, or sprang
up out of Babel. See G. Foxes Primmer for the Scholars and Doctors of Europe;
it is a pretty piece indeed! it is conceived worthy of Mr. Penn's Study, and I
cannot think of any Body that would be so fit for the purpose, as he, to
satisfy his great Prophet, G. Fox, in most of those vain, silly, and
Ridiculous Questions about Words and Terms in the Schools, the Ground, the
Root, the Derivation, etc. of them: Why may it not be as good and profitable
employ for W. Pen to Answer them, as for G. Fox to Ask them, Write, and Publish
them? I should think it the more profitable of the two; For now the Questions
being without Answers, G. Foxes Primmer is of little Value, and less Use,
except only to show the grand Prophets Whimsies, and Windmill in his Brain,
or to Teach his silly Disciples the Art of Tautologizing.

Thus you may see Tempora mutantur, and the Quakers run the Rounds; but yet
have a care that you do not imagine but that these their Teachers and Leaders
are immediately inspired, and Infallible still, I warrant you, as much as ever
they were, but not one whit, MORE than before, or since they became Quakers.

Sic Diruit, aedificat, mu^ at Quadrata Rotundis.

SECT. VIII. The Quakers Quibbles and Hypocrisy in their Doctrine about
Punching People, and Haling them out of Assemblies, with reference to their own
Practices now.
Sect. 1. ONE while (that was, when others thrust and punch'd, and pulled the
Quakers out of their Assemblies, Meetings, or Synagogues, for coming in and
disturbing them, then) the Quakers Doctrine was such as this -- They profess
Moses, Christ, and the Apostles words, but see not the fulfilling of Moses, and
the Prophets, nor Christ's words, and Apostles words, such as be out of the
Light, that believes [that's G. Foxes English very frequent] not in it, these
are now Haling out of the Synagogues, Prisoning, and Beating, and Persecuting,
that believe not in the Light that enlightens every Man that comes into the
World, as the Jews did out of their Temple, etc. G. Fox Testimony of the True
Light, p. 46.

Come, let us Reason, had not many the Scriptures, yet Haled out of the
Synagogues, what think you of them? -- And your Teachers have got into the
chiefest place in the Synagogues, in the PHARISEES steps, and cry, take them
away that are moved to come into your Synagogues to speak, so many are knocked
down, haled out of the Synagogues, and before Magistrates, and cast into
Prison; what do you differ herein from the Jews which did not believe in the
Light? G.F. professors Catechism, p. 6.

The Spirit of Christ does not lead to hale out of the Synagogues, to buffet,
to pluck off the Hair of the Head, to draw the blood of People in the
Synagogues, etc. Idom p. 10. See more, p. 11. Did you ever Read of any of the
Saints, the Christians, did use your Weapons, or go in your steps? You have
brought your Names upon Record, and make them to stink.]

But now if any Man come among them while they are speaking, or when they have
done, and be moved to speak any thing; them of their Church, the Rude Multitude
fall upon him, with Staves, Fists, and Punches, etc. A Paper sent forth into
the World, p. 6. Here they show themselves to be no Ministers of Christ, and
their Assemblies to be no Church, but in Confusion, Idem.

Sect. 2. But now to run round again, (That is, when some Persons come into the
Quakers Synagogues or Assemblies, while they are speaking, or when they have
done, and be moved to speak any thing, then) they will not only tell the
People, and make their silly Disciples believe, That the Man is a Drunkard, but
if they are questioned to prove it, Oh, they meant only Spiritually Drunk, (a
pretty Quibble by the way) nor only basely insinuate, that he is a
Distempered, and Distracted Person* but a Cain, or a Devil (as some said of
John) but that is not all; For to tack quite about: If one comes into their
Assemblies, and be moved to speak any thing, though asserted, as in the Na^^ of
the Lord, yet if it does not please them, the Common Practice in their Meetings
is now, to hunch and punch the poor Man; nay, I have seen them Actually lay
violent Hands on some, and thrust, and pull, and hale them out of their
Meeting; once at the Bull and Mouth, and once in their Meeting near
Wheeler-street, insomuch that I was astonished at it, and could not have then
believed that any such thing should be acted, or Suffered in a Quakers Meeting,
had not my Eyes beheld it, (they having so much cried out against it, and been
pulled out themselves in other Meetings) and yet I did not hear so much as one
Quaker speak against it, or oppose it, when they punch'd and thrust, and laid
violent Hands on the Man, to hale him out of their Meeting in such a manner.

Sect. 3. How they struck and abused another Man in their Meeting, you may take
the Account in Quakerism i^ Paganism, p. 67, etc.

Sect. 4. Nay, no longer ago than in the Month of December last, a Civil
Person that came to London out of the Country, and moved as (he said) he hoped
from the Lord to speak to them, and opposing G.VV. in their Meeting, as I am
Informed, after G. had asked him two Questions, and he had Answered them
directly, and by consent the Person was to ask G.VV. as many, which he did, but
G. finding himself, as it seems, puzzled by one of them, about Circumcision of
the Heart, the Person was so far from getting a direct Answer, that he only
got his SHINS BROKEN directly there amongst them. I hope the Quakers will not
have the Confidence to deny this, (but I am not sure, considering that
sometimes they have denied things as plain) The Person (it seems) p^lling down
his stocking^ and showing his plaistered shins to them in another of the
Quakers Meetings before many witnesses; and it is said he was hunch'd and
punch'd so, that he was black and blew in several places on his Body; and thus
the poor honest Man was fain to return home with BROKEN SHINS: Oh, meek, mild
Quakerism! Your great Prophet has Condemned you all, saying, That such things
manifest ye are out of the Light and Life of Saints, and of true Christians and
that you differ not from the Jews, and are none of the Ministers of CHRIST, nor
the TRVE Church.

Sect. 5. And it is no wonder they do not whip, or Imprison People, because they
have not power to do it, but you see that as far as they can and dare, and have
power, they do, and suffer to be done in their Assemblies: And so it cannot be
doubted, but that those which will do so much, would do more, if they had power
enough; but Blessed be the Lord they have it not. Besides, I must tell you in
this very P^actice of theirs they use sometimes a kind of a Quibbling way: For
many times they will not down right strike a Man, but hunch him, and punch him,
and thrust him, and crowd him, till the Man is almost stisted amongst them; and
so in a secret way sometimes almost kill him, by forcing his Breath out,
because it should not be taken Notice of by others; though twice (as I said
before,) I have seen violent Hands laid on persons in their Meetings; Oh
strange turning! Oh Hypocritical and horrid Change!

Sect. 6. One Francis Chadwel, who I understand Lives in London, has felt, and
Experienced this in the Quakers Meetings, not only once, or twice, but nearer
Twenty times, and h^th, and will Witness it, as I am very well informed, but I
would not have published it, but that I find Mr. Pen himself (in his own book,
truly styled Judas and the Jews, p. 38.) cannot deny it, but says, He is a man
of no Conscience nor Credit, in what Relates to them, and that he has known
him grossly Guilty, both of Lying and Tippling, his aim has been to raise up an
envious and scoffing Spirit against them, etc. and what then? what of all that?
supposing all this was true, Must you Quakers lay violent Hands on him, and be
your own Judges and Ju^y, and Hangman too, to Execute Justice on him? Oh rare!
is it possible, that this is Quakerism, or these Quakers, that houted and
bawled, and disturbed others in their Meetings? and if some did but thrust and
shove them out, though by Authority, and the Magistrates Order, Oh then,
Persecution, Persecution, wicked Jews, etc. Do ye Quakers not demonstrate your
selves now to be the same in the Ground? Here then it is evident by Experience,
that there is not only a Persecuting Spirit, but a Persecuting Hand amongst
the Quak^rs; and as for a Persecuting Pen and Tongue, there is none goes beyond
them, if any to be compared with them for Billingsgate-Rhetorick, Reviling,
Railing, and Damning their betters to the pit of Hell: Are these the men that
once pretended to turn the other Cheek to the Smiter, and now do they smite
others, because their Enemies, as they suppose?

Sect. 7. I cannot but Observe how SLILY Mr. Pen raises an evil Report of Mr.
Chadwel, saying, He is a Man of no Conscience nor Credit in what Relates to
them, i. e. the Quakers; he did not dare say, he was a man of no Conscience nor
Credit in what R^^^ted to others, because then he might have been dis^^^ved,
but only to the Quakers, they themselves being Judges also; when as, you must
note, if a man does but oppose the Quakers, that That is enough to make him a
man of no Conscience or Credit with them; Oh neat Quibble! pray let the Quakers
name you ONE man that does oppose and Contradict them, that they will say is a
Man of Good Conscience and Credit in what Relates to them.

Who is so silly, that cannot see the baseness of such sly and Quibbling
Suggestions?

Pray before I leave this Section, hear another of them, about the same Person,
p, 39: Mr. Pen says, he had as good as confessed, that he had been Hired by some
Professors to disturb us, who sees not the Quibble in the words as good as
confessed? That is, in plain English, he did not tell him so; neither is it at
all likely; but well, on the contrary, I have heard, that some Years since a
Quaker would have Hired him to have let them alone; the Story runs thus: He
owed a Quaker a certain sum of money, and the Quaker would have forgave it him,
and writ, or would write him an Acquittance, as Received so much money of him,
provided he would not disturb them any more; Mr. Chadwel Answered him to this
purpose, that if he writ he had Received so much money, when indeed he Received
none, that would be a Lie, and he would not consent to it. So here it seems
Fran. Chadwel had more Conscience than the Quaker.

Sect. 8. And besides, the Truth of their abusing, punching, haling, thrusting
and throwing the said F. Chadwel out of their meetings by main Force, depends
not upon his Testimony alone, but there are some scores that have been
Eyewitnesses of it, that can testify it. And if the Quakers can Justify
doing thus to one, whom themselves shall alone Judge to be a man of no
Conscience nor Credit, then they may do it to another and another, and to
Twenty, on the same Ground, and at last, to whom they please, as far as they
dare: And* to be sure none shall want their Judgment and Censure of being
Forgers, Liars, or Tiplers, Men of no Credit nor Conscience, if they do but
oppose them: And so at present I Will leave them, with their Apostatized
Persecuting Spirit, as to this particular; wishing they may for the Future
learn more Honesty, Humility, and the Royal Law of Charity, which never fails,
and that they may put on Bowels of Compassion, and Lowlyness of mind to others;
for if they show Love to their own Friends only, what are they better than the
Publicans? Don't they do so?

SECT. IX. The Quakers Quibbles and Hypocrisy in their former Practice of
Disturbing of Ministers in Parish-Churches, with reference to their Practice
now.
Sect. 1. THat it was the Common Practice of the Quakers for many Years, to
pretend They were sent and moved by the Lord, and by the Spirit to come into
the Parish-Assemblies to oppose the Ministers, and accordingly did commonly
every Month, and sometimes oftener, come in and disturb the Ministers and
Congregations, with their Messages, Visions, and Revelations from the Lord, as
they said, is so generally known, that I need bring no Instances, and I think
they will not deny it.

Sect. 2. But now since His MAJESTY'S Happy Restoration and Government, I do
not find but those ORACLES are generally ceased, or at least, for the most
part; and now their Common Practice therein is altered, which shows either
their great Hypocrisy now they think they cannot do it but with more danger,
or that these motions were only pretenses, and so very unreasonable, as most
likely they were; or if true motions from the Lord, then the Quakers have
rarely, if any, of those true motions from the Lord now among them, nor do grow
in MORE Experience of such Revelations, but are withered:

Where Is G. Foxe's Lambs of CHRIST, which have been sent forth to reprove Sin
in the Gates of Cities, Markets, Highways, and Countries? [What, are they all
asleep?] G.F's Professors Cat. p. 22. What, is there no Sin to be Reproved
within the Gates now, as then? What, no such Messages from the Lord now? Oh
Hypocrisy!

Sect. 3. By this it would appear, that Muggleton is the best Prophet of the
two, and that his Sentence and Curse has taken hold of the Quakers, viz.
Because I [saith Muggleton] have passed Sentence upon the Quakers, they shall
never grow to have more Experience in Vision and Revelation, but shall wither.
See G. Fox his Answer to Muggleton's Book, The Quakers Neck broken, p. 11.

SECT. X. The Quakers Quibbles about the Holy Scriptures.
Sect. 1. THis is a very weighty Point, Dear Friends and Contrymen, consider
it well; you shall first hear what G.W. himself, and three more Quakers say (in
Answer to one Sampson Townsend, a Minister in Norwich) in their Book,
Entitled, ISHMAEL, etc.

The Ministers Propositions (which he and they opposed) were these two.

1. That the Scriptures, contained in the OLD and NEW Testament (Commonly
called the BIBLE) is the Revealed Will and Word of God.

2. That the Scripture, which is the Word of God, is the only Foundation of
our Faith, and only Rule for our Obedience.

Now, in their Answer to thi^, I only desire the Reader to Observe the several
Epithetes G.W. gives to the SCRIPTVRE, viz. that commonly called the Bible,
which ONLY the Minister affirmed to be the Foundation and Rule of our Faith
and Obedience, as above; THIS G.W. calls NATURAL and CARNAL, p. 3. Obscure
something without them, p. 3. Bids him prove that ever it was called by the
Saints a Written Word of God, and that with these thy Lies thou have deceived
the Blind, p. 4. That which is Written is the Letter, which is DEATH and
KILLS, p. 10. Thou that say, that the Scriptures Reveal God, thou art a
Liar, p. 10. Where did ever any of the Holy men of God, say, that the Scripture
Converts the Soul, or makes Laws for men's thoughts, p. 11. He calls it a Lie,
to say the Scripture is the means by which Faith is wrought, p. 11. Now, that
which Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John wrote of Christ could not give Life, for
that is called a Declaration of those things which was freely delivered among
them, Luke 1.1. And that thou call the Word, which is DEATH and KILLS, as
thou may Read, 2 C. 3. p. 9.] And that which the Minister then called the
WORD (as G.W. himself, and the Quakers tell you, just before in the same page)
was the sayings, and doings of our SAVIOVR, which are frequently Recorded in
the NEW TESTAMENT, and hence IT [the New Testament] is called the word of
CHRIST, says he; and in the Quakers Answer to this, G.W. and they, tell the
Minister [ and that thou call the WORD, WHICH IS DEATH, and KILLETH] Oh
horrid! abominable and wicked! besides the falsehood of it, how near to
Blasphemy is it?

Not to say much to his words in p. 5. where he makes himself a Judge, for
others to be Judged by, viz. [ Let all that read these Scriptures Judge thee BY
ME to be a Liar.] Nor to their words in the Title Page, where they say [these
their Words or Writings] were GIVEN FORTH from the SPIRIT of the Lord IN US.]
You may enough ghess at it, and the Impudence of it, your selves. Will not the
Impartial Reader now think this Book ISHMAEL a Rare Piece for the bigness of
it, for it is but about three sheets?

I must needs think that many Sober Readers that shall see, and duly Consider
these Words, will almost conclude it incredible, it being so abominably gross,
but that they may see it with their own Eyes, in the Quakers own Book, if they
dare give Credit to their Eyesight, more than to the Quakers false Tongues;
and therefore I refer all such to the Book it self, for better Satisfaction.

Sect. 2. Sam. Fisher, in his Addit. Appendix, p. 21. Speaking of the Holy
Scriptures, says, Which Transcriptions and Translations, were they never so
certain and entire by Answering to the first Original Copies, yet are NOT
CAPABLE to be (to all Men) ANY OTHER than a Lesbian Rule, or NOSE OF WAX;
Forasmuch as even where Men have them (as half the World has not) they are
liable to be wrested and Actually twisted Twenty ways by Interpreters, whose
Expositions, Senses, and meanings, (which are as many* and various, as the
Thoughts, Conceits, and Inventions of men are, who Comment upon them) must be
the Rule to such as can Read them neither in Hebrew and Greek, nor in their own
Mother-Tongues neither.

And further, the said Sam. Fisher, in the same page tells us, that He and the
Quakers have put it to the Question, How it may be known assuredly,
uncontroulably, infallibly, that the Scripture is at ALL of God, and not a
cunningly DEVISED FABLE and INVENTION of Men?

Do ye not think now, Impartial Readers, that the Quakers are High Honourers of
Holy Scripture to use such Terms and Language, in Querying about it, as a
cunningly devised FABLE and INVENTION of Men? And in his very next words he
gives us and the World to understand, that the Church and Clergy of England do
but go-round (or Dance in a Circle) when they tell the Quakers and us, That the
Scripture may be known to be of God by the Testimony of the Spirit, and that we
may try, and find assuredly that Spirit to be of God by the Scripture.

Sect. 3. Ed. Burrough^, p. 834. The ONLY perfect Rule of ^onscience, in the
Exercise to God, is the SPIRIT of Christ, and not any other thing.

G.W. Again (the Question being put [ Do you esteem of your speakings to be of
as great Authority as any Chapter in the Bible?) makes this Answer, in his
Serious Apol. p. 49. viz. That which was spoken from the Spirit of Truth in
ANY, ^s of AS GREAT Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters are, and GREATER,
etc.

Sect. 4. W. Pen also, (that he for his Worthiness and sincerity may not
Complain as left out) shall give in his Verdict, in his Spirit of Truth
Vindicated, p. 38. Thus, the Scripture is much like the shadow of the True
Rule, etc.] Now, all men know a shadow is an empty and vain thing, and the most
uncertain thing in the World; sometimes shorter, and sometimes much longer than
the Substance it self.

Sect. 5. But now to wheel about, and run round again, though one would think
no man possibly (that pretends to Honesty or common Reputation) could either
have the Face or Confidence to do it, having so rivetted and fixed the Contrary
in Print, as above; nay, some cannot believe that any Ordinary Romancer would
Publish it in Print with such a Stupendous confidence as the Quakers have
lately done) viz. G.W. Quakers Plainness, p. 70, 71. Nor did we EVER prefer our
Books before the Bible, as unjustly we are charged, but do prefer the Bible
BEFORE ALL other Books extant in the World. Our Intention and Principle NEVER
was to bring our Books in Comparison to the Scriptures] No, G? Is this True?
Does not thy own Conscience smite thee, and fly in thy Face? Nay, is this
possible to be true? When G.W. himself calls the Scri^ture (which the Minister
asserted was the Foundation of Faith) as I have already told you, NATURAL and
CARNAL, the LETTER, which is DEATH, and KILLS: What can be worse than
Natural, Carnal, that which is Death, and Kills? Are your Writings worse than
that? Then further, do but consider the Titles and Epithets this very G.VV.
gives to some of his own Books, viz. The Glory of Christ's Light within
Expelling Darkness. Another, The Light and LIFE of Christ within; well, go thy
ways, GEORGE, not only for a QUIBBLER, but an AUDACIOUS CONFIDENT: surely,
Geo. thou had not forgot, that your Book, ISHMAEL, was given forth from the
SPIRIT of the Lord in you: Or did you deal therein falsely with the World? And
with God too? Was any of the Holy Scriptures any more than given forth from the
spirit of the Lord? And if that you say be true, I am sure your Books must be
EQUAL at least with the Scriptures; but what need I talk of that, when Geo.
himself assures me, that some of their Writings, or speeches were GREATER? if
ever the spirit of Truth spoke in any of them, it is of AS GREAT Authority
(says he) as the SCRIPTURES and CHAPTERS are, and GREATER.

Sect. 6 And to face quite about again, G. Keith told us positively, That W.P.
has the Scripture as the Secondary Rule of his Faith and Practice, Narrative
of the Second Dispute, published by the Quakers themselves, p. 57. Who does not
see now, that these men will say any thing? Or care not what they say? Mr. Pen
himself at best does but say, The Scripture is much like the SHADOW of the true
Rule (so far is it from being any (either Primary or Secundary) true and
Substantial Rule to him, but only much like the shadow of it, and a shadow is
sometimes three or four times longer or shorter than the Truth and Substance)
and in that Respect (says VV.P. it may be a KIND of a Secondary Rule: Observe,
Reader, how mincingly and Quibblingly VV.P. words it; 1. In that Respect [as it
is much like the shadow.] 2. a kind of Secondary Rule, [a shadowy Kind, but
neither the true, substantial or certain Rule,] and it all comes in with it may
be suppositively; now, which of these two Quakers is the Quibbler? Both May be,
one Must be.

But that is not all neither, for worse absurdities will still follow; for if
that be true which G.VV. said, then that which is DEATH, and KILLS, is A RULE
of VV. Pen's Faith and Practice, and that which is Natural and carnal is A RULE
of the Quakers Faith and Practice; then an obscure something without them, is A
RVLE of the Quakers Faith, and that is not all neither: But if what Sam. Fisher
said, be true, then VV.P. has a NOSE OF WAX, for a Rule of his Faith and
Practice, or one of the Quakers Rules for their Faith and Practice is no better
than a Nose of Wax. Nay, (if you will believe Sam. Fisher himself) is not
CAPABLE of being ANY OTHER to them that have the Scriptures, (which the Quakers
have) and as to them that have them not, they can be surely nothing at all; not
so much as a Nose of Wax: And is not this an Excellent Rule (according to the
Quakers own Confession) that they now say they have, for a Rule of their Faith
and Practice?

Sect. 7. I am sorry that before I conclude, I should have Occasion given me to
Tax Mr. Pen of INSINCERITY, and deceitful dealing about this matter of the
Quakers Doctrine touching the Holy Scriptures, by Reading the late little Book
he set out, Entitled, A just Rebuke (but more properly, a huffing Rebuke) p.
10. Those very words he tells his Opponents, reflect most justly, as a just
Rebuke on himself; I must tell him, he has Acted with them herein far from a
Man of Common Ingenuity; For, whereas W.P. asserts, The Quakers deny the
Scriptures to be the Word of God in that sense wherein they deny them, viz. The
Word that was God, the Essential Word: Does not W.P. in his Conscience know,
that none of these Presbyterians, Independents, nor any others ever asserted
against the Quakers, that the Scriptures were in that sense the Word of God,
and consequently, is no part of the matter in Dispute? And not only so, but
does not W.P's Conscience witness, that the Quakers have, and do deny the
Scriptures to be the written Word of God? In which sense those men do not deny
the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and the Quakers do; and therefore W.P.
must Act against his Conscience, in taxing them of being herein, far from Men
of Common Ingenuity, when it is only his own dis-ingenuity, thus to Quibble
and deceive People.

And Secondly, The like Fallacy, double dealing, and Insincerity W.P. manifests
in his words, about the Scripture being a Rule, as if the Quakers owned the
Scripture to be a Rule in some things; or some parts of the Scripture to be a
Rule to them, whereas it is manifest, that the Quakers have over and over again
denied the Scriptures in general, and not some part of it only, to be their
Rule; yea, in these express words, The Books of the Old and New Testament,
called the BIBLE, See the beginning of this Section.

Oh Quakers REPENT, REPENT of such wickedness, and for shame leave off such
double hearted dealing, and most unparalled Confidence! Do not think all your
Contrymen Fools besides your selves, as if they could not discern such petty
slights and Quibbles, and take Notice of them and you also, as not
single-hearted in them.

Sect. 8. For my Part, I never thought any man blameworthy, nor would be he
that should blame any man for changing his Opinion or Judgment, if so be he did
it upon better ground, and did not pretend to INFALLIBILITY, nor scorn, nor
blame others for Confessing their Fallibility, but did Honestly and Ingenuously
acknowledge that he was before mistaken, and in an Error. But for Men to change
their Opinions, either really, and yet endeavor confidently to vindicate, and
justify their former Absurdities and Errors; or pretendedly only to fawn and
flatter, or curry favor with their Adversaries, or any others of the World,
and yet still to pretend to Infallibility; is so low, abominably base and
Hypocritical, or so Impudent, that it is not to be admitted by, or among any
Sober and Honest Men. Now, whether this change, alteration, and difference in
the Quakers words and Writings, Epithets, and Phrases, about the Holy
Scriptures be real, or only Hypocritical, and Temporizing, out of design to
blind others, and to ingratiate themselves a little more into Peoples
Affections, and good will of the World, God and their own Consciences best
know; yet the last is much to be feared, for this Reason, because they are so
far from dis-owning their former mistakes and mis-expressing themselves, that
they stand to vindicate and justify it: But be it either way, they thereby
show their uncertainty, inconstancy, and self-contradictions, Confusions, and
the effects of their Fallibility.

Sect. 9. And therefore I would only desire G.W. to tell me honestly (if there
be any such thing left in him, or that he may return to) without Quibbling or
Equivocation, or if not me, that he would acquaint his Contrymen,

1. Whether he does NOW Believe, That the Holy Scriptures, both of the Old and
New Testament, commonly called the Bible, be the Letter which is Death, and
Kills, or whether they be the Letter mentioned or meant by the Apostle Paul
in 2 Cor. 3.6.

And 2. If he does NOW believe, That were the Scriptures never so certain and
entire, yet that they are not capable to be (to all men) any other than a Nose
of Wax?

3. And whether he, or W. Pen and the Quakers do NOW Witness and Believe, that
the Letter of the Scripture is CARNAL?

A proper direct Answer is desired and required to this, without any Quibbling
or mental Reservations, if the Quakers are indeed, what they now would pretend
to the World, they are, and will manifest themselves to be no Dissemblers.

The Conclusion.
To Sum up all in short, and to Conclude this Mess and Medly of their most
irreconcilable Contradictions, and irrecoverable Gulf of Confusions, in which
they have plunged themselves over Head and Ears, take it thus.

Sometimes they can call, yea, and positively assert, the Letter of the
Scripture is CARNAL, and the Letter is DEATH, and KILLS: But their own
pityful Scriblings, or Books, they can call The LIGHT, and LIFE of Christ
within, and yet (to go round again) at other times they tell us, that they
prefer the Bible BEFORE all other Books extant in the World; but then (to go
round again) they tell us (without excepting one) that THEIR WRITINGS and BOOKS
are given forth from the immediate ETERNAL SPIRIT of God. Yet (to face about
again) That their Intention and Principle NEVER WAS to bring their Books in
COMPARISON with the Scriptures; but yet, to go round again, (though to their
own Confusion) the same man has given us to understand, that what the Quakers
speak from the Spirit of Truth is not only of AS GREAT Authority as the
Scriptures and Chapters are, but GREATER: And the Quakers can sometimes tell
us, that one might AS WELL condemn the SCRIPTURES to be BURNED, as Their
WRITINGS.

But come once more to turn about [Robin Hood] W. Pen now has the Scripture
(positively, says Mr. Keith) as a Secondary Rule of Faith and Practice; and
yet, to step halfway back again, and Janus-like, look two ways at once, it is
but much like the SHADOW of the true Rule, and in that Respect (as it is like a
shadow) it may be a kind of Secondary Rule, Mr. Pen himself thinks, but he
seems not certain of that neither: But to turn quite back again, if Sam. Fisher
may be believed, the Scriptures we have, Though they were never so certain and
entire, by answering to the first Original Copies* yet are not CAPABLE to be
(to all Men) ANY OTHER than a Lesbian Rule, or Nose of wax, so far are they
from being either a Primary or Secondary Rule, that he says they are not so
much as CAPABLE of being ANY OTHER than a Lesbian Rule; and if that be the Rule
G. Keith meant his Brother Pen had for his Faith and Practice, it may be true
enough, and so he may well agree with his late Brother Fisher.

But yet to give one turn more, the quondam sincere-hearted, and Zealous man,
W. Pen, (whose Writings many times, like squint-eyes (which as they say, look
nine ways at once) would make us believe, if we were no wiser, that
notwithstanding all this the Quakers abuse of Scripture, that it is the Quakers
are abused, and (if he does not Quibble, and deal disingenuously) they do
indeed own (whatever they say to the contrary) the Scripture to be a Rule in
some things; or some parts of the Scripture to be a Rule to them. But yet, says
Mr. Fisher, (to confound the Quakers, and knock all ot'h' Head at once,) They
say truly, which say, that A RULE and Guide should be CERTAIN, which will not
deceive, and that which is VARIABLE and ALTERABLE cannot be A Persons Rule: For
it is the property of A Rule to be INVARIABLE, and the SAME at ALL times.

But that as to the Scriptures we and the Quakers now have, he tells us, This
is one plain UNDENIABLE Truth, viz. That there are VARIOVS Lections in the
Copies of the very ORIGINAL Texts of the Scripture; this he asserts point
blank: and not only that they are alterable and variable, but varying and
altered in abundance of places; and some parts, portions, and whole Books
thereof LOST, and so is not fit nor capable to be a Rule or Foundation, as he
gives us to understand, to cut the Throat of all, and to make short work; Thus.

Sometimes it is Carnal, without Breath,

Sometimes the Letter, oh, it is Death!

Sometimes it is a Rule of Faith;

That Is impossible, Fisher says:

Sometimes a Nose of Wax, no Rule.

(They know as much, as the Ass or Mule)

Sometimes one way, then another,

Sometimes both ways, this and the other;

Sometimes one o'th two, take either,

Sometimes 'twixt both Rules, but neither.

Some say it is this some that, some (O Riddle)

Nor this, nor that, but just a Quibble.

And so they run the Rounds, trace to and fro, and dance up and down in their
dark minds about the Holy Scriptures, and their Rule of Faith; I cannot think
of any thing that the Quakers Doctrine about this, better resembles, than what
their own Fisher brings to my Hand, the (so called) Devils Neck verse, which
may be read upwards or downwards, backwards or forwards, which way they please,
to the scanning whereof I at present leave them, wishing they may in time
become wiser and honester, and not run the round so, still to make their Brains
Giddy.

S A T O R A R E P O T E N E T O P E R A R O T A S

Sam. Fisher Transposed.
THus Quaker's work, who talk for self,
Is tangling talk against it self;
Against Truth a prate, a piteous Preachment
That cannot make good its own Impeachment,
As Doctor REYNARD'S Doctrine does,
Who heeds not well which way he goes;
Whitehead's, Live'stone's, Pen's prances round
And round again in the self-same Ground;
It staggers to and fro, and reels,
Skips up and down, and runs on wheels;
Starts aside like some broken Bow,
C^osses Christ like Cris X Cross in the Row:
Who so can feel, in it may feel,
As 'twere a wheel within a wheel;
A Net, Ginn, Trap, a Snare's in It,
A VVhirlpool, Gulf, Bottomless-Pit.
Wind, Dust, Husk, Chaff, no Stable Steeple
A Tale, that takes unstable People,
A Toy, a Cloud, Mist, Smoke, a Fogg,
Both Quak'rism, and some Quav'ring Bogg;
A Quick sand, a Quagmire that sucks,
Who Is in it his Feet out hardly plucks,
Himself who is in gets seldom Out,
It self's more seldom in, than Out:
It flutters like some blind Night- Bat,
Now here, now there; this way, now That:
Now it is one thing, then another,
And now and then nor to one, nor to'ther;
Sometimes it is This, sometimes it is That,
Sometimes it is This, and This, and That:
Sometimes it is either this or that,
Sometimes it is neither this nor that:
Now this, not the other, anon it is Either,
Then by and by, both Both, and Neither.
One while it looks like So, not No,
Another while like No, not So:
One way it seems or So, or No,
Another way, nor No, nor So:
Some ways it shows both So, and No,
So it is a mere endless No, and So.


Here Follows THE QUAKING, QUIBBLING ANSWERER Turned to A SLIGHT TIMOROUS
REVILER: OR, Remarks on G.W's. Slight silly Sheet, styled, The Timorous Reviler
Slighted; Given forth by the said G.W. as a Reprehension (for want of an
Answer) to the Second Part of the Quakers Quibbles.
COURTEOUS READER,
THE Man I have here to deal withal, having neither Honesty or Knowledge enough
to give a Right Answer, nor Prudence enough to hold his Peace; you may (it is
not unlikely) admire why I should trouble my self to take any Notice of so
slight and silly a sheet, the greatest part whereof is stuffed (according to
the Quakers old Custom) with nothing but bitter Railings, scornful Revilings,
and false Suggestions, as if the Quakers were dreyn'd, and this the very dregs
of their filthy Bottle; wherefore I shall here acquaint you with the
Considerations that moved and constrained me thereto.

First, That Justice which I found lay upon me to clear an Innocent Gentleman
(and so far vindicate his Innocence and Reputation,) of whom, this Man has
Published in Print a most gross false Suggestion.

Secondly, To undeceive the World, that I might not be false to the Truth, nor
unjust to my self, they having raised and published of me, not only many false
surmises, but palpable falsities.

They first take me for another Person, with whom they have had formerly some
Contests, and then New Baptizing me, and dressing me up as they please, they
throw all the dirt at Me, that they in their wicked and Malicious minds wish to
Him, though he be a Person (by the faithfullest account I could have concerning
him, I not being acquainted with him) whose Candor, Judgment, Parts, and
Deserts, are as far beyond G.W's. in Reality, as Geo. can Conceit himself
beyond others, and so not deserving any such ill usage at their unmannerly Pens
or Tongues; but this confirms me in my Opinion, that it is much at one, and you
may as soon expect an Ingenious, Sober, Rational Answer from a Scold at
Billings-gate, as from a Quaker; till they change their Morals, as well as
their Religion (as much as Mr. Pen could (which seems to be only out of a
fawning design) pretend to speak in the behalf of poor morality, when as, it is
his pretended Light and Inspiration within, that indeed he so much adores.)

No small Evidence whereof this Quakers pitiful sheet demonstrates it self to
be, notwithstanding the pretended Civility and Condescension in his private
Letter to me, yet his sheet, which he since set forth publicly (being made up
chiefly with so many false suspicions, and Railings) now manifests that that
was only Hypocritical, or out of Design by fair words to deceive the Author:
But alas, the Quaker was mistaken, and Geo. was too Young; the Author had a
better discerning (without the Quakers Gift) and understanding of them, than
so, by his many Years Observation and Experience.

He told me in his Letter privately, He took it well from me, that I Ordered
him one of my books; and in his sheet he tells me and the World, that the same
Book was made up much with Scoffs, Quibbles, gross perversions and abuses,
short of all seriousness and sobriety, yea, manifest perversions, lies, and
slanders.

What then did he take it well from me, that I ordered him such a Book with so
many perversions, lies, and slanders, scoffs, Quibbles, and gross abuses? But
as the Perversions, Scoffs, Quibbles, and Abuses were the Quakers that my Book
set forth, and so was made up much of, it may be true enough, for I know of no
such Perversions, Quibbles, etc. there, but only the Quaker's, and there was
good store of Them.

Truly, Reader, some think the like Letter was hardly ever before seen to come
from a Quaker, and one of their Chieftains too; He assured me therein, he was
as willing to receive INFORMATION as to give it in any thing wherein any thing
seemed doubtful, or any mistake is (or may be) supposed, about the
Controversies depending between us.

Hereby then he acknowledges, he thought the Author was able to give him
Information (at least) in some of those matters in Controversy, otherwise it
was silly for him to desire that he might Discourse with the Author to that
purpose, viz. for mutual information, as he writ he did.

And did not the Quaker herein finely vail his Bonnet, that had been talking
of, or pretending to INFALLIBILITY nigh these Twenty Years (if not above) and
yet now in 1674/5. assures the Author (who yet had told him I pretended no such
Infallibility) he was as willing to Receive Information (by discoursing with
him) as to Give it in any thing seeming doubtful about the Controversies
depending between us: And therefore for his better Information in those very
matters, I send him this Discourse and Remarks of mine, further to try him and
his reality herein: and for your better satisfaction you shall have here (
verbatim as I think) his said Letter, and my Reply to it.

T.T.

For the Author of the Book, Entitled, The Second Part of the Quakers Quibles.
To be left with Francis Smith, the Bookseller, to be Conveyed, as abovesaid.
Friend,
I Lately Received thy Book, Entitled, The Second Part of the Quakers Quibles,
and take it well from thee, that thou Which is the most true and pure Language
to a single Person, to write, that thou ORDERED me, or to say, that you Ordered
me? Are they not both alike as to the impureness of speech: Oh ye rare
Linguists, that write by Inspiration?
Ordered me one of them, and this is to desire so much Civility from thee, as
that I may have an hours Discourse with thee (if thou Live in, or near
London) which, perhaps, may save us several hours writing, and prevent others
of some charge and trouble in such Books of Controversy, and possibly may
afford so much mutual Information as may tend to Peace, or at least, to a more
moderate and serious method in managing the Controversies between us than the
tenor of thy said Book seems to bespeak, which for Truths sake, and not for
any popularity or Mastery, I could (and do) desire. And if thou will be pleased
to let me know where thou Dwell; or where I may conveniently meet with thee,
I am willing with a Friend or two to come to thee and two or three of thy
Friends, as I may have an Opportunity; for I apprehend both my self, the Truth
and Friends wronged in diverse passages of the said Book, and not only so, but
many serious and unprejudiced Readers are much disgusted, and wearied, and
their Patience too much grated upon, by such kind of Method as thou have chosen
against me: Yet I Will assure thee, I am as willing to Receive Information as to
Give it, in any thing wherein any thing seems doubtful, or any mistake is (or
may be) supposed, about the Controversies depending between us. So desiring thy
Answer if thou If you have bad English again, I cannot help that, you have it
as such a Schoolmaster and Dictator as G.W. sent it me: I would not take
notice of this, but that the Quakers pretend to Infallibility, and have
condemned others for bad English, or not speaking it Grammatically.
please, and as soon as may be, to what is hereby desired, I Remain,

A Friend to thee and all Men, as bearing no ill will toward any, George
Whitehead.
London, 13 th. 12 mo. 1674/5.
To Mr. George Whitehead, These. To be left for him at Mr. Francis Smith's,
Bookseller, at the Elephant and Castle, near the Exchange in Cornhil, London.
Mr. Whitehead,
THY Letter, Dated the 13 th. came well to my Hands, which I find to be so
Civil and Moderate, that I Accept of it very kindly from thee, and should I not
return thee the like Answer, I must (to save thee the labor) judge my self
ungrateful, which is an Humor I Naturally abhor; and as this Courteous temper
best becomes a Christian Spirit, so I assure thee I have always found it more
prevalent upon my Soul than any Arrogant self-conceited huffing, and censorious
damning.

As to thy desire, for thee and two or three of thy Friends to Meet and
Discourse with me, it is a thing that possibly I should willingly comply with;
if some Circumstances of my Occasions would conveniently admit; and that by
your late Practice, as I have heard, you had not already given others to see,
and Experimentally know how FRUITLESS such Meetings with you have, and do
commonly prove: For if my Information fail me not, (which I have not as yet any
ground to suspect, I receiving it from a very serious and Sober Person,) When
you had accused one Mr. Hedworth (a Person I do hereby assure thee, who is no
more acquainted with me, than thou art) and not being able, or at least willing
to prove it your selves, you would IMPOSE upon the Gentleman, to accuse
himself, It seems G.W. says (or to deny it) was added: Whether it be so or no,
and What G.W. meant he WAS to deny, or would IMPOSE upon him to deny, I know
not; but it is still the same as to the purpose I brought it, viz. their
IMPOSING upon others, as if they had the Power of, or would new erect among
them, A HIGH COMMISSION COURT, for even there, their IMPOSITION was the same,
that the Parties accused had the Liberty to confess or deny the Questions that
were put to them.
or otherwise you would not Discourse the Matter with him, when yet you had
appointed him a Meeting to that purpose; which surely Friend, thou must know,
is not only against the good Law of our Nation, but against the Law of Nature,
and is no less than for you to set up an HIGH COMMISSION COURT, which our
Prudent Governors have long since abolished, seeing the unreasonableness
thereof; and how any of thy Friends can rationally IMPOSE such Terms and
Conditions on others (against their consents) or else refuse to Discourse with
them, I must confess I do not, nor can understand, and therefore should much
call my own Senses and Judgment into Question, if I should but imagine to see
any good Effect of such a PRIVATE Discourse with thee and thy Friends. WHEN I
Consider besides, that some of you have not stuck PUBLICLY in the Face of the
World to assert (without blushing) such strange things sometimes (as I
apprehend to be) beside the Truth, common Reason, yea, and contrary to our very
Eyesight, which if you did not afterward stand in, and pretend to vindicate
(but did ingenuously own the mistake, and heartily retract the Error,) I should
not yet think so ill of.

Therefore as I have Printed my Reply, that all who will, and can, may see and
Judge of what I say; so I think it cannot be better than for thee to do the
like, that all may see how Civily and fairly thou have, or shall deal with me
therein, and that was the Intent I at first signified to Mr. Pen, hoping that
his Education would have been so prevalent with him (at least as he was a
Scholar) as not to write Trivially, or impertinently, nor deal unfairly by me,
when he was COOL; as I apprehended he did by some when he was HOT in the
Dispute, which really I was then so Charitable as to attribute chiefly to the
Motion of his Passion, or Party.

Whereas thou say, Thou apprehendest thy Self, Friends, and Truth wronged in
diverse passages of my said Book; if it should prove so INDEED, I should be
heartily sorry for it, but I protest seriously to thee in the dread and fear of
the most HIGH, that I have not wronged you knowingly, and if it should be
Ignorantly (which yet I hope upon due Examination will not appear) I presume
thy Charity may the easier forgive me, as I believe my Heavenly Father will;
especially if it be occasioned through thy OWN FRIENDS ill expressing
themselves, they then may be more blameworthy than I.

Further, thou say, many serious and unprejudiced Readers are much disgusted
and wearied, Mr. Pen^ Judas and the Jews is no more than a little above sixteen
sheets in Answer to four and a h^lf, and this you must not doubt, but without
disgusting their Sober Readers, it being a Quakers Method See also hi^ Spirit
of Truth Vindicated, it is but seventeen sheets in Answer to six.
and their Patience too much grated upon by such kind of method as I have
chosen against thee.

As to this, be pleased but to consider that they and thou must thank thy self
for that, occasioning me so to do by thy dealing so INSINCERELY with me, and
giving no real nor pertinent Answer when thou had undertaken it, which if
thou had pleased thou might have forborne; I could not, nor did impose it
on thee: (But since thou wast pleased to propose to the World, and thoughtest
meet to undertake it. Now, it cannot but be expected, both by them and me, thou
should perform it more directly and heartily than as yet thou have done, or
ingenuously say thou can not any more than others.)

For what Sober Person, that pretends to tenderness of Conscience and
Ingenuity, would ever endeavor to make any believe I had contradicted my self,
by saying IF PERHAPS; or that pretended to any thing of Scholar-ship, that
would assert those words of mine to be a Contradiction according to (your own)
Mr. Keith's just Laws of Dispute?

Or what Man would have accused me, as being in the Unbelief, and not
acknowledging the sufficiency of the Spirits Evidence, for my owning Miracles,
Signs, and the Gifts of Tongues immediately Inspired by the Spirit, as
sufficient Evidence of the Spirit, which thou thy self say (p. 12.) I did
propose as Evidence?

But if thou had been pleased to have given me a sincere Answer to the very
Matter indeed at first, much, if not most of this had been prevented.

Yet pray Consider why mine should grate on the Patience of thy serious and
unprejudiced Readers, more than thy own Book lately put forth, Entitled, A
Serious Search, which is almost five sheets, in Answer to two, proportionably I
think my Reply is not so much.

Besides, I have Divided my Discourse into Sections, and set down the Contents
at the beginning, that so if any Readers Patience shall not serve him to Read
the whole, he may only cast his Eye on that Section he has most mind to,
which he may do without any great Injury, the Matter of them not depending much
one upon the other.

And, Friend, for thy ease, if thou shall think good but to give an honest,
plain, and direct Answer to the twelve particulars mentioned in the
ADVERTISEMENT, which is not one full sheet, I shall gratis, quit thee (for the
present) of all the rest, upon this Condition, that thy Answer be plain and
direct INDEED to the very Question, without Equivocation, Evasion, or begging
of the Question.

And in my next, if I think I have Occasion to Rejoyn, it is now my Intention
to be briefer, but then I wish it may not be sharper, I generally Observing
that Prolixity much abates the picquant Severity of ones style.

Further, I pray thy Excuse if I do take the freedom to tell thee, that I had
abundantly rather see a Real Answer to that little part of it, than a great
many words to the whole, if as far from the purpose as the former was; and bear
with me if I entreat thee to Observe this particular thing.

If by grating on their Patience, thou meanest, their waiting for it so long,
I Will assure thee my self was a chief Sufferer in that Respect, and the Printer
or Bookseller to be blamed for keeping it five or six weeks in hand before
Finishing it.

To Conclude this, I Will promise thee, that if thou will forbear all
Reflections, for the Future, I will also, and only and merely concern our
selves with the Merits of the Cause; and this will be the best way I can think
of, both to shorten the work, ease thee and me, and accomplish all the Ends
propounded in thy Letter, which shall be my chief aim, as it is my hearty
desire, if thou, or some of thy Friends do not divert me, so I Rest,

Thy Well-wisher, T.T.
17. Feb. 74/75.
Remarks on G.W's. Sheet, etc.
W. Pen's Account of the INFALLIBILITY of himself and the Quaker's Ministers,
We ascribe not an Infallibility to Men, but to the Grace of God; and to Men, SO
FAR as they are led by it; for that it certainly Teaches, what it does Teach,
W.P's. Rebuke, p. 22.

And are not the Ministers of the Church of England, and the Ministers of the
Baptists Church, yea, and ALL the Men in the World SO FAR INFALLIBLE, as well
as the Quakers? Oh Excellent Rhetorician! But poor Logician!

SECT. I. Of G.W's. Title, and his False Suggestion therein; Which runs thus;
The Timorous Reviler Slighted, being a brief Reprehension of a Scornful
Pamphlet, Styled, The Second Part of the Quakers Quibbles, Subscribed by the
Name of Thomas Thompson, but (by some) suspected to be the Author of the two
Pamphlets, the one Entitled, The Spirit of the Quakers Tried, the other,
Controversy Ended, etc.
Sect. 1. REviler] and why so? But because I told him and the Quakers of their
Railing, and demonstrated their Ridiculous and deceitful Equivocations; let him
but name to me any one word that I have used (that he Accounts Reviling) that
he himself has not used, or worse, in his Writings, if he can; and till then
he may with more Justice keep his Title to himself: But when these Men cannot
bite, yet they will bark.

Sect. 2. Sleighted] a true word; ^or as he has Published it, it is to say,
SHIFTED, or dealt deceitfully and Craftily with; and in the Apostle Paul's
Time, we find there were some such, Ephesians. 4.14. Be no more -- carried about with
every wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of Men, and cunning Craftiness, whereby
they lie in wait to deceive.

But G. art thou no wiser to play Hocus Pocus, and shift me, but that thou must
tell me and the World of it in thy Title?

Sect. 3. But suppose his Intention is, slighted] (for it seems a Quaker can
hardly speak, or Print much now, without the Art of Directing the Intention, or
speaking by a Figure) Then we have a slight Title, fit for such a slight silly
sheet; yet Proud and Arrogant, denoting rather the Pride of Quakers, than the
Humility of Christians, alias, we have a new-coyn'd Quibble for Evading an
Answer, or an Old term for running away, and timerously quitting the Contest.

Sect. 4. Slighted, no wonder, they that have slighted the Protestant Churches
beyond the Seas, slighted the Church of England, slighted 21 Learned Divines at
a Clap, slighted all the Baptist's Churches, yea, and slighted all Teachers and
Professors in Europe besides themselves; how is it possible but that I must be
slighted too, except I Will Banish my self to the Indies?

They that have slighted the Writings, or Books of Holy SCRIPTURE, (so far as I
have showed you out of their own Books, and more particularly, G.W. himself, in
his own words, but in the last precedent Section) can you reasonably expect,
they should not slight other Men's Books, and mine too? Are these the Despised
People, or the Despisers by G.W's, own Testimony? What they cannot so well
Answer, they pretend to slight; a poor shift: For thereby they manifest but
their silly scorn, and disdainful Pride and Arrogance. Though it is not yet six
Months since, that his Brother Pen could take Notice of a ridiculous sorry
Mouse (as he calls it) and so turn Mouse-catcher; and are the Quakers thus
Elevated on a sudden?

Sect. 5. A Reprehension, what, for want of an Answer? It is indeed well known
you are free enough of the first, however timorous as to the latter. Their
Confidence, though usually too great, yet at this time it seems did not serve
them to say it was an Answer.

Sect. 6. But (by some) suspected to be the Author of the two Pamphlets, the
one Entitled, The Spirit of the Quakers tried; the other, Controversy ended.]
What, Infallible, and yet suspect? How now, what, suspicious, George? Other
Men's Fallibility then, is as good as the Quakers suspicious Infallibility: Is
this your Gift of Discerning, and Prophecy? But that is not the worst of it,

For the Suggestion is of a matter absolutely false, Satan owing them a shame
(as the Proverb goes) has suggested a false thing, which the Quaker has here
Published to the World, as true, to their own dishonor and shame.

Besides, this Quaker h^th hereby wronged me, and abused another Person (whom
Mr. Pen, in his winding sheet, says, is H^n. Hedworth by Name.)

Sect. 7. First, G.W. has here grossly wronged me in Publishing a Suggestion,
and that in Print, that I was the Author of the two Books, Entitled, The
Spirit of the Quakers Tried, and Controversy Ended; when as, I was not, nay,
did not so much as see or hear of either of them, till after they were in
Print. But in these Books, Mr. Pen has (in the Quakers Name) declared to the
World there are several falsehoods, scandals, lies, and Forgeries, and yet here
G.W. has endeavored to fix and fasten them all (if any such be there) upon
me, as suggesting, or representing me to the World as the Author of them.

Now, ye that are Quakers of G.W's. Church, and pretend to be the true Church
of God, I will try your Truth, Honesty, Conscience, and Justice in this
partic^lar, viz* Whether you will cause G.VV. to make me satisfaction for the
Offense and wrong he has done me (in spreading abroad a suspicion and
suggestion of me, in a Matter that is absolutely UNTRUE, and UNJUST,) in the
same manner as he has done it, viz. in Print; I hereby require it, and demand
it of you and him as you profess yourselves to be a true Church.

And that you may not say I am, or may be unreasonable, I hereby Declare, that
his bare acknowledgment of the wrong in Print, I shall accept of, as
satisfaction.

And for your further and full assurance of the falsehood of the Matter, I do
hereby Declare, and solemnly Testify, IN THE PRESENCE OF THE HOLY GOD, That I,
who did write, and was the Author of the late Books, Entitled, The Quakers
Quibbles, was not the Author of the two Books, Entitled, The Spirit of the
Quakers Tried, and Controversy Ended: and if there be any need, I doubt not,
but that Common Justice will Oblige Mr. Hedworth (if called thereunto) to
witness the same thing in the presence of your Church, he being, it seems,
better acquainted with you than I am, or desire to be with such unreasonable,
dishonest, and dis-ingenuous People, as some of you thus demonstrate your
selves to be.

And that you may not make your being unacquainted with me, any Excuse, of not
doing me Right, I shall here take that off before hand: For if your Minister,
G.VV. can abuse, and wrong me in Print by a false suggestion, though
unacquainted with me, he may, and can as well and easily give me in Print the
satisfaction required, though unacquainted with me, viz. only acknowledge it
so, you having it evidenced by my own solemn Testimony, and if that be doubted
(though you can have no Reason to doubt thereof, it being the Highest Testimony
that Men can give.) And you des^re further Evidence, signify it to the
Bookseller, and I presume Mr. Hedworth will be so Just, as to clear me, he
being the best Evidence that it is possible for you or any one to have to clear
me in this Matter, if so be, he was (as Mr. Pen says he was) the Author of the
two Books before mentioned, but is not the Author of the Quakers Quibbles. So
that ye Quakers, can have no just Excuse, and therefore I do again complain to
you as wronged, and demand that you see that just satisfaction given me, that I
require from G.VV. If not, I Will mark you, and declare you to the world to be
Abettors and Publishers of false suggestions.

Sect. 8. Secondly, By this, G.VV. has wronged and abused the said Mr.
Hedworth, in raising, or spreading abroad a false suggestion touching him, as
if he was the Author of the Book, Entitled, The Second part of the Quakers
Quibbles, in which Book G.VV. has Asserted and published to the world there
are gross perversions and abuses, p. 4. Yea, manifest perversions, lies, and
slanders, that he is chargeable with, and as yet he lies under the Guilt of, p.
2. and so represents and suggests to the world Him to be the Author of all
those abuses, lies, and slanders, which in truth he is innocent of: Therefore
it is hoped that Mr. Hedworth will be at least so just to himself and his own
Name, as to require satisfaction for such wrong and injustice done him, when as
it is another Person that ought to be charged with all those manifest abuses,
lies, and slanders, if any such there be.

Sect. 9. Was it the Light within that led thee G.VV. to the publishing this
suspicion, or not? If thou say, not; then G. where was the Light, or thy
sincerity to it? If yes, Then thy Light leads thee to publish suggestions of
Persons and things that are false. It must come from a false Spirit, it being a
false Suggestion.

Sect. 10. I should not have said so much about this, but upon these two
Considerations.

1. Because these are the Persons that pretend to Infallibility, and a Gift of
Discerning MORE than others that are not of their way. If G.W. had indeed a
Gift of Discerning by the Light within, how wicked or silly was he not to
inquire of it, whether this suggestion was true or false, and the suspicion,
right or wrong, before he published it? Or if he did inquire, and the Light
within him could not tell him, what is false, and what is true, then how does
he and his Light exceed others, or make him MORE Infallible? How evident here
and plain is either this Man's wickedness, or vanity in his Pretensions to a
Gift of Discerning?

2. Because of this Man's base unworthiness, and unchristian carriage in
publishing such a thing, when I had before in a Letter to him seriously assured
him, that Mr. Hedworth was a Person no more acquainted with me than G. himself
was; but this Man being so guilty himself, of asserting and writing so many
untruths and falsehoods, he thinks others are like him, and no more to be
Credited: But now let the unbyassed Reader* Judge of it, do they think to Grace
their Cause by such doings? Where is thy Conscience and Religion, George? Is
this the Quakers Christianity? Oh, silly Scorner, blush, and be ashamed!

SECT. II. About the Author 's NAME and LETTER.
Sect. 1. THE Ingenious and Impartial Reader may easily Conclude how he has
managed the rest of the Work, by pu^^^g such a false suggestion even in his
Front, and that so basely, and unchristianly: and at the same rate he goes on,
with these words, Looking upon thee to be an unworthy, Cowardly, base Spirited
Man, who shuffles about to hide thy self: How now, Friend? What, such as M.Y.
saw through the Keyhole, or so as one G.W. did in the Matter of Mrs. Bat --
when accused at T.Y's.? According to thy own way (with Mr. Danson) this is but
a Query Mr. Sleights, thou better know the Mystery.

Sect. 2. Thou art very cautious thy Name should be discovered.] But alas, poor
Men, that are put so hard to it, that they are now forced to make use of such
slight shifts for Excuses. For the time was when the Quakers could tell you,
that even the Blessed Name of JESUS and CHRIST it self, without (that they
call) the Power, are but EMPTY WORDS, Princip. of Truth, p. 12. And yet behold
what a considerable thing does this Quaker now pretend to make of my Name? Oh
the Folly and Hypocrisy of these Men! can the Knowledge of an Empty word be of
such weight to them? which yet they cannot tell but that they do know; to be
sure they will not own that I am in the Power; what, is this Man so base then,
as to make my mere literal Name to be of more concern to them, than they have
declared the mere literal Name of the Lord CHRIST to be, to them? What, would
thou make thy being unacquainted with an EMPTY WORD, an Excuse? Blush for shame!

Sect. 3. But to take that false Cover from him, and cut all short, I do hereby
tell them for a certain Truth, That my real Name is in Print as a witness
against them, and my Books as a Testimony against several of their Principles,
and let them either Answer or Confute them if they can. Though this is more
than (...) ^as Obliged, either by their Civility, or any other Law, that I know
of, to tell them: what if I should ask them whose Name is to the Epistle to the
Hebrews, and the Acts of the Apostles? whose Name is to the Books of Judges,
Kings, and Chronicles? Can the Quakers tell with all their Light uncontroulably
what Men writ them? And will it not thence appear, it may be both good and
honest enough, though a Man's Name should be concealed? And neither the Man the
worse, nor his Book the worse? (what have they to say against Paul's changing
his Name?) Besides the continual Custom of many good Men amongst us; nay, and
of the Quakers themselves sometimes, (if they will admit themselves to be
good.) Pray, G. whose Name is put to that Printed Paper, Entitled, A Paper
sent forth into the World, etc. accusing the Ministers of the Nation, and
several Teachers of many gross things? Pray, who writ The Principles of the
Quakers Defendable by Scripture? who is it, that cannot see now most strange
Hypocrisy in these Men? And what small twigs they would catch at, and hang
upon: any thing rather than to deal honestly, and give an Answer in plainness.
Oh Timorous Man, what sorrowful shuffling art thou fain to make use of!

Sect. 4. And whereas I said, suppose the Author be a private Person, what if
he Dwells fifty or sixty miles from London, or what if the Author had
subscribed M.A. could not W.P. have joined N. (according to Mr. L's. way of
Addition) and then have read it a MAN; and that it was happy that their Light
left them in so much darkness of the Author, that they could not tell whether
it was the Author's real Name or no, when they read it; to this G.W. says, Have
thou not bewrayed thy own Equivocation, and that the Author's Name is not Tho.
Thompson?

I Answer, no: But I have bewrayed the Quakers Folly and Vanity, and that was
one part of my aim, thereby to try Experimentally whether their high boasted
Light would reveal any more to them than others, or stand them in stead when
they had need of it* whereby they might know and have a DISCERNING beyond
others.

But alas, Experience, (which is one of the surest Masters) now tells me, that
the Quakers are as easily mistaken, and do as foully deceive themselves as
other Persons in the World do: Their Light will not so much as help them to
know really a Man's Name when they read it, except the Person himself, or some
other Man Reveal it to them: And thus we see that I or a mere man may Reveal
more to them, if we please, than their Light within.

Sect. 5. Besides, to make this Man's Folly more manifest; how silly is he to
inquire about my Name, when he himself has turned Baptist, and given me a
Name, (nay, two or three) though I assure you false ones, which yet you may (if
you please) take as one Evidence of the Quakers pretended Infa^libility, and I
think as good as any they have.

Notwithstanding this man is no wiser than to tell me, that he has ground to
think who I am, p. 5. and yet pretends the want of that very thing, as a main
Reason why he does not Answer me, Does he not herein, not only Quibble
egregiously, but ingeniously confute himself?

Sect. 6. As to his Letter and my Answer, the Reader has them both set down
before, to whose judicious Consideration I leave it, to be further Observed.

First, how well the Style of G's. written Letter and his Printed sheet agrees,
surely by the Letter, any one may well conclude, that the pretended Civility in
the former, was no better than Real Hypocrisy: what Fountain is this within
G.W. that sends forth both sweet water and bitter? It seems G. put on a Sheeps
Clothing in his Letter, though he remained a Wolf inwardly, as appears by his
Ravening sheet: A Cat will be a Cat still, George.

Secondly, Thereby the Reader may also Observe, how falsely, and Quakerly G.W.
represents it, where he says, That I shuffled him off with a Letter, pretending
some Circumstances of my Occasions would not conveniently admit, with some
other TRIVIAL Allegations, says he, whereas they were as weighty, if not more,
than any other, and those Reasons that he calls TRIVIAL, were so weighty
Arguments as I think it is possible for any to be, to a Person that would not
offer violence to his own senses and understanding, for that was one of the
Allegations I made, which he can call TRIVIAL; and now his own virulent and
abusive sheet may Experimentally satisfy others, what usage (I writ him, I was
well enough satisfied) I must expect from Men of their Kidney, for if they
would not spare to accuse and load a man falsely with Reproaches publicly in
Print, how can I or any man expect, or promise our selves, but to be dealt
withal as bad (if not worse, if it may be) in a private Meeting with them.

Sect. 7. But as to what he says, of my having taken many hours to write
against them: I Reply, VV.P. has spent as many, and a great many more, in
writing against Mr. Faldo, and yet in two Letters, one after another, he could
pretend, some Circumstances of his Occasions would not permit him to meet Mr.
Faldo: And one of them was such a Trivial one, viz. a Ceremony, that it was not
at all becoming a Quaker: Shall I say then of VV.P. a strange put off? ah poor
timorous Man! But I can with Truth tell thee, Geo. that my own House is above
44 Miles from London: Now then, poor Shuffler, does not thy catching at such
Trivial things demonstrate that it is only thy own timerousness to Answer?
Silly Quibbler, is thy store of Evasions so exhausted, and VV. Pen's too, that
ye have nothing left but the Dregs?

Sect. 8. But let the honest hearted Reader Judge, if I did not offer him
fairly and Civily enough in my Letter, when I told him, that if he would give a
Direct Answer but to one sheet of it, I should accept of it: or if that he
would lay aside all Reflections, and enter solely on the MERITS of the Cause, I
would do so too; but no, the Gentleman did not think good, or dare adventure at
that; he had rather turn Mr. Sleights.

SECT. III. Of Socianism* and the Divinity of Christ, which the Quakers own.
G.W. p. 5. Why have thou appeared so much then ( lik^ an Envious Socinian) for
the Angry Anabaptists, etc?

P. 7. What, is the Socinian, or Biddlean Prosylite Offended at our confessing
the Divinity of Christ, etc?

Sect. 1. Can thou, G. for shame cry out against Socinians, and yet not
Rebuke thy Brother Pen? Thou should first look at Home, and reprehend him: At
best, all that thou say against them, is indeed against him, so long as his
Sandy Foundation stands, without a Recantation, beyond his self contradictory
weak Apology.

Show me such a word of my own, in either of my Books, if thou can, as is in
thy Brother Pen's, UNLESS the Father, Son, and Spirit are three distinct
NOTHINGS, they MVST be three distinct SVBSTANCES, and consequently, three
distinct GODS. Here Is a Socinian to the purpose, and this whilst he was a
Disputer for, and amongst the Quakers: Besides, what is that whole Book of his
but Socinianism? Look no further than the very Title Page, and he tells you it
is a Refutation of the Doctrine of Justification from, or by an Imputative
Righteousness, and of Plenary satisfaction, etc. Show any such Socinian-like
assertions in my Book, if thou can, Geo. Oh, the Folly of this Man! That he
should cry out against Socinians, and yet Cherish such an one among them (and
highly Commend him for a Sincere hearted Man too) yea, and several of the once
peculiar Socinian Doctrines amongst them: would not one think such a Fellow out
of his Wits, to write thus foppishly? But if the Quakers may hold three or four
Socinian Doctrines, and not be Socinians, might not H.H. or another, hold one,
and yet be no Socinian?

Sect. 2. But suppose one be a Socinian, can any judicious Person think it is a
good Reply, or Answer enough to him to cry out, Oh* he is a Socinian, a
Socinian, a Biddlean; why, truly then, at that rate, it will be Answer good
enough to a Quaker, to cry out, he is a Quaker, a Quaker, a Quaker; and so then
they cannot justly expect any more from another, and thus they show us a very
easy way how quickly to Answer all the Quakers.

Sect. 3. But I can tell this discerning Man more than yet his Light Reveals,
as it seems, that he is most false and mistaken in these his Suggestions: Not
that I will tell him here expressly whether I am one or no, because I will leave
that for a further Trial of his Gift of Discerning, and of his Revelation by
the Light within: But I was never Baptized into that Name, till this Quaker
turned Anabaptist: But if I were one, why should I think it any dishonor, more
than W. Pen, when he wrote his Sandy Foundation? Besides, I can freely tell
G.W. I had rather a thousand times be one of them he calls Socinians, than such
a Quaker as he is. Forasmuch as they own somewhat REAL in the Lord JESUS
CHRIST, and own him to be a REAL PERSON WITHOUT US. But this Quaker and others
of them, make a mere PHANTASM (or FANCY) of him or his Body, as their former
Preachments and Writings give me to understand: And accordingly some do not
apprehend it any difficult thing to make out, that some of the grand Quakers,
when they will speak more plainly (whatever at other times they pretend) do, or
did own, no other CHRIST, than what is indeed and Truth either their own FANCY,
SPIRIT, or MIND within, or at best, the dictates of their OWN CONSCIENCE, or
what some Men commonly call the Dictates of Conscience, or others call Reason,
Man's Spirit the Mind within, or the Life of Man, or cannot be well and truly
differenced, distinguished, discriminated from them.

And therefore they do but Quibble and Equivocate (to blind the World) when
they talk of owning the DIVINITY OF CHRIST. For in Truth, They own no other
Divinity of Christ, than what is properly, or essentially within their OWN
BODIES: Neither do they in truth and plainness own any other DIVINITY of
Christ, nor any other CHRIST than what is born into the World with them, when
they come forth of THEIR Mothers Wombs, or is manifest in THAT individual Flesh
of theirs, as their words and writings inform me: And what a rare DIVINITY of
Christ is this, (think you) that the Quakers own?

It is possible I may declare to you a MYSTERY of the Quakers Doctrine, which
you have not yet heard of, or so well understood, which their sayings give me
to understand, viz. That CHRIST and the Divine Nature ( or the Divinity of
Christ) is as truly, properly, or really in the BODY of GEO. FOX, or the BODY
of G.W. as it was in THAT BODY born of the VIRGIN MARY; and yet further, That
the CHRIST manifest in GEO. FOX'S ( or some Quakers) FLESH, is really,
properly, and truly, CHRIST MANIFEST IN FLESH, as that CHRIST was, which was
manifest in THAT Flesh at Jerusalem, Born of the VIRGIN MARY above 1600 Years
ago.

Let them directly and positively deny any one of these two if they will, and
tell us, that what they say, is to be taken in the Grammatical sense to avoid
Quibbling Equivocation, if they dare; and it is very probable, you may have a
most full proof of it, and that from their own Mouths or Pens; and therefore
when they say, That Geo. Fox is not Christ, that is but a Quibble, for they mean
then by G. Fox, ONLY his Flesh, or Body; and so they do likewise say, That the
Body of JESUS, or the Body called JESUS, is not the CHRIST; and thus no wonder
then, if they say, that Geo. Fox's Body is not the Christ: But will they say,
that the LIVING and BETTER Part in Geo. Fox's Body, or in and of GEO. FOX, is
not THE CHRIST? No, I never could hear them say that: So you may see what
CHRIST it is they own, and what DIVINITY it is they talk of, to deceive
ignorant People, and unwary Souls withal, a mere Quibble and most horrid
Equivocation, no worse, nor better, notwithstanding (at other times) their
feigned Pretensions to hide it. G.W. p. 6. says, I tell him of a pretty Medley
of Hypocrisy, Quibbling, and Confusion, and deviating from Scripture Language
in their speaking of the Divine Nature or Word Clothed with the most Holy
Manhood, being the Christ: But (says G.W.) is this a truth in it self yea or
nay? What is it (or can it be) now then with him a truth in it self, though it
deviate from Scripture Language? or be a Medley of Hypocrisy, Quibbling, and
Confusion? Oh rare! if this be thy Rhetoric, Geo. where is thy Reason and
Logic?

SECT. IV. Of Scornful Reflections.
Sect. 1. G W. p. 5. With a multitude of Scornful Reflections upon G.W. W.P.
and others, and not only so, but upon the Quakers in general, with which thy
Pamphlet is much stuffed, short of all seriousness and Sobriety. To which I
Reply, that were it so, yet their playing the Fool, would be excuse enough: why
do they Act, Write, or speak things, to render themselves so Ridiculous, if
they would not have their Auditors and Spectators be moved at it?

I never heard of any Jack-Pudding, that wilfully made himself Ridiculous, but
that it was with design to raise a pleasant Humor in others; and if G.W. or
the Quakers have not the like design, it is to be feared they have a worse: But
if they would not have others be moved to Laugh at them, their best course
would be, to learn to be no more Ridiculous, nor write and Print Nonsense. For
if G. Fox will pretend to be wiser than (and to Instruct) all Europe, and yet
is such an Ignoramus, as to call a Father, Mother; a Man, Woman; or a He, She;
or not know the Masculine Gender from the Femi^^^e, is any Man to be blamed for
Laughing at ^im? For my part, I do here say, I think not at all: But rather
that it may be a Duty, at least very convenient, to Laugh at such vain boasting
Pride, Ignorance, and Ridicu^^sity, to shame them out of it.

Sect. 2. But still Mr. Sleights, thy Brother Pen, falls under thy lash, why
do thou not Reprehend him? Thou ought to have done that in the first
place: You shall, I think, hardly find any use more scurrilous scoffing (in
such matters) than he has done. To instance but in three or four (because of
brevity) of his scornful Reflections, viz.

W.P. Rejoinder to Mr. Faldo, p. 38. I cannot but Observe after what a
SVSPECTED RATE the SCRIPTVRES have been first Collected, and then conveyed
throu^h the several Ages, etc.

P. 39. From hence we may Observe the UNCERTAINTY of JOHN FALDO'S WORD OF GOD.

Pen's Rebuke, p. 31. It is the Presbyterians special Grace, THAT SAVES; and
as for particular Persons, take this in his Winding sheet, p. 2. That Little
Great Pragmatical T.F. a MONSTER, ALL Tongue and NO Ears

Will ye say now, that it is likely any Man should outdo this Pragmaticus (your
Brother Pen) for Personal Reflections? nay, he gives the Gentleman's Name at
Length, though as I hear, one that is a good substantial Citizen, a Person of
very good Repute and Estate; besides the Personal Reflection, if one should
inquire into the Truth of it strictly, one should find it to be a most
notorious falsehood, for I have inquired, and do understand that that Gent. has
TWO EARS, though W.P. say^ NO EARS: (and so might give Occasion to some silly
suspicious Quakers, to think, as if the Gent. was indeed Born without Ears, or
had lost them) so base was his scurrility, and at best W.P. will have need of a
Quakers Figure (which must needs be the Devils drawn Figure) for to help him
out, and excuse this Scoffing Slander.

If you would have a Scornful Reflection above all that ever I read, a silly
and Profane one too, See W. Pen's Winding sheet, p. 8. speaking of H.H's.
Prayer to the Lord JESUS: But indeed, his Margin proves to us, he takes him for
A MAN, and none of the BEST LINGVISTS neither; for lest HE should not well
understand the English word delivered, he refers HIM to Tradita in the Margin,
though both Translations, and one as good as the other, for the Original word
is Greek, which either H. Hedworth does not know, or he doubted the skill of
him he prayed to, or else he did foolishly to Correct by a Translation, the
Original word being ready.

Any other Man of Sense (except such a wilful scoffing Perverter as W.P.) could
not but take TRADITA, to be there put down for the Readers, (and especially ye
Quakers) better Information, not for the Lord Christ^s; and so I took it on my
first Reading it, and could honestly take it no otherwise, H.H. fearing (as I
perceived) you might, or would Quarrel, or discant upon the word TRADITION,
just before used by him in his Prayer.

But by this it appears the Quakers are so Profane, and far from owning the
Lord JESUS, the MAN that indeed dyed at Jerusalem, that they wilfully make a
mere Scoff at one's serious Worship and Prayer to him.

Where Is W. Pen's Religion and Conscience now? Is it all devoured with
Lightness, and turned into Scorn?

Nay, Mr. Pen is such a Pragmaticus, and a wit, that rather than he would lose
breaking his Jest on Jeremy Ives, he would adventure the bestowing on himself
the Title of Mouse-hunter, or Mouse-catcher; and in time, if he continues, as
he has begun, it is hoped he may as well arrive to the Degree of a Rat-catcher
amongst the Quakers.

P. 4. He says, I term my self a scornful Fellow: which is a plain and evident
falsity, for I did not term my self so, but these were my words, G.W. knows, IT
SEEMS, it is a Scornful Fellow he has to deal withal; otherwise I thought he
would not (nor could) have styled my Epistle a very scornful Pamphlet, as he
did: Where Is this Man's Conscience now? Or so much as common Honesty? That
cares so little what he says or writes, though never so false. Is this and the
like the Quakers Religion? Is this the Practice of one of the Us Gods People?
Is this to pretend Christianity? Or to talk for it at such a Rate? Then many
Civil Heathens may, or will go beyond them.

SECT. V. Of the Miraculous Gifts of the Spirit, and of Prophecy.
Sect. 1. IT appears G.W. met with two such stumbling blocks (though of his own
framing) at the very threshold (the Epistle) of my Book, that he dared hardly
to enter into the Book it self, only peeps in, and presently his Brother
Fisher's Ghost presents it self to him, and thereupon he Runs away from the
rest, as if he was scared out of his wits.

Without any of the Quaker's Revelation I could foretell my Reader how I did
expect they would winch and Kick, wynd and twine, to Wyer-draw, or draw back
those two Sentences again, but all will not do.

For as to the First, he can poorly and only give us his bare word without any
Proof, That those Spiritual Gifts were ONLY PECVLIAR to some in the Apostles
days, p. 2. I have proved the contrary, by Testimonies and Records Cited in my
Second Part of Qu^k. Quib. p. 53.

And besides, if he could do that (which I conceive he will never be able to
do) yet his business would remain still undone: For how will he be able to
prove Infallibly, uncontroulably (Sam. Fisher's word) and certainly, that these
Gifts of the SPIRIT, viz. the Gift of Infallibility; Discerning of Spirits,
Immediate Revelation, and Prophecy (or an immediate Gift of Interpretation, and
foretelling things to come, certain^y and expressly, and not conjecturally
only) were not PECULIAR ALSO (without begging the Question) to some Christians
and Ministers in the Apostles times, as well as the Gifts of Healing, Tongues,
etc. (when besides, the Gift of Infallibility is one of the matters in
Question.)

For the same Text that says, Tongues shall cease, and Knowledge vanish, first
mentions, that PROPHECIES shall FAIL, 1 Cor. 13.8. and that in the Plural
Number.

Sect. 2. And whereas G. says, If he could speak with the Tongues of Men and
Angels, that were not a sufficient evidence (OF IT SELF) to convince
Unbelievers: I Answer, That is more than he knows; because he never could make
Trial: It might be sufficient to convince Unbelievers, though not to Save
himself. But if that were any good Argument against the Gift of Tongues NOW,
then it is also a good Argument against the Gift of Prophecy NOW, yea, and
against FAITH; since the Apostles very next words in 1 Cor. 13.2. are of the
same strain; And though I have the Gift of Prophecy -- and all Faith, and have
not Charity, I am nothing -- it profits ME nothing; [whatever it may do to
others.]

But above all, G.W. shows his Folly, when he had said, That the Gift of
Tongues, and working Miracles were PECULIAR to the Ap^stles times: Yet then to
talk that he cannot give away the Quakers Cause, as to working Miracles in a
Spiritual way. Oh Senseless Man, is this thy Rhetoric, or Logic, either? Were
not the Gift of Tongues, and all the Miracles that the Apostles and the
Christians then wrought, Miracles in a Spiritual way? Surely thou dare not
say, but that they were.

And thus you see he is as far off as before, he has done just nothing at all
to take away the dint of his own words as a strong Argument against himself.
But he has here made it worse in this sheet, by positively LIMITING THE HOLY
ONE in those visible Gifts of his Spirit, saying, they were ONLY peculiar to
them then. Who has given this Quaker POWER to LIMIT what Gifts of the Holy
Spirit are to be PECULIAR to the Primitive Time, and what are to CONTINUE; and
none but such and such as he says? Oh Rare, is not this abundantly more
Arrogant than for John Perrot, to Subscribe John only? Or to write Proverbs,
like Solomon?

SECT. VI. Of the Manifestation of the Spirit.
Sect. 1. G W. p. 2. Whereas a Manifestation of the Spirit was given to every
Man to profit withal: Very good, this makes as much for the Gift of Tongues,
and healing the Sick, as Prophecy, since they were all Manifestations of the
Spirit; and if the Gift of Tongues were not COMMON to all, no more was the Gift
of Discerning, nor of Prophecy COMMON to all (See 1 Cor. 12.29.) And therefore
that makes as much against the Continuance of BOTH, as ONE: And so Geo. by his
own Hand, is but still st^iking at, and Destroying his own Cause.

Sect. 2. Besides, I could wish for no fuller and fitter Text for my purpose
and his confutation, than this he has Cited; For if the Manifestation of the
Spirit be given to every Man to Profit withal, then it is a strong Argument
against the Quakers, that they have it not, or at best have it not any more
than others, because there appears NO SUCH MANIFESTATION given to them MORE
than others have, whom yet they Condemn, which will be easily further
demonstrated, if you do but consider this, viz.

That the Quakers must mean, that these words of the Apostle are to be taken
either Universally, and that the manifestation of the Spirit was, and is given
to every one, as well Women, as Men, to ALL Persons in the World. Or
Restrictively, to the CHURCHES in the Primitive times (and particularly that at
Corinth) to whom the Apostle was writing.

And Secondly, Consider that these Manifestations of the Spirit, so given, must
be either VISIBLE or INVISIBLE, (though it is apparent enough by the
enumeration of those Manifestations in the subsequent Verses, that the Apostle
spoke of visible manifestations, such as were visibly APPARENT to others, and
for the Profit of others, without as well as within the Church, and the Greek
word (...) which the Apostle uses, signifies, plainly and clearly appearing;
open, bare, or easy to be seen, as a Face uncovered.)

Sect. 3. But let the Quakers take it which way they will, it destroys their
Usurped Title, and vain Pretenses above others, whom they Condemn.

For if they say that the Apostle meant thereby, that the manifestation of the
Spirit which he speaks of, is given to every one in the world. Then they at the
same time grant, it is given to the Church of England, to the Baptist Churches,
and to me also; and if they I say, that the manifestation of the Spirit is
VISIBLE to others, then thereby they grant they have it not more than others,
nay, are without it; because the Quakers have Censured and Condemned other
Churches as being WITHOUT it, and yet themselves can produce visibly NO MORE
manifestation of the Spirit, than those, whom they say are without it.

And if they say, the manifestation of the Spirit is INVISIBLE to others, then
at the same time, they grant, the Church of England, or the Baptist Churches
may have it, though they may not know it, or cannot SEE it, for how should
they, if it be INVISIBLE?

Sect. 4. But on the other hand, if they say, These words of the Apostle are to
be taken Restrictively, that the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every
Man in the Churches only, (as most likely in truth it is, as the word IS in
the Present Tense, and the whole scope of the Chapter intimates, the Gifts and
manifestations of the Spirit he mentions being then peculiarly in the Church,
and no where else that we find, such as the Gifts of Healing, Tongues, etc.
mentioned in the very next Verses, as some of these manifestations spoken of,
in v. 7.) Then this of the Church at Corinths having the manifestation of the
Spirit, is no more to the Quakers, than to the POPE OF ROME. For it will not
follow, That because the Church at Corinth had the manifestation of the Spirit,
that the Quakers Church must NOW have it, nor because THEY SAY they have it;
for at that rate, the Baptist Churches, and ALL the Churches in England might
claim it, and who can hinder them?

And besides G.W. has barred himself of that, and plainly told us, (in his
Glory of Christ's Light within p. 33.) That which was to one State, was not to
every particular State and Condition among the Churches, neither do we read
that the Church at Corinth, was to go and make the Epistle to the Church at
Rome their Rule; Nor that the Churches at Ephesus, Philippi, or Thessalonica
were to go to the Corinthians for Paul's Epistles to them, to compare theirs
with, and to be their Rule; but that of the Spirit or Light within, to which
they were all directed, and which was the Rule of the New Creature whereby the
things of God were Revealed and made known unto the Saints.

Now then what does the Apostle Paul's writing to the Church at Corinth [that
the Manifestation of the Spirit was then given to every Man, to profit withal]
signify to G.W. or the Quakers here? They are not the Church at Corinth, nor
can they produce visibly such Manifestations of the Spirit, as they did; Nay,
G.W. himself gives you to understand, such visible manifestations were only
peculiar to the Apostles times. Thus then you may easily see how much this
silly Quibbler is beside the business, and has confuted himself

SECT. VII. Of the Gift of Discerning of Spirits.
Sect. 1. G W. p. 3. says, He cannot give away the Quakers Cause, as to the
Gift of Discerning of Spirits, for they have sufficient evidence thereof, as a
Gift given to diverse.

I suppose the two Germans, Young men, (may be some of their most sufficient-
evidences) who pretending to be of great Families, and Convinced of the Truth
of Quakerism, as I have heard, came (or were Conducted by one S.C. a Quaking
Minister) into England, and were Entertained at London, at the common Charge of
the Quaking Friends of Devonshire-House for a long time. The Quakers paid for
their Board, and bought them Apparel, Glorying in their Converts: But in
process of Time, it seems these Men in the Prosecution of their Debaucheries,
fell at variance, and each of them fearing to be detected by the other, charged
one another, in a Meeting of Quakers, with great and notorious Crimes; did they
not detect one another even of haunting of Bawdy-Houses, W -- Pilfring, etc.
even out of those Houses where they had been entertained? Was not here in the
mean while an Excellent Gift of Discerning, among the Quakers?

Sect. 2. Another Instance and pregnant proof I have heard of also: One W.W.
being a Minister among the Quakers for many Years, and an Active man in their
Cause, yea, and a Sufferer for the same, was not discerned, nor Discovered by
the Quakers, till being troubled in his own Conscience, he Confessed himself,
to have Lived in uncleanness, etc.

Who is it will not think now that they have a most Excellent Discerning of
Spirits? And that they are so very wise, and have such a Rare Gift, they can
tell any thing that is told them, and so can others.

SECT. VIII. Of Unbelievers, Muggleton, etc.
Sect. 1. G W. p. 3. Have not thou plainly employed the self to be an
Unbeliever, who wants such a Sign to be shown thee, to evidence that WE are
Divinely Inspired?

Observe, 1. How sillily does this Mr. Sleights scribble of my implying my self
to be an UNBELIEVER of their Divine Inspiration, when I have often directly
confessed it, and now do it once more, That I do not believe that G.W. nor the
Quakers are Divinely inspired, so as the true Apostles and Ministers of Christ
were; and I am well assured, I have very good Reason for it, viz. Because they
cannot Evidence it, as the true Apostles did.

This was one of the first things I writ them, that I did not, nor could
possibly upon any good and certain grounds, believe the Quakers Pretenses to a
Commission from Heaven, Immediate Revelations and Inspirations, MORE than
Muggletons's except they could produce somewhat considerable MORE than
Muggleton could, and therefore I prayed them to show me what they had, and to
tell me but this, Why I might (and ought undoubtedly) believe them and their
Commission, MORE than Muggleton's, or the Baptists? Which I am sure is a very
Reasonable and modest Request; for otherwise, I should have no BETTER ground
for my FAITH in Believing a Quaker, than a Baptist, or Muggleton.

2. But I do believe, and declare to all the World I am a BELIEVER, that the
Apostles Peter and Paul, and the true Apostles and Ministers of CHRIST, had
Divine Inspiration, and that they both could, and did Evidence it. Though I do
NOT BELIEVE that the Apostle Geo. Fox, nor the Apostle G.W. nor the Minister W.
Pen, nor other pretended Apostles, or false Ministers, have such Divine
Inspirations; because they do not, nor can, ^O Evidence it, as the true real
ones did: And let any Quaker amongst them all, Answer this if he can.

Muggleton and the Church of Rome say they have Divine Inspirations, as well as
the Quakers, do thou, G.W. (or any of the Quakers) BELIEVE it? No doubt I may
safely presume, you will say, No: Why then art not thou an UNBELIEVER, as well
as I, for want of such a sign to be shown thee by them to evidence indeed that
they are Divinely Inspired? For I Will be so Charitable as to think, that if they
could produce such Evidence, that they were Divinely Inspired, some of the
Quakers at least would BELIEVE Muggleton, since it is very Certain, that some
one (or more) that was of the Quakers for several Years, yet now is turned
Muggletonian, and believes him without any such Evidence.

3. But besides, how poor and pitiful would this Quaker hereby represent his
Church to be, as if it had not, or could produce no sign as Evidence to
Convince UNBELIEVERS, that they (Quakers) are Divinely Inspired, MORE than what
a Papist, or a Muggleton (an Impostor) can do: Oh sad! to be proud, and yet
Beggarly; proud in pretenses and boastings, but Beggarly in the Actual
Demostration of the Spirit, and of Power.

Sect. 2. G.W. p. 7. Note, that this Man boggles at, and evades my eight plain
Questions, [ in p. 22, 23. of Qua. Plainness] about the Son of God.

And note, Reader, this man [viz. G.W.] Boggles at, and Evades five whole
Sections, and an Advertisement of twelve particulars, that is, in short, my
whole Book.

Is not this an Honest Person think you, thus to cry -- First?

Is it possible that this man could have Understanding and Eyes enough to see
this, and not the other, without SPECTACLES? or without being taken by the
Sleeve, (though not so wrathfully or ruggedly as he pulled W. King) to show him
his Face in a Glass? But it seems the Case is altered, quoth Ployden.

This man has boggled at, and evaded a whole Section about the Son of God, the
Lord Jesus Christ, his Person, his Nature, etc. He has boggled at, and evaded
another Discourse, about the Spirits Evidence and sufficiency, the Gifts of the
Spirit, Miracles, etc. Jeremy Ives did but let a poor sorry Mouse (so called)
run up and down the streets, and their Zealo^^ man, and great Doctor, W. Pen,
ran presently aft^^^; but a Discourse about the Lord Jesus Christ (though
immediately Directed to W. Pen) yet he has declined, and G.W. has slighted,
contemned, and openly run away from.

However I can inform him better, there was no occasion for me, either to
boggle at, or evade those Questions, I finding they were demanded of the
Baptists, but I was none; and now G.W. himself says, neither did he take me for
any then, (but how palpable a falsity that is let any Pesron but consider his
own words, in Qua. Plainness, p. 35. The Baptists may be ashamed of such gross
and abusive Insinuations as this, comparing the Quakers and Muggletonians -- AS
WHERE IT IS SAID, Muggleton says, he is one of the two Witnesses, and the
Quakers say, they are the true Witnesses, etc. Now, it was I that said so
THERE, and I ONLY. Thus then he made me a Baptist, now no Baptist, but
Socinianized, anon a Socinian, yea, a Biddlean Prosylite; Oh Excellent
Discerning Quaker! I wonder what his huge Gift of Discerning, will TRANSFORM me
into next; (may I not be afraid of Withcraft, or that he is one of the
Heathenish gods? I think not.)

But 2. G.VV. Had not plainly and directly Answered to mine, which he had
already undertaken to Answer, but instead thereof he merely Trifles, Quarrels,
Contemns, Retorts Questions, etc. And therefore till that be done, no Answer
could, or can be duly, or in Course expected to those new Questions: But if he
pleases to give me an honest, plain, and direct Answer to what I have writ,
without Evading, or Quibbling, I will promise him he shall have an Answer (...)
those Questions, without Boggling or Evading, rather ^^an that shall be any
Excuse to him.

Sect. 3. G.VV. p. 8. Have thou managed the Baptists Cause well, in saying,
they do not pretend to such Immediate Revelations, Inspirations, Infallibility,
etc. contrary to their former Testimonies?

Observa. It is not for me to boast of my self therein, neither desire I, but
for ought yet appears, it is managed well enough, as I apprehend, and better
than thou have managed the Quakers Cause by Sleights, for,

1. Thou do not set down the place, nor page, in their Books, nor so much as
cite their own words, that one may know where to find those former Testimonies
thou talkest of, and see how honest thou art therein, for to tell thee truly, I
can give but little Credit to thee now, seeing what thou art, and have
manifested thy self in Print to be.

2. But if thou do find any such Ancient Testimonies, I dare say, neither you
nor I shall there find that they Testify they pretended to them AS the Quakers
do, for so I said.

3. But yet if that were to be found, why may it not be as Lawful for them to
decline from what many of them pretended at first, as for the Quakers to
decline from what many of them pretended at first, as I have Instanced
abundantly in several particulars, in this Third Part of the Quak. Quib? What,
is it a virtue in You, and a vice in Them? Surely they might better do it, (a
hundred times) than ye Quakers, because you pretended to a Gift of
INFALLIBILITY, but none of those men, whose Testimonies you make mention of,
did so, that I understand.

SECT. IX. Of the Quakers Art of DIRECTING the INTENTION, sometimes directly
Contrary to their Express words, and sometimes quite beside their true, proper,
common, and Ordinary import and Signification.
I Having in my former Book only hinted this, and Confined my self to one
Instance, for fear of swelling it to too big a bulk, it has been intimated to
me, that some discreet Persons wished I had been larger therein, which I could
desire some abler Person would undertake, it being a Theme whereon one may have
Scope enough, if he does but consider what he Reads in the Quaker's Books.

But the same Reason that prevented me then, will in a great measure do the
same still, viz. The fear I have of exceeding the brevity that was designed,
therefore I must now give you but a few Instances more (of many that I could
produce) and beg your Excuse, if it makes this longer, than otherwise it would,
or should have been.

Sect. 1. That which I Instanced, was a most eminent and remarkable one, in no
less Case than that of BLASPHEMY in it self; Solomon Eccles, one of their
Ministers, did not only write privately, but thought fit to Publish it in
Print to the World, That it may be SAID, yea and SO said of GEORGE FOX, AS it
was said of CHRIST, that he was in the World, and THE WORLD WAS MADE BY HIM,
and the World knew him not, whom John said, HE WAS NOT, as you may see more
largely in the Second Part Quak. Quib. p.93, 94.

G.W. In his Serious Search, p. 58. In this matter undertakes (according to the
Jesuitical Art) to DIRECT Solomon Eccles's INTENTION, and gives us to
understand, that indeed Solomon Eccles did not INTEND as he writ and published,
but though he said it of GEO. FOX, yet (seeing People take notice of the
Blasphemy of it, and of the Divine Honor that they give by such words to G.
FOX, to the shame and dis-credit of their Cause) he INTENDED it only of
CHRIST; so he spoke or writ one thing, and meant another, which yet, in
sincere-hearted W. Pen's sense (at another time, he can tell you) is no better
than to be one of the worst of KNAVES; they are his own words, in his Rebuke,
p. 8. And so let him share it amongst them, if they please.

Sect. 2. You have another ingenious one in this sheet of G.VV's. p. 4.
concerning FIGURES; yea, even when they are speaking of Figures, and against
Figures, they speak by a Figure: One while the Quakers tell us, ALL Figures
were ended by Christ; but now this Quaker is at the Old Jesuitical Art again,
of DIRECTING THE INTENTION, and gives you to understand, that though the Quaker
says, ALL Figures, yet he does not INTEND all, but only SOME, viz. The Figures
under the Law.

I need not only set his Quondam Master Fisher to whip him for this, Rusticus
ad Acad. p. 142. So on this score our Scribes escape scot-free still by their
SHIFTS. To meet with Quakers [we] need never doubt,
Nor need [we] when we meet them fear a rout;
If all is but some, Out's In; and In's for out,
Then they are always In, and never Out.


Thus ( says Fisher) the Seed of the Serpent saves it self alive in its Enmity
against the Holy Seed, not so much by PLAIN DOWNRIGHT DEALING -- as by
shameful SHIFTINGS FROM SENSE TO SENSE, miserable marchings from meaning to
meaning, so that one can hardly know well where to have them, nor how to find
them, nor what they mean.

Then he complains, But as for us, we may not safely WITHOUT THEIR CENSURES, so
much as take the Scriptures to be (what themselves are neither afraid, nor
ashamed to make them, viz.) a LESBIAN RULE, and NOSE OF WAX, which may be made
(yet scarcely is by any more than themselves) to show it self in 7, 8, 9 shapes
at once. [ Oh brave Fisher!] And though they dare Dispute themselves, and Argue
any way from Figurative and Foreign, and proper and improper, Literal or
Mystical meanings and Importments of words and Phrases, yet they can well
digest, or dispense with none of all this in us. and LEAST OF ALL, when we do
(as we mostly, or EVER do) keep to the true, honest, Ordinary, and plain
purport of the words, as they lie OPEN AND CLEAR to every Ordinary and Common
Capacity, that is willing both to know, own, and do the Truth. So far he; and
need any Man any more to Confute and Confound this Figurative Quaker?

Sect. 3. Nay, and they undertake, not only to DIRECT their own Friends.
INTENTIONS, but other Men's also, such Masters of it are they; as hear G.VV.
again, p. 4. If Quakers use Figures, either Metonymies, Metaphors, or Ironies,
Oh then it is used, and INTENDED in a Serious Sense: But if T. Hicks, or
another, use the same, or the like, in the Title or words of their Books; Oh,
then it is INTENDED as palpable Slander, or DESIGNED Forgery.

Thus indeed Geo. is so far from clearing of himself, by his silly Answer, from
the dint of his Second Sentence against himself, that all he says, can amount
but to thus much, viz. That T. Hicks speaks, or writes words, which are
Scoffing, sland^rous Lies, used in a Scoffing or Ridiculous since: And the
Quakers speak, or write words, which are serious Lies, used in a serious sense:
Taking both their words equally and alike in their Natural, Proper, and
Grammatical Sense, without Respect of Persons (which once I am sure the Quakers
pretended much to abhor, and nothing worse, or more unjust, than Respect of
Persons.)

For if the first Accusation alone will so alter and vary the Intention, and
make a Man Guilty, then the Quakers are as liable so to be made by T. Hicks, as
T. Hicks by them, yea, and rather more, because the Quakers are Originally the
first Persons Accused, and impeached by T. Hicks; in his first Dialogue, and
this Renders G.W's. Cause very lame, and sorely wounds it.

And which is worst of all, Mr. Sleights is so willing to Slight over this,
that he slips by his own Prophet's words, which yet stood as fair to be seen as
any there, on the very top of the last Page in the Epistle, which if he had
said any thing to the purpose, he should have cleared; for there G. Fox speaks
Directly of Figurative Speeches, viz. We Charge thee show us a Verse in
Scripture that speaks such Language, and where ONE WORD may be put for ANOTHER
by METALEPSIS; and so leave People in Doubts and Questions.

What say thou now, Geo? What, could thou not see this? If the next time
thou writest, thou can not, I will write to the Bookseller to buy a pair of
SPECTACLES for thee to help thy Eyesight.

Now, for him thus slily to avoid this (if he could) by a Figure, surely cannot
be much better than one of his Devils drawn Figures.

Sect. 4. Another Excellent (rather most grossly false) one, he gives us in
this threadbare sheet of his slight stuff, p. 7. where he DIRECTS his quondam
Master, Sam. Fisher's INTENTION, though dead, and Directly contrary to his
words, yea, the main Scope, Bent, and Intent of his Book.

Well, now good Readers, I am fully satisfied G.VV. is a wicked Man, and of no
good Conscience, but of an Audacious Confidence, for otherwise he could never
have had the face to publish such a thing, that all Persons that can but Read
English, and understand what they Read, may detect his falseness in; as here,

Sam. Fisher, in his Appendix, p. 21. speaking of the Scriptures, and the
Scripture Text, says thus, in these very words, Which Transcriptions and
Translations, were they never so certain and entire, by answering to the first
Original Copies, yet are not CAPABLE to be (to all Men) any other than a
LESBIAN RULE, or NOSE OF WAX, [now, if so far be not a plain Assertion, I never
saw, nor heard any in my Life: Then he goes on in his Proof, or Confirmation of
it, as his word Forasmuch denotes,] FORASMUCH as even WHERE MEN HAVE THEM (as
half the world has not) they are liable to be WRESTED and* Actually twisted
twenty ways, etc.

Now comes G.VV. with the Art and Mystery of Jesuitism, and would DIRECT
Fisher's INTENTION, By asking me thus, Have thou dealt Honestly and Truly in
this? Was it S.F's. positive Assertion concerning the Scriptures THEMSELVES,
etc.? Judge, serious Reader (says he) whether it be S. Fishers own positive
Assertion, that the Scriptures are a Nose of Wax (IN THEMSELVES) or whether
that they are not RATHER made so (or no better) by such as wrest and twist
them? And then has the wicked Confidence to call me Manifest Perverter, yea,
and to take the LORDS Name in vain upon it too, saying, Surely the Lord will
Rebuke him, and all perverse Opposers and Perverters.

What a sad thing is it to have to do with Men thus hardened, false, and
impudent, which I will show to you as Clear, as I think it is possible, for any
words to be Clear, in three Particulars.

1. This Man turns Perverter and Forger himself, and then he Charges me with
it; for First, to the word [Scriptures] he adds these words, [THEMSELVES] and [
in THEMSELVES:] But if he, or any Man can find those words [Scriptures
themselves, and in themselves,] as my words in that whole Book, I will never
trust my own Eyes more: He first foystes in words of his own to serve his
Design (which yet they will not) and then falls abusing me, as if I had abused
Mr. Fisher: Oh horrible, add words of thy own, Geo! and then Charge me with the
Guilt of Perversion and abuse, if it were any such thing, as it would not be
neither.

2. For though I did not say so much then, yet now I find I safely may, and
will say it positively, That Sam. Fisher did speak or write it with Reflection
upon the Scriptures THEMSELVES, as well as upon the Ministers (who had the
Scriptures) going Round, etc. Yea, rather MORE (if not only) at that place in
Respect of the Scriptures themselves, and do thou, G.W. bring him honestly off
if thou can.

The Question then is, Whether Sam. Fisher's words (which are his Assertion
mentioned) are of, or about the Scriptures THEMSELVES? And it is most certain,
that no Man that is honest, and has his Senses and Reason, and can Read
English, that can doubt of that, when he says, WHICH Transcriptions and
Translations, it can be nothing else but the Scriptures themselves; Because
neither we the Ministers, nor the Quakers have any other thing for the
Scriptures themselves, But ONLY these Transcriptions or Translations; If the
Quakers have any other than Ours (Commonly called the Bible) which are all and
every one of them, either Transcriptions or Translations; let them tell us
what, and which it is, if they can. And when S.F. says [ were THEY never so
CERTAIN and entire by ANSWERING to the FIRST ORIGINAL Copies.] Now, is it not
most Manifest, that it is the Scriptures themselves he here speaks of? Nay, is
it possible to be any thing else, that can so certainly and entirely Answer the
first Original Copies? Oh wicked Man, blush at thy Impudence, that would go
about to make us believe that S.F. did not here speak of the Scriptures
themselves; Tell us what it was then? To be sure thou will not say, that it was
the Ministers Rounds, Confusions, nor yet their Interpretations, that either
do, or might so Answer to the first Original Copies: for as to their Rounds and
Interpretations, S.F. Rebukes and Scoffs at them.

But were the Transcriptions, or Translations (which are, and are only the
true Scriptures themselves, which we and the Quakers now have, that ever was
heard of) never so certain and entire (says S.F.) by Answering to the first
Original Copies, yet are not Capable to be (to all Men) any other than a
Lesbian Rule, or NOSE OF WAX; Forasmuch, as even where Men have them, etc. Here
he comes to bring his Proof (as he thinks) of this his Doctrine.

3. Besides the Absurdity that unavoidably follows such a Construction, as G.W.
would put upon S.F's. words, not only evinces it to be false, and not possible
to be consistent with the rest of his words: But also shows G.W's. Construction
to be so silly, that if it were right and true, yet would it not do the
Quaker's a Pin's worth of Service: For, have not the Quakers the Scriptures as
well as the Ministers? And S.F. says, That even where men have them, (even
there, without excepting the Quakers themselves) they are liable to be wrested,
and Actually twisted twenty ways by Interpreters.

Have not the Quakers then got much by this, think you? For their Brother
Samuel hits them and all that have the Scriptures, without excepting One; so
that now the Quakers must of Necessity either deny themselves to be Men, or
say, they have not the Scriptures: Or otherwise, if the Quakers are Men, and
have the Scriptures, they are liable to be wrested, and Actually twisted twenty
ways by Interpreters, WHOSE Expositions, Senses, and meanings, (which are as
many and various as the Thoughts, Conceits, and Inventions of THE MEN are, who
Comment upon them) must be the Rule to such (without excepting any one Quaker)
as can Read them neither in Hebrew and Greek, nor in their own Mother Tongues,
If Sam. Fisher is to be Credited, either by us, or them; and so still they must
indeed own, what he Asserts, That the Scripture can be no Rule to THEM, but a
LESBIAN RULE, nor is CAPABLE to be any other than a NOSE OF WAX.

And if it can be no other to them that have the Scriptures, then certainly it
cannot be so much (or nothing at all) to them that have it not, and never had
it; and S. Fisher himself tells us, that half the World has them not.

Moreover, S.F. shows us in above Twenty several places, the impossibility, or
unfitness of the Scriptures to be a RULE, by Reason of the variab^eness of
them, the alteration and Change that has been in them, even the Scriptures
themselves. But that it is too long, you should have it here Transcribed; do
but look in the Second Paragraph of this Section, and in the Tenth Section
foregoing: Now then, let the Serious Reader Judge, whether I have not most
Reason to Cry out, What a Manifest Perverter is this Man! The Lord Rebuke him,
and all perverse Opposers and Perverters.

What, cannot a Man of Skill (as G.W. is) in this Jesuitical Art of Directing
the Intention, do? Oh, Quakers! REPENT, REPENT of such wicked doings; lo^^ upon
it as you will, God and good Men will abhor such base, false, indirect, and
impudent ways. I shall only desire my Reader at his leisure to peruse a Book
Printed some Years since, Entitled; THE MYSTERY OF JESVITISM, Compare it with
this Mystery of the Quakers, and consider how near they come. Good Wits (you
know) use to jump; the Jesuits and the Quakers; we know the Jesuits are Wits,
and you may be confident the Quakers will say themselves are no Fools: This I
leave with them, and shall take my Leave of them for the present, till some
fitter Occasion, and then it is not impossible they may have it in some other
Mode, if they do not like of this. I did not study so much to please them as to
deal Faithfully with them; nor to flatter them, but to be plain with them: Be
not over-Angry. Open Rebuke is better than secret Love.
And sharp Maladies require sharp Remedies.


Postscript.
Kind Reader,
THE Business betwixt the Quakers and Me is not so much Matter of Difficult or
Intricate Dispute, as Matter of Fact, and of Ocular Demonstration, which is, or
may be plain to the very Eyes or Ears of Persons of mean Capacities, as well as
Learned: For my so often reiterated Grand Objection against them all along my
first two Treatises, is in effect no more but this,

That they (Quakers) do not say, nor visibly produce ANY MORE, than the Baptist
Churches, or the pretended Prophet Muggleton does, or can do, whom yet they
Condemn; the one for FALSE, and the other as an IMPOSTOR.

G.W. As in the Name of the Quakers, affirms, THEY CAN, AND DO, or to that
purpose.

Upon this, I require of him, his Proof, Evidence, or Instances: (But as yet
cannot obtain them, and some thin^^ never shall.)

Now, this would be plain, and is not to trouble Peoples Heads or Minds with
long and dubious Disputes, about nice School-distinctions, nor abstruse
Matters; WHEREFORE if the Quakers design to give any Real and Direct Answer to
ME, they ought (if they dare to go the plainest way, and deal honestly therein)
To set down on one side, what the Baptists and Muggleton say, and can visibly
produce for themselves; and on the other side set down what they (the Quakers)
do say, and visibly produce for themselves.

Thus the Work would be short, the Quakers need do no more at present than
this, in Answer to the First and Second Part of the Quakers Quibbles; neither
do I desire any more at present of them, thereunto. And this I pray my
Contrymen and them to take NOTICE, how Reasonable my Request is, and how I
desire to prevent (that they may have no Color nor Excuse for troubling the
World and me with) any more of their Impertinent, and silly scribbling, not at
all to the purpose.

If they undertake to make any Answer to Me, NOTE, that this above is the main
thing, and the very MATTER, they must Answer to, or else it is not an Answer to
ME, nor to WHAT I have wrote, but an Answer to SOMEWHAT else, or only an
EVASION.

And they cannot, now either honestly or justly refuse to do this, because G.W.
has already undertaken (for them) to give me a plain Answer to my first
Treatise, (which contains this,) which he has not yet done, as I have fully
showed in my Second Part, where, and how he falls short. THEREFORE that they
may not pretend Ignorance or forgetfulness, I do signify it to them ONCE MORE,
(Because I would fain beat this into their Heads, finding they will not yet let
it enter their Crowns, it constrains me to tell it them over and over again)
and do desire him or them that shall go about to write, to Read this, and take
NOTICE of it in the first place.

And then when they have honestly performed this (that they may not pretend any
Excuse) Let them write what, and as much as they will about any other Matter in
difference betwixt us, I hope it shall find no other than a kind Reception with
me.

THIS any plain Ordinary Man, that has but the Common use of his
Understanding, Eyes, or Ears, may be able to see, or bear, and Judge of, viz.

Whether, and what the Quakers do say, and visibly produce MORE than those
others (whom THEY CONDEMN) do, or can say and produce. For otherwise no Man can
certainly, and uncontroulably give and produce any BETTER ground for his Faith
in Believing a QUAKER, than a BAPTIST, or MUGGLETON.

But I doubt this is too honest and plain-hearted for the Quakers ever to do,
and some think one may as soon expect the Great Turk to turn Quaker, as the
Quaker to do this; they knowing that this would touch them to the Quick, and
lay them too open, however I lay it before them, and leave it with them, that
all good and sober Men may see what Plainness, Honesty, Fidelity, or
Christianity is in them.

I would Advise all Persons, that are, or shall be concerned in Dispute with a
Quaker, to bring them to this plain matter and Method, and hold them close to
it: Or if any Quaker speaks to you, or would persuade you to come to them, or
to turn to their Church or way, or does but Assert that their Church is true,
and the Church of ENGLAND, or the Baptists Churches false, do but keep them
close to THIS, and you shall, without doubt, quickly find them weary of you,
and willing to leave that Discourse, sooner than by any other way or Arguments
that ever I heard; because these are plainer and easy to be discerned: And
this I here intimate to you, as my sincere and Cordial Advice. The Benefit of
it you will be better able to Judge when you have Experienced it: Which that
you may do, and overcome all Deceivers, Hypocritical Pretenders, and their
Temptations, is my earnest Prayer.

FINIS.
THE Printer has Omitted to put the Citations of the Quakers words, in an
Italick, or different Letter (as they ought to have been) through the most part
of this Treatise; therefore the Reader is desired to take the more heed, which
are their words, and how far the Citations out of their. Books go, that so he
may not run into any mistake thereby: And that he would Correct these Errata's
of the Press.

PAge 4. Line 24. Read. of the. p. 6. l. 2. for was, r. were. p. 18. l. 13. for
are, r. were. p. 9. l. 9. for as, r. at. l. 25. for ^s, r. are. p. 13. l. 12.
add 15. l. 20. r. man's. p. 15. l. 24. dele in. l. 26. r. spoke or writ. l. 28.
r. teachings. p. 17. l. 4. add or. l. 21. add of. l. 28. for, and motions, r.
to the anointing. p. 20. l. 3. r. whining-Spirit. p. 22. l. 24. r. they. p. 32.
l. 12. where is, r. where be. p. 40. l. 26. and, r. and the. p. 43. l. 32. r. To.


