THREE LETTERS Of dangerous Consequence: READ AT A CONFERENCE OF Both Houses of
Parliament.

The two first from Rotterdam, and dated July 1. and 4. stilo novo. 1642. The
other, from M. Wilmot to M. Crofts at the Hague, Dated June 22. 1642.

In which appears a desperate design of the L. Digby, Cap. Hide, Sir Lewis
Dives, M. Jermin, M. Percy, and diverse Cavileeres, against the Parliament of
England. With the names of Ships, number of Men and Ammunition now in readiness
to be transported into the North.

With many other observable matters.

Ordered by the Commons in Parliament to be printed.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.



LONDON. Printed by E.G. for E. Husbands, and J Francke. 1642.

Worshipful Sir,
SInce my last by the Post, many things of consequence have come to my hand,
The Ship Providence of the Kings, with the Lion, which brought over the Ladies
of Honor to the Queen, bring over for the North parts of England all those
Gentlemen mentioned within the enclosed, with three or four score more, it is
thought here they go for New Castle; some of Prince Roberts men told me they
were bound for York: they are all desperate in their way, that whoever they
meet with, if they oppose them, to fight it out to the last man. The Lion has
42. Guns, the Providence has 14. and is to take in two more, which we know of,
now being within one mile of Rotterdam, they are 12. foot long, and shoot a
Bullet of 44. pound weight. Every one here is fearful of a desperate design
upon the premises: you may please not to harbor any thought of faithfulness
in the Officers of the Lion, for we have certain intelligence of the truth
hereof. I my self went to the Helleford-sluce, and see Cavileeres there; and
going thither, some whereof told me that they went in the Ship, and named all
the enclosed. We cannot yet hear of any further pawning of the Jewels, yet all
men think they have gotten much money upon them, for they have provided all
sorts of Arms of proof: and othersome that had Pistols to make at the Hague,
could not get them done till all their work was done, which now is finished,
and they lie all for a Wind: much of their Baggage being laden at Brill aboard
the Providence, and at Helleford-sluce, aboard the Lion. The Scout of Crauling
a small Town near Rotterdam, told one of this Town, that Prince Robert has
hired a Boyer to carry Horse for England, the Scout is the only Master of
Horses in these parts. One Isaac Light, a Merchant of the Company, has bought
15000. weight of Powder, and is now gone to Vtrecht to buy Match, all which
presently to be Shipped for England; they give out it is for the Parliament, and
by their order. This Merchant, late Factor for M. Christopher Tomlings Merchant
of London, and Thomas Ashton servant to M. Laurence Halsted of London, has
shipped here 38. Cases of Arms, being but the remain of 700. Cases for which
they obtained License to ship here: and at Ansterdam, we are informed that the
greatest part of those are shipped in 3 Flemish Boyers or Hoyes, now lying for a
Wind at the Tassell; this information we had of one of the Custom House in
Rotterdam, upon occasion of a Merchants sight of the warrant. Yesterday a
Jewel was sent to Rotterdam, from the Hague, valued at 40000. Guilders by a
Jeweller here. M. Percy, M. Jermin, M. W. Mountague, and M. Davenant, came into
the Hague this day seven-night, at 12. a clock at night in the Queens Coach,
and with her Footmen. These are all that for present I shall write, but shall
inform you more by word of mouth, if I can get passage one way or other. Of
the most material of these particulars, by the advice of friends, I have
informed the Earl of Warwick by this bearer, the 38. Cases are shipped aboard
one Rich. Lyndall, a Hull man, laden for London. Thus with my humble service
remembered, I take my leave and rest,

Yours to command.
Of all these we have sufficient proof. Roterdam 1o. Iulii 1642. Stilo novo.
In one White of Dover a Ketch, there are many Fats of Match, with other
provision of War. I hope to be with you before this Letter.



The Contents of the enclosed note.
PRince Robert, Prince Maurice, Lord Denby, L. Digby, Oenele that Traitor,
Captain Hide, Sir Lewis Dives, Colonel Wilson sent for out of Germany, with
very many other Gentlemen and Commanders; and is credibly known that they have
all sorts of Arms for Horse, and that in great quantity, there being a Hoy or
Boyer, a Dutchman hired and paid his freight before hand, to carry the Arms
and provision that Prince Robert and the rest from the Hague, have made for
their transportation into the North, and is undertaken that these Boyer shall
be conveyed as well home as out.

Worshipful Sir,
I Wrote to you on Tuseday last by a Merchant, that had a pass to come
overland, but least that should not come to hand though little has hapened
here since, I cannot omit this post; The ship called the Lion that brought over
Ladies of honor, is now fitted to transport into England P. Robert P. Mawrice,
Lord Digby, Lord Denby, Colonel Cockram, Captain Hide, Oneale, Sir Lewis
Dives with 80 or 90 Cavaleers more, they have fitted themselves with Armor of
proof and all other accoutrements of war, they have been very merry, and have
drunk many healthes to their good voyage, and in their Cups have made
Dividents of the Parliament-mens lands, they are very jocond, and were all
aboard yesterday morning, the wind being then fair, but held but a little
space, and now blows very hard, so that God has now stayed them; The
Providence that lies at Brill is to take in diverse of them, she has taken in
much of their luggage with two great Gunnes, each 12 foot long, and shoot a
bullit of 44 pound. Also the Lion at Helleford sluice, has taken in much
luggage: There are three Boyers or Hoyes lying at Tassell, laden with Arms,
and 38 cases of Armor shipped in Richard Lindall of Hull bound for London; I
hear they be all Muskets, and there are in that Ship 700 Corslets, beside this
I was told by one whose son sits in the Customhouse, all these shipped here
by a warrant which they had obtained for 700 cases; which as a merchant in this
Town saw, and told, he, besides one of the Customehouse, did confess it true:
They give our diverse reports, of staying of arms, and of their declining
their voyage, but we knowing they endeavor to work withal deceiveablenesse,
think them only tricks to confound our intelligence, for we see such as are
laden here are not stayed. Indeed, for certain the States General have given
out a warrant of stay for Arms, so they did when all the Arms provided
against the Scots were transported, the Officers are corrupted: there is a
Boyer lying within a mile of this town to be fraughted with Horse, for P.
Robert, A Merchant of this T^^n saw the Shippers Charter part y^(...) them to
what part shall be appointed by him between Dower and New Castle, the Prince
undertakes his safe convoy out, and home; one Isaac Light a Merchant of the
company here, has bought 600 l. worth of powder with much match, where it is
shipped we cannot yet hear, they work with much privacy; monday last there
came a Jewel from the Hage valued at 40000 Guilders, by the Iewellers; they
were offered 10000 Guilders upon it, but would not, and so it was returned
again: We cannot heareof any further pawning of the Jewels, nor where they
be, Mr. Webster went with Sir William Boswell to the Queen Monday last.
Tuesday last was seavenight at 12 a clock in the night Master Percy, M. Jermin,
M. Will. Mountague, and Danenant, came into the Hage with the Queens Coach, and
footmen, This I was told by one Mr. -- The Cavalleers do boast, that having
a Ship of 42 pieces of Ordinance, and another of 16. pieces, that will fight
till they sink, if any oppose them: This is the resolution of Captain
Strachin, Captain of the Providence, Yesterday at Helleford sluice arrived
Gustavus Horn, with the happy entrance of the King, I hope the Captain of
her, will not do as the captain of the Lion. This being all of any moment
that we hear here, I humbly take my leave and rest.

Rotterdam the 4. of June, 1642. Your^ to comm^^^ (...)

For Mr. CROFTS at the Hague.
Dear WILL,
BY these last Letters to the Queen, you will find a great alteration of
business here; the King, that very lately appeared almost abandoned by all His
Subjects, is now become the Favorite of the Kingdom; yet I believe His Enemies
are not so neglected as not to be able to raise an Army to oppose Him: and
indeed here lies the jest, for they will be followed just enough to forfeit
their estates, which I have heard you often say, were better bestowed on some
of us. Yesterday there came a Messenger from the House, who had Order, (and did
raise the power of the County) to entreat Bartley, Ashburnham, and my self, to
come to speak to the House; but the King gave the Messenger a short Answer, and
an Officer or two gave him a short Cudgel, so he is returned to London (a fine
Gentleman) with his Arm in a Scarf. Dear Will, preserve me in your good
opinion, for I assure you I am,

Your most affectionate humble servant, H. WILMOT.
June 22. York. 1642. Pray if Master Iermin be with you, present my most humble
service to him.




