

ROGER THE CANTERBURIAN, That cannot say Grace for his Meat, with a low-crown'd
HAT before his FACE.

OR THE CHARACTER OF A PRELATICALL MAN affecting great Heighths.

Newly written, by G. T.

LONDON, Printed for WILLIAM LARMAR* 1642.

ROGER the Canterburian.
OR THE CHARACTER OF Praelaticall ROGER.
ROGER the Canterburian is a Man made up of a Soul and a Body like Ananias the
Puritan, only he worships God with both. He has learned out of the Bible to
make a Leg to the Authority of Church and State, and does the same to Heaven
the ordainer and dispenser of that Authority. He has read the whole Story of
Christian Religion from Christ-Crosse to and per se and: and yet cannot find
Ananias the Puritan neither in A. nor B. nor C. nor any Age of the
Christ-cross-row, but quite beside it: The Pox and the Plague has frighted
him out of Oxford; and Mr. PYM out of his Leg-Religion, and almost his Wit.
Notwithstanding his distractions, he has so much wit yet left, that Ananias
could not see his Grace through it.

The Apprentices give him a broad side as he walks the Streets by crying no
Bishops, No Bishops; and never leave till he cries* No Bishops too: for which
when he is safe in housed, he repents crosses and blesses himself, and curses
them as things never Christened, or never Bishop't.

To make him cry* No Bishops, he says is to boil a Kid in the Mothers milk
against the Law of GOD and Nature. When he is abroad, he dares not speak sense
aloud, for fear he should be knocked of the head for it; but hum's and haa's in
God morrow, and God eeven, and what a Clock is it. His fear leads his judgment
by the nose, as Religion leads Ananias. All the Sciences he has skill in but
the Arithmetic of Sects; which ignorance the Bishops he hopes will curse* when
they become Arithmetick-Lecturers. His greatest fear next the loss of one of
his Parsonages, is that the City Gentle-women will put Gussets and Goures into
the Canonical Prayer, to make it as much too wide for his Faith, as his
Memory. He is so extremely given to short Prayers, as if he were sure the
Kingdom of Heaven might be surpised and taken with a Squib: and his Wife
thinks him short in all, as he is in his Orisons; and so (though she seem
Religious in his way) Cuckolds her Beads and Him. He dares take it upon his
death that there has not been a Sermon preached since Eighty eight that has
had any Theology or Religion in it, but by Doctor Andrews and the learned
Pupils, after the Order of Saint William of Canterbury all Catechismes, but
that of the Church he counts Libels against Heaven, and esteems them as the
People do Articles of PYM. When a zealous Woman goes to St. Antholines with her
Bible under her arm, he says she looks like a Goose with the Gysard trnst
under her Wing. It grieves him to hear every Coxcomb crow new Divinity able
to startle the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. A Priest after the Order of my Lord
Major he never liked till now that the Brownists have created him Papist. It
astonishes him to think that his censurer Ananias should esteem the bread
after his Consecration no better then that which baits a Mousetrap. When he
enters a Church, especially where there is an Altar and Organs, he mutters to
himself that of Jacob; How dreadful is this Place! this is the House of God,
and the very gate of heaven; and wonders why he should be contemned for a
Formalist* because he shows but so much reverentiall fear as a Turk entering
a Moschit. If the expression of such a religious fear in Gods House be not
commanded and established, he thinks that Religion and himself shall not be
beholding to the Synod for a courtesy Six-penny broad. Except he and many
more of his Order be elected Synoders, he resolves to esteem their
Determination no more then the Apprentices do Proclamations. He smells like a
piece of Russian Leather of Arminius; and for that is suspected of Popery,
although he lie Perdu upon his own Wife to catch the Roman Priest in an error
of superstitious Chastiry* He wishes that we may at length stutt into some
Religion that he may eat Tyth-Pigg in peace. But one thing he desires above
all; That the Christian Sacrifice, as the Jewish always was, may be seasoned
with Salt, the Symbol of judgment and wit; and not with Puritan long-Pepper
talk. Rosemary and Bays he abhorres more then Bell and the Dragon, and will
have none of it in his House this Christmas because it was profaned in the
triumph of those holy Martyrs Burton, Prinne and Bastwick, which he accounts
the Schismatic Sectaries of Martin Mar-Prelate. He thinks it impossible that
a man should give a better Character of this Age, and the Religion of us
Zealots, then that Churchwarden has already done, who took down the Picture
of Jesus, and let the Ass upon which he rode stand still in the Church.
Besides all this he has another scurvy fault; he deliberates what and how he
should speak to God Almighty in his Prayers, because he knows not why
deliberation which is the counsel of Reason should be shuffled out of Gods
Service only, and be received and praised in all things else. The Scotch
business lies still upon his stomach like a Sow-baby upon the stomach of a
Scot; and Doctor Bastwick can see no reason why that should make him so sick.
Might he have had his will the Scots should have had 3000000. Pounds bestowed
upon them to have sent them home sooner: but now he thinks it were better
bestowed upon the building of Paul's; such is the superstition of the Man. He is
not a man of many Graces; those he uses before and after Meat are stolen out
of the Primmer. The eyes of all things is his Grace before meat: and after it,
from the same Book an old devout Rhyme. As thou have fed our bodies Lord so
feed our Souls likewise;
And make us mindful of the poor as Riches does arise.
Increase thy flock preserve our King, thy Grace and Peace down send;
That we may lead a faithful life, and make a godly end.


This Grace is set to a whistle which his Wife has for that purpose in the
Heft of her Knife, that it may be like the Man Liturgick and Cathedral. He is
so very much addicted to set Forms of Prayer, that in a sudden and dangerous
Fire, he has nothing to say to God Almighty, but that Collect of our Church
that calls for Rain in the time of fiery drought. He is a Creature of
doubtful interpretation; no man knows well what he is: Thus much more I think
I may say of him. If there be an insurrection of Papists, you shall meet him
with two leaves of Thomas Aquinas, set Cross in his Hat, because he resolves
never to have his throat cut for a Puritan. His pride has swollen him too bigg
for the Church of England, and now he must die like an Hydroptick Man. Nothing
but a Cardinals Cap could keep his Wit and Learning warm: but God has
punished the pride of that wit with a plain Northern Blew-Cap. He is so
clearly resolved that the Clergy ought to be preferred to the bravest
heighths, that his Spirit will not give him leave to say Grace for his Meat
with a low-crown'd Hat before his Face; because it is not Gloria in exelsis,
glory to God in the highest. Most of his Discourse is about that old Devotion
which richly endowed the Church, and enabled the Clergy to tip their Staves
with vnvallued Unicornes horn. You shall hear him tell you with a great deal
of affection out of the Historian Boisardus; That the French Clergy possesses
8000. Lordships, in which they have the chief Power of exercising Political
Justice; and besides those 240000. Country Villages; That they possess 7000.
Acres of Vineard, besides the Tithes which they receive from other Vineyards;
That to them are belonging 125000 Fishponds; of Meddow ground 90000. Acres. Out
of the same Author he can show you an Account of Annual Provision of ^^^t for
Ecclesiastic Men.

Of pure Wheat 4. Millions 500000. Measures; every such Measures containing
600. Pounds.

Of Oats, 900000. Of Barley, 800000. Of Pease, 860000. Of fat Capons, 180000.
Of Hens, 560000. Of Partridges, 600000. Of fat Oxen, 12500. Of fat Weathers
12000. Of Eggs, 7. Millions.

And to be short, such like proportions in other necessaries for a temperate
Priestly life. Moreover, out of Boterus, he can tell you; That in Saxony there
are certain Bishops* of which every one has his Jurisdiction, his Towns and
Subjects as Princes have.

Certainly he would be a brave fellow if he could but retrive the Old Religion
with it is Circumstances. Yet for all this he hopes to see the Gentlewomen of
London come to Auricular Confession; which if they do, he will lie with some
of them for pure spite; except four or five Acts of Parliament button up his
Codpiece. He has a kind of humorous Charity toward the Scot still left in
him, which he thus bestows.

LET US PRAY;
THat the SCOTCH Kirk,
Which has eaten Perk,
And with that is run sterk-
Mad against Priest and Clerk,
Cause he is dumb and does not berk;
But will both believe, and werk;
May leave her Schism which has cost her
Her Credo in Deum, and Pater Noster.
FINIS.

