TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT Majesty.

THE HVMBLE DESIRES of the Commissioners of His Majesty's Kingdom of SCOTLAND:
As also the Names of the said Commissioners.

With an Order of the House of Commons, testifying their loving acceptance, and
thankfulness for their Brotherly care of the Public welfare.

London printed, 1642.

TO THE KINGS Most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Desires of the Commissioners of his Majesty's Kingdom of Scotland.
We Your Majesty's humble and faithful Subjects, Considering that the
mutual relation betwixt Your Majesty's Kingdoms of Scotland and England, is
such, as they must stand or fall together, and the disturbances of the one,
must needs disquiet and distemper the Peace of the other, as has bin often
acknowledged by them both: And especially in the late Treaty which is ratified
in Parliament, and confirmed by the public Faith of the Estates of Your
Majesty's Ancient and Native Kingdom of Scotland; So that they are bound to
maintain the Peace and Liberties of one another, being highly concerned
therein, as the assured means of the safety and preservation of your own: And
finding our selves warranted and obliged by all means to labor to keep a
right understanding between Your Majesty and Your People, to confirm that
Brotherly affection begun betwixt the two Nations, to advance their Unity by
all such ways as may tend to the glory of God, and peace of the Church, and
state of both Kingdoms. And likewise to proffer our service for removing al
Ielousies and mistakings which may arise betwixt Your Majesty and this
Kingdom, and our best endeavors for the better establishment of the affairs
and quiet of the same: That both Your Majesty's Kingdoms of Scotland and
England may be United in the enjoying of the Libetties and Peace under Your
Majesty's Scepter, which is the most assured foundation of Your Majesty's
Honor and Greatness, and of the security of Your Royal Person. Crown, and
Dignity: We have taken the boldness to show to Your Majesty, that we are
heartily sorry and greiv'd to behold these Distractions, which increase daily
betwixt Your Majesty and Your People, And which we conceive are entertained
by the wicked Plots and Practices of Papists. Prelates, and their adherents,
whose aim in all these Troubles, has been not only to prevent all further
Reformation, but also to subvert the purity and truth of Religion within al
Your Majesty's Kingdoms, For which end, their constant endeavors have been
to stir up division between Your Majesty and Your People; by their
questioning the authority of Parliaments, and the lawful Liberties of the
Subjects, and really weakening Your Majesty's Power and Authority Royal, upon
pretense of defending the same. Whereof, by Gods Providence, being disapointed
in your Majesty's Kingdom of Scotland, they have now converted their
mischievous counsels, conspiracies, and attempts to produce these distempers in
Your Majesty's Kingdoms of England and Ireland. And therefore according to our
duty to Your Majesty, to testify our brotherly affection to these Kingdoms
and to quit our selves of the trust imposed on us. We do make offer of our
humble endeavors, for composing these differences. And to that purpose do
beseech your Majesty in these extremities, to have recourse to the sound and
faithful advice of the Honorable Houses of Parliament. And to repose
thereupon, as the only assured and happy means to establish the prosperity
and quiet of this Kingdom. And in the depth of your Royal Wisdom to
consider and prevent these apprehensions of fear, which may possess the
hearts of Your Majesty's Subjects in your other Kingdoms, if they shall
conceive the authority of Parliaments, and the Rights and liberties of the
Subject to be here called in question; And we are confident, if Your Majesty
shall be graciously pleased to take in good part, and give care to these our
faithful and humble desires, that the success of Your Majesty's affairs,
howsoever now perplexed, shall be happy to Your Majesty, and joyful to all
your people: over whom that Your Majesty may long and prosperously reign, is
the constant and fervent prayer of us

Your Majesty's faithful Subjects and Servants. Earl Lothian. Earl Lindesay.
Lord Balmerino. Sir Thomas Morton. Sir Thomas Hope. Sir Archibauld Johnston
Burgesses. Sir John Smith. Master Robert Barklay. Master Patrick Bell.



Die Lunae 17. Ianuar. 1641.
THe House of Commons having considered, both that paper given in to them from
the Scottish Commissioners upon Saturday last, as likewise their advice lately
given to his Majesty, by occasion of these present troubles, which at the
entreaty of the said house, they have communicated to them, and finding therein
a large testimony of fidelity to the King, of affection to the State, and of
wisdom for the honor, security, and peace of his Majesty, and both
Kingdoms, does hereby declare that they have herein done that which is not
only very acceptable to this House, but likewise that which is of great
advantage to both Nations. And therefore have ordered, that Sir Philip
Stapleton, M. Hampden, M. Fynes, M. Pym, M. Arthur Goodwin, Mr. Long, Sir Henry
Vane, Junior; or any three of them shall return them very hearty and
affectionate thanks in in the name of this House. And this House does further
desire them that according to their affections already expressed, they will
continue their care and endeavors to remove the present distractions amongst
us, as also to preserve and confirm the Union between the two nations so
happily begun.

Hen. Elsing Cler. D. Com.


