THE SAINTS Great DUTY IN Time of the dangerous Afflictions, Persecutions, and
Oppressions, they may meet with in the troublesome and tempestuous Sea of this
World, either by spiritual or temporal Enemies.

Preached in a FAREWEL-SERMON BY Mr. GEORGE THORN, of Weymouth in Dorset-shire.

From Psalm. 37.34. Wait on the Lord, and keep his Way.

Published by a Friend.

EXODUS 14.13. And Moses said to the people, Fear ye not; stand still, and see
the salvation of the Lord.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1664

The SAINTS GREAT DUTY IN Time of Affliction, Persecution, and Oppression.
PSALM. 37.34. Wait on the Lord, and keep his Way.


NOt knowing whether ever I shall speak to you more from this place, being
willing to leave a word in season, I shall recommend to you what in answer to
prayer I have received of the Lord for the directing me in my course in this
gloomy dark day; being well assured that as many of us as walk by this Rule,
and sail by this Compass (however we may be scattered by the tempestuous storms
we meet with here in the Sea of this World) shall shortly arrive at, and meet
in our desired Port, the Haven of eternal Rest and Happiness: What therefore
the Lord has said to me, and that with a strong hand, that say I unto you in
the Name of the Lord; Wait on the Lord, and keep his Way.

The scope of this Psalm, is to direct the people of God, and to encourage them
to keep on in the course of godliness at such times, as when the wicked
prosper, flourish, and grow great, and the Godly fro afflicted, troubled,
persecuted, and oppressed: And there are two general parts of the Psalm
intermixtly spoken unto throughout. The one is for Direction; the other for
Encouragement. The Text appertains to the former part.

And the sum of the Directions may be reduced unto two Heads.

First, That they take heed of such inward Commotions and perturbations of
spirit, as through the remainder of corruption they are subject unto; and by
the temptations of Satan, and the provocations of wicked men, they will be put
upon through this occasion: More particularly he forewarns them to take heed of
Envy, verse. 1. and 7. and of Anger, verse. 8. And what need there is at such a
time to watch against the exorbitant workings of these Passions, none that
observe their own hearts, can well be ignorant; such being the unworthy,
insolent, and provoking Carriage of the wicked toward the poor People of God,
as is able, as we may say, to move a Saint. Hence that of Psalm. 73.23. But as
for me, my feet were almost gone, my steps had well-nigh slipped; for I was
envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked. Attend
therefore to the counsel of the Holy Ghost. Fret not thy self because of
evildoers, neither be thou envious against the workers of iniquity. Fret not
thy self because of him that prospers in his way, because of the man that
brings wicked devices to pass: Cease from anger, and forsake wrath. Fret not
thy-selfe in any wise to do evil.

Secondly, That they so carry themselves toward the Lord in keeping on in
their way of following him, as becomes those that firmly believe, and
steadfastly hope in him for his Salvation.

There are many particular directions to this purpose, verse. 3. Trust in the
Lord, and do good. Verse. 4. Delight thy self also in the Lord. Verse. 5. Commit
thy way unto the Lord. Verse. 7. Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him.
Verse. 27. Depart from evil, and do good; and here in the Text, Wait on the Lord
and keep his way.

These words contain Advice and Counsel for the people of God, and it is
considerable, either with respect to the troubles and temptations of the people
of God in general; or with respect to that particular that is immediately
touched on before the Text, verse. 33. The wicked watches the righteous, and
seeks to slay him. Upon this something is spoken by way of encouragement to
the righteous, verse. 33. The Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn
him when he is judged. Though he may let him fall into the hands of the
Wicked, he will not leave him there; though the Wicked may fit in judgment on
him, and pass sentence against him, yet the Lord will not condemn him; yea,
when he is judged he is chastened of the Lord, that he should not be condemned
with the World. Thus for the encouragement of the Righteous.

2. There is something by way of direction in the words read: Wait on the Lord,
and keep his Way.

From the words, considered under this double reference, we have this
profitable point of Doctrine.

However it go with the truly Godly here in this World, more especially when
the wicked watch the Righteous to do them a mischief, it is their best way to
wait on the Lord, and keep his Way.

I shall not spend time to show you who are truly Godly, and who are Wicked.
It is said of the Godly man, verse. 31. The Law of God is in his heart. Such
then as from the Law of God in their hearts have respect to all his
Commandments, walking in all the Statutes, and Ordinances of God blameless,
Luke 1.6. such are truly godly: And such as from the Dominion of sin in them,
are evil Doers, workers of iniquity, walking according to the Lusts of the
Flesh, and of the mind, according to the course of this World, of the Prince of
the Power of the Air, etc. they are wicked.

In the handling of this Point, according to my wonted method, I shall speak
first to what is supposed, and then to what is expressly laid down.

Here are two things supposed in this point; the one more General, the other
more Particular.

First, In General; It Is supposed, that the condition of the truly Godly may be
full of Troubles, Afflictions and Distresses in this World; for when it is
said, However it go with the truly Godly; the meaning is, how evilly, how badly
soever, though they be never so much troubled, afflicted, and distressed;
wherein it is supposed that it may go very ill, that the truly Godly may be full
of troubles, sufferings, and distresses: this is not only plainly held forth in
Scripture, in such Texts as these, Psalm. 34.19. John 16.33. Acts 14.22. but so
sadly experienced in all Ages, that we need not spend time in the clearing of
it.

Secondly, More Particularly; It is supposed, That it is the manner and guise of
the Wicked, to watch the Righteous to mischief them: so verse. 32, and verse. 12.
The Wicked plotteth against the just; (or as the Margent, practices) i. e. his
wit, and skill, his labor and Judgment is employed against him: And verse. 14.
The wicked have drawn their Sword, and bent their Bow, to cast down the poor
and the needy, and to slay such as be of upright conversation. So Psalm. 64.2.
the Psalmist prays, Hide me from the secret Counsel of the Wicked; from the
Insurrection of the Workers of Iniquity; who whet their tongues like a Sword,
and bend their Bows to shoot their Arrows, even bitter words, that they may
shoot secret in at the perfect: suddenly do they shoot at him, and fear not. So
we read in that Isa. 29.20, 21. of those that watch for iniquity, that make a
man an offendour for a word, that lay a snare for him that reproves in the
Gate, and that turn aside the Just for a thing of naught. Thus it has been
ever since the beginning. So wicked Cain watches righteous Abel to kill him,
Genesis 4.8. And Cain talked with Abel his Brother; and it came to pass that when
they were in the field, that Cain rose up against his Brother Abel, and slew
him: And thus have Cain's brood done all down along (for he was of the wicked
one, 1 John 3.12.) So has Esau watched righteous Jacob, Genesis 27.41, 42.
comforting himself, that he should have shortly a time to do him the mischief
that he intended him. So Saul watches righteous David, 1 Samuel 19.11. Saul sent
Messengers to David's house, to watch him, and slay him in the Morning: And so
did others, his wicked adversaries, watch him, as you have him complaining,
Psalm. 38.12. They that seek after my life, lay Snares for me; and they that
seek my hurt, speak mischievous things, and imagine deceit all the day long:
And Psalm. 140.5. The proud have laid a Snare for me, and Cords; they have
spread a Net by the way side; they have set Grins for me. So did Jeremiah's
Familiars, as he calls them, Jer. 20.10. For I heard the defaming of many, fear
on every side: Report say they, and we will report it: All my Familiars (or as
in the Margent, every man of my peace) watched for my halting; saying,
peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him, and we shall
take our revenge of him: While they pretended friendship and peace, they
intended nothi^^ but mischief, even the taking of their revenge on him. So the
Presidents and the Princes, watched righteous Daniel to mischief him, Dan. 6.4.
where first they seek to find occasion against him, concerning the Kingdom;
they would gladly have sound any occasion against him, to have accused him of
Disloyalty, Sedition, Treason, Rebellion, or at least Falsehood and
Unfaithfulness; but here they could find no fault, his very enemies being
Judges, Verse. 5. In the next place, therefore they plot, to find occasion
against him from the Law of his God; and therefore enticing the King to make a
Law against the Law of Daniels God, they quickly catch him. So you may see the
Scribes and Pharisees watched the Lord Jesus, that Just One, Luke 6.7. And the
Scribes and Pharisees watched Him, whether He would heal on the Sabbath Day,
that they might find an accusation against Him. It seems they had a Law against
doing good on the Sabbath Day: So, Luke 20.19, 20. And the chief Priests, and
the Scribes, sought to lay hands on Him, and they feared the people; for they
perceived that he had spoken this Parable against them; and they watched Him,
and sent forth spies, which should feign themselves just men, that they might
take hold of his words, that so they might deliver Him to the Power and
Authority of the Governor: They endeavor to trappan Him, that they might give
him over to the secular Power. Time would fail to show how they watched the
Apostles, and the Saints, all down along throughout all ages: Neither need we
search the records of former ages, in this matter, for evidence, our own times
affording pregnant proof, more than enough in this thing; and as it has been,
and now is, so it will be to the end of this wicked world, the guise and manner
of the wicked, thus to watch the Righteous to do him a mischief.

1. For that there is the same principle of hatred, and enmity, in the Wicked
against the Righteous now, as ever, yea, and ever will to the worlds end: That
enmity that we read of in Genesis 3.15. is a lasting enmity, as long as there are
any of the Seed of the Serpent in the world, it will work; It is an enmity in
nature, Prove. 29.27. He that is upright in the way, is an abomination to the
Wicked; and the wicked must cease to be wicked, ere this will cease to be. As
there are some Creatures that have an enmity in nature, as the Wolf, and the
Sheep, so that enmity is propagated to all of the kind that partake of that
nature: So is the Enmity that the Children of the Wicked one have against the
Children of God; As therefore the Wolf need not to be taught to watch to devour
the Sheep, it being natural to him: So the Wicked need not be taught to do the
Saints a mischief, having a principle within them inclining, and instructing
them thereunto.

2. There is the same necessary ground and occasion of their hatred of them:
Though there be no just ground of the wickeds hatred of the righteous (hence
David speaks of their hating him without a cause, Psalm. 69.4. that is, without
just cause on his part) yet there is a necessary ground of their hatred, and
that continues now as heretofore, and will continue as long as there are any
truly Godly; and what that is, you may see in that, Psalm. 38.20. They also that
render evil for good, are mine adversaries; because I follow the thing that
good is. The true ground and reason of their being adversaries unto David, was
this, Because he followed that which they hated.

Thus our Savior showing his Disciples how they should be hated of the World,
acquaints them with the true cause and ground of the Worlds hatred, John 15.19.
If you were of the World, the world would love its own; but because you are not
of the World, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the World
hates you. And that this is the proper ground of the Worlds hatred, is most
manifest, for that the same person, whom the world loved while he was of the
world; when called out of the world into the Kingdom of Christ, then is he
hated of those that before loved him; as in Paul. And if a person that
professes himself the Disciple of Christ, and is hated of the world, shall
forsake the assembly of Saints, and turn back from the way of righteousness,
and run into the same excess of riot with the profane world, none more worlds
darling than he. So that it is Godliness, Holiness, and true Religion, that is
the true ground of the worlds hatred. So 1. John 3.12. Not as Cain who was of
the wicked one and slew his brother: and wherefore slew he him? because his own
works were evil, and his brothers righteous. This was the true cause of his
hatred; and while that the cause remains, while godly Men continue to walk in
the ways of Godliness, the wicked will continue to hate them.

3. The Devil, whose Children these wicked ones are, 1 John 3.8, 10. is still
as malicious, and industrious as ever, to put them upon this. We read of Satan
in that, 1 Pet. 5.8. that he goes up and down like a roaring Lion, seeking
whom he may devour; and as far as the Lord permits him, he acts wicked men in
whom he rules, Ephesians. 2.2. to do what mischief they can to the Godly; yea, and
in the last times he is so far from abating his rage, as that we read, his
wrath grows the hotter, because he knows he has but a short time, Rev.
12.12.

While therefore the principle of enmity, which is in the wicked against the
Saints, remains, and while the ground of their hatred continues, and Satan is
as industriously stirring them up as ever, naught else can be expected, but
that they watch the righteous to do them a mischief.

But now, where shall the righteous do? shall he render evil for evil, and watch
the wicked that he may mischieve them? God forbid; what shall he forsake his
righteousness, and leave off to be godly? no, in no wise. But if ye would
know, O ye Saints and righteous Ones, what to do in this case, I am sent of God
at this time to instruct you, That it will be your best way to wait on she
Lord, and keep his way.

And so I come to what is expressly asserted in the point, That however it go
with the truly Godly here in this World, more especially when the Wicked
watches the righteous to mischieve them, it is their best way to wait on the
Lord, and keep his way.

Here I shall speak by way of Explication, in showing, 1. What it is to wait on
the Lord. 2. What it is to keep his way.

First, To wait on the Lord, is taken more largly, or more strictly.

1. More largly. And so it is the same with serving the Lord, attending and
following the Lord, and takes in the whole duty of the Saints; waiting on the
Lord as a Soldier on his Captain, or as a Servant on his Master: Psalm. 123.2.
Behold! as the eyes of the Servants look to the hands of their Masters, and as
the eyes of a Maiden unto the hand of her Mistress; so our eyes wait on the Lord
our God. So in that, Hos. 12.6. Turn thou to thy God, and keep Mercy and
Judgment, and wait on thy God continually.

2. More strictly, And so it intends a patient expecting the Lords Salvation.
It Is the continued exercise of Faith and Hope; it is Faith and Hope eekt out:
So here Verse. 7. Rest on the Lord; wait patiently. So Psalm. 130. when he cries
out of the depths, as he says Verse. 1. then Verse. 5. I Wait for the Lord, my
soul does wait; and in his word do I hope. My soul waits for the Lord, more
than they that watch for the morning, I say, more than they that watch for the
morning. We have both these together in that, Lam. 3.25, 26. The Lord is good
to them that wait for him; to the soul that seeks him. There it is taken as
largly as seeking after God: but it follows, It is good that a man should both
hope and quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord: there it is taken for the
continued exercise of hope; for a patient expectation of the Lord's Salvation.

Secondly, What it is to keep the Way of the Lord: here mind, The way of the
Lord may be understood, of that way wherein he walks toward his People,
which is aptly styled, the way of his Providence; or, of that way wherein he
requires his People to walk toward him, and is properly styled, the way of his
Precepts.

1. There is the Way of Gods Providence, in which he walks toward us: of
which, that Psalm. 18.30. speaks; As for God, his Way is perfect. So Psalm.
25.10. All the Paths or Ways of the Lord, are Mercy and Truth unto such as
keep his Covenant, and Testimonies.

Now, if it be thus taken here, Then to keep his Way, is diligently to attend
his Hand, and to observe his Carriage, and ordering, in all that befalls his
People, more especially in all that trouble that comes on them: For whatever
trouble comes upon the People of God, and whoever be the instruments of
inflicting, the Lord has his way in it, Mic. 6.9. ordering it, as to the kind,
as to the measure, as to the season, as to the continuance, as to the ends and
fruits.

Now, to observe the Lord's Hand, and to attend his Way, in ordering his
Providence, and our troubles, this is to keep his Way. So Isa. 26.8. In the
way of thy Judgments we have waited for thee: as if he had said, We have
waited on the Lord, and kept his Way.

2. There is the way of God's Precepts; in which he commands his People to
walk: And thus is this phrase most commonly taken. So 2 Kings 21.22. where it is
said of Amon, He forsook the Lord God of his Fathers, and walked not in the Way
of the Lord; i.e. not in the Way of his Commandments. Thus David spoke of the
way of his Precepts, in Psalm. 119.27. Make me understand the way of thy
Precepts: And if it be taken thus, then to keep the Way of the Lord, is to walk
in his Statutes, and to observe his Commandments to do them. So Genesis 18.19. The
Lord testifies of Abraham; I know him, that he will command his Children and
his household after him, and they shall keep the Way of the Lord, to do Justice
and Judgment. So in Job 23.11, 12. My feet have held his steps, his way have I
kept and not declined: neither have I gone back from the Commandments of his
lips: So to walk in his Ways, and to keep his Commandments, are the same,
Deuteronomy. 26.17. and Psalm. 119.1, 2.

So that the sum of all, is, However it be with the truly Godly, more
especially when the wicked do watch them to do them a mischief, their best way
is, to attend on the Lord, to follow him, to walk on in the ways of his
Commandments; so eying the hand of the Lord in all that befalls them, as they
that patiently expect, and quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord. Thus for
explication.

I now come to the Demonstration, which shall be dispatched by clearing, That it
is the honestest, the wisest, the safest, the most comfortable, and most
honorable Way.

First, This is the most innocent, just and honest Way; yea truly, this is the
only good, honest, and right Way.

I am to show what is the best for a Godly man, to whom no way is good, but
what is just and honest. There are indeed other ways which a man may take when
he is in trouble through the wickeds watching him to do him a mischief, whereby
to escape the mischief intended him; but they are not just and honest. I shall
instance in these.

1. By sinful complying with the wicked in their ungodly ways, thereby to abate
the edge of their wrath: This was the way Peter took, when in the High Priests
Hall, he not only denies his Master-but backs his denial with an Oath; yea,
being among a cursing crew, that should seem would not believe him else, he
falls a cursing and swearing that he knew not the man, Mat. 26.74.

2. By sinful shifting or shuffling, through Lies or deceitful Equivocations,
to avoid the mischief intended: This was the way that Abraham took to escape
the mischief, that he thought at one time the Men of Gerar might do to him,
Genesis 20. and that the Egyptians might do to him at another time for his wives
sake; wherein, though Abraham did not tell a downright untruth, as he excuses
the matter to Abimilech, yet he did sinfully shuffle in making use of a
deceitful Equivocation for his safety.

3. By angrily and revengfully rendering Evil for Evil, thereby thinking to pay
the wicked in his own Coin, and to avenge a man's own quarrel. This was the
course that David was about to take against Nabal, had he not been prevented by
Abigaeles wisdom, 1 Samuel 25.33.

4. By basely deserting the Place that the Lord has put a man in, and requires
him to abide in. This was that which Shemaiah would have out Nehemiah upon but
he refused to hearken to him, in Neh. 6.10.11. not but that a man may forsake
his place, not only of habitation, but also o^ public station and employment,
in some cases when that the Lord calls him off; but this is no base deserting;
Base deserting is, when out of cowardliness and base fear, a man withdraws
himself from his place, in which, and at that time, when the Lord requires him
to abide, that he may provide for his own safety: This was the way Moses would
have taken, when the Lord was sending him to deliver his People, had the Lord
left him to himself, as you may see at last in the 3d. and 4th Chapters of the
Book of Exodu^

5. By rebelliously and traitorously stepping out of the place that God has
set a man in. This was that way they tempted David unto, in 1 Samuel 24.4. and
which Abishai would have taken, had not David hindered him, 1 Samuel 26.9. Now
none of these ways are just and honest, being all of them contrary to the
Command, and a departing from God to the Creature, as I shall clear
particularly.

First, That sinfully to comply with the wicked to abate the edge of their
wrath, is contrary to the Command, is clear from these Scriptures, Ephesians. 5.7. Be
ye not therefore partakers with them; that is, with the Wicked, with the
Children of disobedience: Now one way of partaking with them, is, by sinful
compliance: hence verse. 11 Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works o
darkness; have you no hand, do not you bear a part be not drawn in to comply in
these things: To this purpose is that, Romans 12.2. Be not conformed to this
World. Nonconformity to this World, is a Christians duty.

Secondly, That sinfully to shift and shuffle through Lies and deceitful
Equivocations to provide for ones safety, is contrary to the Command of God,
clear is that, Genesis 20.9. where Abimilech reproving Abraham for his practice,
tells him, Thou have done things to me that ought not to be done.

Thirdly, That to render evil for evil, and to avenge our selves, is against
the Command of God; clear is that, Prove. 20.21. Say not thou, I will recompense
evil, but wait on the Lord, and he shall save thee. 1 Thessalonians. 5.15. See that
none render evil for evil to any man. Romans 12.17. Recompense to no man evil for
evil: and 19. Dearly beloved avenge not your selves.

Fourthly, That basely to desert the place that God has put a man in, is
against the Command of God; clear is that, 1 Cor. 7.24. Brethren, let every one
wherein he is called, therein abide with God; and as in the condition wherein,
so in the place whereunto, till God remove him.

Fifthly, That rebelliously to step out of a man's place, is against the Command
of God, is clear from, Eccles. 10.4. If the spirit of thy Ruler rise up against
thee, leave not thy place; for yielding pacifieth great offenses. Subjects are
here directed how to carry themselves when that the spirit of the Ruler rises
up against them; the counsel that the Spirit here gives, is, That they keep
their place, not in a way of rebellious opposition, but in way of yielding
subjection; leave not thy place as a subject, contain thy self within the
bounds of thine own calling and condition, bridling all disloyal passions, and
forbearing all unlawful attempts, to ward off the wrath of the Ruler; he
speaks not against a prudent withdrawing from a storm, as David from Saul,
Elias from Ahab, and Christ from Herod, but against a disloyal and rebellious
defection; as Israel to their Tents, 1 Kings 12.16. So that whatever the
provocations be that the Rulers give, Subjects must submit themselves, by
yielding active obedience in all things which they command according to God,
and by patiently enduring what they inflict on us, though for righteousness
sake; keeping our selves in the some humble, obedient, and loyal temper,
whatever provocations we meet with to the contrary.

And that in all these ways there is a departing from God to the Creature,
arising from a distrust of his All Sufficiency to provide for us in his way,
and from a conceit of our own wisdom to provide better for our safety, is most
manifest; therefore these ways being contrary to the Command of God, and
in^urious to his All Sufficiency, are not just and honest; but to wait on the
Lord, and to keep his way, this is the good, the right, and the honest Way. See
1 Samuel 12.23, where he tells them, that he will show them the good and the right
way; and what that is, he acquaints them in the next verse, Only fear the Lord,
and serve him in Truth, with all your heart, which is to the same purpose, with
wait on the Lord, and keep his way; that is, the honest, and good Way, in which
the Lord commands his People to walk, 2 Chronicles. 6.27. His Commandments being
holy, just, and good, Romans 7.12. The way of his Commandments must needs be
good, just, and honest; yea, and his Commandments being the Rule; the goodness
of a way lies in its conformity thereunto; and this is the way that is
agreeable to the Command of God, as in the Text.

2. This is the wisest Way: When a man has many wise, subtle, and powerful
enemies watching to mischieve him, he had need behave himself wisely. Hence
when our Savior sends forth his Disciples as Sheep among Wolves, Mat. 10.16.
he says to them, Be wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves, he advises them
to look to the wisest, as well as the honestest way. Now however carnal men do
think some one of the forementioned ways to be the wisest, yet it will be
apparent, that to wait on the Lord, and keep his Way, is the wisest course; by
these two arguments.

First, It is the way which the truest and highest Wisdom, the Wisdom of God,
does direct unto; So here in the Text. So in that Psalm. 27.14. he complains of
his enemies, and of false witnesses that were risen up against him, that did
breath out cruelty, verse. 12. and then by the spirit he commends to himself and
others, suitable advice in such a case; verse. 14. Wait on the Lord. So Exodus
14.13. there Pharaoh and all his Hosts are at the heels of the poor Israelites,
and he counts of nothing but of destroying them, Exodus 15.9. and they for their
parts knew not how to escape: Now says Moses to them, Fear ye not, stand
still, and see the Salvation of the Lord. So that whatever distress the People
of God are in, this is the way the Wisdom of God directs unto; for what the
Word of God in the Scripture directs to, that the Wisdom of God directs, as is
clear from that, Luke 11.49.

2. This is the way that the wisest men have taken. David was a wise man; we
read of him in 1 Samuel 18.30. that David behaved himself more wisely than all
the Servants of Saul, so that his name was much set by: Now this was the way
that he took, as you have him speaking in that, Ps. 18.21. I have kept the ways
of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed from my God; for all thy Judgments
were before me; and I did not put away his Statutes from me, etc. So Psalm.
119.110. The wicked have laid a snare for me, yet I erred not from thy Precepts.

Daniel was a wise man; hence that Proverb, Ezekiel. 28.3. Wiser than Daniel; and
he took this course when that his Enemies had laid a snare for him to take away
his life; yet (Dan. 6.10.) he declined not from the way of the Lord, but waited
on the Lord, and kept his way, as aforetime; as you may there read.

Yea, Jesus Christ, the Wisdom of God, he took this course, as you may read,
Luke 13. where when certain of the Pharisees came, saying to him, Get thee out,
and depart hence, for Herod will kill thee, verse. 31. He answered verse. 32. Go
ye and tell that Fox, Behold, I cast out Devils, and do cures to day and to
morrow; that is, I will do the work of my Father; I will follow what he has
sent me about, and keep his Way, whatever becomes of me. Thus you see it is the
wisest way.

3. This is the safest way; when a man is beset with the wicked that seek to
mischieve him, it is a time to look after the safest way; now to wait on the
Lord, and to keep his Way, is the safest course a man can take: Pro. 10.9. He
that walks uprightly, walks surely. And 28. 18. Whosoever walks uprightly, shall
be saved. I know carnal wisdom thinks otherwise, and mocks at this: But I am
speaking to the People of God, who are capable of receiving and understanding
what I shall offer, and to them this will appear to be the safest way, by these
two Particulars.

First, This is the readiest way for the People of God to escape that mischief
which the wicked devise, and intend against them, Prove, 18.10. The Name of the
Lord is a strong Tower; the Righteous fly to it, and are safe: But how do they
fly to this strong hold, but upon the wings of Faith and Hope, whereby they
wait on the Lord? and being fled for refuge to this strong hold, they are sale,
and continue safe by abiding there, which is by keeping the Way of the Lord:
Hence that, Prove. 16.7. When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his
enemies to be at peace with him. Now for those whose ways please him, who wait
on him, and keep his way, he makes even their enemies to be at peace with
them, these several ways.

1. Sometimes by changing their hearts, and by making them even of Enemies, to
become Friends. So we find he changed the heart of Ahasuerus, that whereas his
enmity was so enflamed by the misinformation of Haman, as that he had signed
the Decree for the utter destroying of the People of God; yet afterward he
grants unto the Jews to gather themselves together, and stand for their lives,
to destroy, slay, and cause to perish all the power of the people of the
Province that should assault, both little ones, and women, and to take the
spoil of them for a prey. So he changed the heart of Nebuchadnezzar, with
respect to the three Worthies, whom in the heat of his fury be commanded to be
cast into the fiery Furnace, heated seven times hotter than aforetime; yet
afterward his heart is so turned toward them, as that he greatly promotes
them in the Province of Babylon; as you may read Dan. 3. So the Lord changed
the heart of Paul, who of a persecuting Saul, became a preaching Paul, Gal.
1.23. abounding in love to Christ and his Members, as he did before in rage and
cruelty against them.

2. By restraining sometimes their envy and fury; so that though their hearts
continue as full of bitterness, malice and revenge, as formerly, yet he binds
up their hands, so as that they cannot execute the mischief they intend against
his People. So Psalm. 76.5. The stout-hearted are spoiled, or disarmed; they
have slept their sleep, and none of the men of might have found their hands.
All which expressions tend to show the restraint that is laid upon them; and by
whom, you may see, verse. 6. At thy Rebuke, O God of Jacob, both the Chariots
and the Horses are cast into a dead sleep: Hence that, verse. 10. Surely the
wrath of men shall praise thee; that is, as much of it as he suffers for to
break forth; for the remainder of wrath will thou restrain. We have a notable
example of this in Laban, Genesis 31. who is not only rebuked by the Lord in his
not pursuit after Jacob, with a charge not to hurt him, but is overruled to
tell Jacob how the God of his Father spoke to him, as you may read, verse. 29.
whatever be the fury and rage of the enemy, he can say unto it, Thus far shall
thou go, and no farther, as Job 38.11.

3. He makes their enemies to be at peace with them, sometimes by enclining
them to use his People well, and to treat them peaceably, after that they have
them in their power and under their hand, Jer. 15.11. The Lord said, Verily it
shall be well with thy remnant: verily, I will cause the enemy to treat thee
well, in time of evil, and in the time of affliction. So we read, Psalm. 106.46.
He made them to be pityed of all them that carried them away captives.

4. Always by overruling what they do against them, so as that it shall not
hurt them. So Isa. 54.17. No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper.
But of whom is this spoken? it follows there, This is the heritage of the
Servants of the Lord: It may prosper to put them to smart, but not to hurt
them: As the Lord promised Paul, Acts 18.10. I am with thee, and no man shall
set on thee to hurt thee. So he promises all his, in that Isa. 41.10. So that
the readiest way to escape the mischief that our enemies design against us, is,
to wait on the Lord, and to keep his way, whatever carnal wisdom thinks, or
suggests to the contrary: It is true, this is the way to be hated, and to have
many enemies, who from their malice and rage, will devise and design much
mischief against us: but Romans 8.31. If God be for us, who shall be against us?
that is, it matters not who they are that are against us. This then is the
safest way; hence Prove. 1.31. Who so hearkeneth unto me, shall dwell safely.

I know this seems a Paradox to the men of the World, and they think some other
ways to be more safe.

First, Some think that sinful compliance is a safer way; but their error will
be manifest to any that duly consider,

1. That hereby they do more encourage the wicked World against them, whilst
they partly comply, but will not run into the same excess of riot with them. So
Lots compliance with the wicked Sodomites in offering them his Daughters, did
but encourage them the more against him, Genesis 19.9. And they said, Stand back;
which words may either refer unto Lot, and then they hold forth how they were
enraged by his motion; or to one another, as contending who should fall foul on
him first: and this agrees with the following words; And they said again, This
one fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a Judge: Now will we deal
worse with thee, than with them, and they pressed sore upon the man: so far
were they from being appealed by his sinful compliance, as that they grew the
more furious against him.

2. Hereby you provoke the Lord to withdraw the Covert of his Protection from
you; while you wait on the Lord, and keep his Way, you have the promise of his
Protection, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. but if by sinful compliance with the wicked, you
forsake him, he will forsake you; you forfeit his protection: Had not
Jehosaphat's compliance with Ahab like to have cost him his life? 2 Chronicles. 18.
and hear what the Prophet says to him, 2 Chronicles. 19.2. Should thou help the
ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore is wrath come upon thee
from the Lord: And through the wrath of the Lord that is upon men for their
sinful compliance, those very evils are brought upon them sometimes, which they
think to escape: As notable is that instance which Mr. Fox gives account of, on
Richard Denton, in Queen Mary's days; who by his sinful compliance with the
wicked World, in disowning the truth of the Gospel, thought to escape burning,
and was afterward burnt in his own house: according to that of our Savior, He
that will save his life shall lose it, Mat. 16.25.

Secondly, Others think that to avenge themselves in paying the wicked in their
own Coin, doing mischief unto them, is the safest way; but their error will be
manifest from that of our Savior, Mat. 26.52. Put up again thy Sword into its
place; for all they that take the Sword, shall perish by the Sword: This way in
which they think to provide for their safety, is in the judgment of our
Savior, the ready way to their ruin.

Thirdly, Others think by Shuffling, Lying, and Equivocating, to provide better
for their safety, then by keeping the Way of the Lord; but however, some
present security sometimes has been obtained by such ways, yet in the end
they are most pernicious and destructive for us; Prove. 19.5. He that speaks
Lies, shall not escape: and verse. 9. He that speaks Lies shall perish. And
for such as comfort themselves, as they, Isa. 28.25. We have made Lies our
refuge, and under Falsehood have we hid our selves: Mind what the Lord says to
them, verse. 17. Judgment will I also lay to the Line, and Righteousness to the
Plummet; and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of Lies; and the waters shall
overflow the hiding place; and your Covenant with Death shall be dissanulled,
and your agreement with Hell shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge
shall pass through, then shall you be trodden down by it: and then where is
your safety? they think to secure themselves from the wrath of man; but they
mind not how to be secured from the wrath of God.

4ly, Others think by basely deserting their places, to provide better for
their safety, than by following the Lord, and keeping his Way. But the hazards
David was in when he took this course, 1 Samuel 27. may convince these men of
their mistake^, especially if they consider that he that leaves the place God
has set him in, out of base fear, is sure to carry his fear with him
wherever he go, if not (in the place he promised himself greatest security)
to meet with the evil he feared: As the Lord threatens them in that, Jer.
42.17. Then it shall come to pass, that the Sword which ye feared, shall
overtake you there in the Land of Egypt; and the Famine whereof you were
afraid, shall follow close after you in Egypt, and there ye shall dye.

Fifthly, Others think it a safer way rebelliously to step out of their places,
for the overturning the power of those that are in Authority over them, because
they grant power to the wicked to oppress and mischief them: But had Zimri
peace that slew his Master? the experience of all Ages testifies how ill they
provide for their safety, at the long-run, who take this course: Let that
instance suffice which we have in 2 Chronicles. 25.3.

So that whatever men may think, there is no such way to escape the mischief
intended against us by the wicked, as to wait on the Lord, and keep his Way.

2. It will yet further appear to be the safest way, for that it is the ready
way to have good by all their troubles, by all that the wicked do against them:
Wait on the Lord, and keep his Way, then no matter though the wicked watch
against you to do you a mischief; for they shall not only prove abortive in all
the mischievous designs they are big with, as Job 5.12. but according to his
promise, all shall work together for good, Romans 8.28. for he that has
promised, is infinite in Power, Wisdom, Goodness, and Faithfulness, to
overrule all the devices and designs of his and your Enemies, so as to make
those things that are in their own nature against you, to work together for
your good: As you know what Joseph says, in that Genesis 50.20. As for you, ye
thought evil against me, but God meant it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is
this day, to save much people alive. Thus does God overruled the malice and
revenge of men for good to his people; but they must then wait on the Lord, and
keep his Way; as you may see Psalm. 81.8, etc. For all the Paths of the Lord are
Mercy and Truth unto such as keep his Covenant and his Testimonies. When the
wicked smite and oppress the people of God, they are the Lords Rod, Isa. 10.5.
wherewith he chastises his people: And that of the Apostle holds in this, as
well as in other chastisements, Heb. 12.10. He for our profit, that we might be
partakers of his holiness; as also what follows in v. 11. Now no chastisement
for the present seems joyous, but grievous; nevertheless, afterward it
yields the peaceable fruit of Righteousness to them which are exercised
thereby, so as that they wait on God in the Way of his Judgments, and keep the
Way of his Commandments. Thus I have cleared it to be the safest Way.

3. This is the most honorable Way; though it were a safe way, yet if it be
not an honorable way, it is not the best Way. That proved a safe way that
David took, in 1 Samuel 27.1, 2, 3. but it was a dishonorable way; and however,
under the power of temptations he concludes it best, yet afterward he finds, by
woeful experience, his mistake. It was a safe way that they advised Nehemiah to,
in Nehem. 6.10. but because it was dishonorable, he would not take it; verse.
11. And he said, Should such a man as I fly? and who is there, being as I am,
would go into the Temple to save his life? I will not go in: He would not so
dishonor his place. To run hazards in an honorable way, has always been more
eligible to Spirits truly noble, then sneekingly to provide for safety in a
base dishonorable way. Now the way that is before you, is the most honorable
way, as will appear in these following Particulars.

First, It Is the way of true valor and courage. When the wicked watches to
mischieve you, when the wicked, even your Enemies and Foes come upon you to eat
up your flesh, as Psalm. 27.2. then to wait on the Lord, to stand your ground,
to follow the Lord, to keep his way, This is an argument of a brave and gallant
Spirit. Was it not a proof of a heroic and brave Spirit in Paul, when he says
to them, Acts 21.13. What mean you to weep, and to break my heart? for I am
ready, not to be bound only, but to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord
Jesus. When men are bold and daring in a wicked way, and will resolutely keep
on, whatever difficulties or opposition they meet with, this is not true
valor, but a mad hardiness, and desperate stoutness of spirit: But when men
are courageous and undaunted in following the Lord, steadfastly keeping and
walking on in his Way, maugre all opposition that Satan and wicked Men make
against them, this is true valor and gallantry of Spirit. Such brave and
heroic Spirits were they, mentioned, Heb. 11.35, 36, 37. who have this
honorable Testimonial of the Lord, ver. 38. of whom the World was not worthy:
Persons, whereof every one was more worth than a world, or too excellent to
abide in the world, being worthy of better and greater honor than the world
could give them.

2. It Is the way by which you shall most victoriously triumph over all your
enemies: Wait on the Lord, and keep his Way, and you shall go on conquering and
to conquer, over Sin, Satan, the World, and Antichrist, over all your enemies;
Through God you shall do valiantly, for he it is that shall tread down all your
enemies, Psalm. 108.13. For this is the victory that overcomes the world, even
your Faith, 1 John 5.4. Through Faith, whereby we wait on God, and keep his
way, we shall overcome the world, that is, Satan and all his wicked crew, with
all the instruments of mischief they make use of against us. Hence that, Romans
8.37. In all these things we are more than Conquerours, through him that loved
us. And this honor have all they, that wait on the Lord, and keep his way.

3. It Is the way by which you shall bring most honor to God, to the Lord Jesus
Christ the Captain of your Salvation. That the People of God are employed in
service whereby God is honored, that reflects honor upon them; and the more
God is honored, the more honor have they that serve him. The Queen of Sheba
counted Solomon's servants happy, who waited continually upon him, 1 Kings
10.8. how much more honorable is it to wait on the Lord, in that a greater
than Solomon is here? Now wait on the Lord, and keep his way; herein you will
greatly honor the Lord. As they that dissert and forsake the Lord and his
ways, when it comes to any hard service, do greatly dishonor him; as if there
were not enough to be had to make amends for all their hardships they endure;
So they that follow the Lord, and keep his way, through sharp oppositions and
sufferings, they greatly honor him in the world. To cleave to the Lord, and
follow him, when all the world are about our ears for his sake; to keep his
Way, when that his way is every where spoken against; to continue faithful in
his Service, when nothing but bonds and persecutions attend us for it; this
commends his Service, and tends much to the honor of his Name and Ways.

4. This is the ready way to true Honor; As the wise man has it in that,
Prove. 27.18. He that waits on his master, shall be honored: So wait on the
Lord, and keep his Way, and you shall he honored, and that with true Honor,
even that honor that is of God. In that John 5.44. our Savior distinguishes
between that Honor that is of men, and that Honor that is of God; and that is
the true Honor that is of God: For as they say, Honor est in honorante, non in
honorato, in him that honors; and then that is true and highest honor that
is from the only true God, that high and only One. Now this honor have all
they that waiting on the Lord, and keeping his Way, do honor him: 1 Samuel 2.30.
Him that honors me, I will honor: and says our Savior, John 12.26. If any
man serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there shall my servant be: and
what honor that is, you may gather from that Col. 3.4. And it further follows,
If any man serve me, him will my Father honor. Thus it appears to be the most
honorable way.

5. Lastly, This is the most comfortable way. It must be granted, it is a way
that is attended with sufferings, tribulations and distresses, 2 Timothy 3.12. and
yet it is the most comfortable way, as will appear; In that,

1. It is the ready way to have peace, inward peace, the best peace in the
midst of all the trouble the world can bring upon you; In that, John 16.33. The
Lord Jesus says to his Disciples, that in the world they should have
tribulation, but in him they should have peace. And to wait on the Lord, and
keep his Way, is the ready way to attain this Peace, as appears from Isa. 26.3.
Thou shall keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee, because he
trusts in thee. That which is rendered perfect peace, is [Peace, Peace] in the
Original, the reduplication, according to the Idiome of the Hebrew, denoting
the excellency, perfection, abundance, and duration of Peace. But to whom is
this promise made? says the Text, to him whose mind is stayed on the Lord, and
trusts in him; and in verse. 2. to the righteous Nation which keeps the
Truth: which, according to the point in hand, may be expressed, to them that wait
on the Lord, and keep his Way. So Psalm. 119.165. Great Peace have they that
love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them.

2. It Is the ready way to have the Holy Ghost, who is styled the Comforter, to
abide with us. What more comfortable way, than that wherein we may be sure to
have the Comforter to be with us, to abide and continue with us? Wait on the
Lord, and keep his way, so shall the Comforter abide with you for ever.
Express is that of our Lord to this purpose, John 14.15, 16. If you love me,
keep my Commandments; and I will pray the Father, and he shall give you
another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever. So verse. 23. If any man
love me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will come
and make our abode with him. So that this is the way to have Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, to come to us, and abide with us.

3. The Comforts which are to be had in this way, are true, solid, substantial
and abiding Comforts, such as fill the soul with inward joy and mirth, under
the sorest outward trouble, so as that they can sing in prison, and leap in the
flames. Notable is that expression of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.4. I am filled with
comfort, I am exceeding joyful in all our tribulations in following the Lord.
He tells us in the next verse, that his flesh had no rest, that he was troubled
on every side, and yet exceeding joyful: yea, he tells us in another place, 2
Cor. 1.5. that as his afflictions did abound for Christ, so his consolations
did abound by him.

4. This is the way to arrive speedily where the wicked shall trouble you no
more; where there shall be no more sorrow nor weeping, but where you shall have
perfect rest and peace, fullness of joy and comfort for evermore. That of the
Lord Jesus to his Disciples, Luke 22.28, 29. is plain for this, Ye are they
which have continued with me in my temptations, and I appoint you a Kingdom, as
my Father has appointed unto me: with John 10.27, 28. My Sheep hear my voice,
and I know them, and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal life, and
they shall never perish, neither shall, any man pluck them out of my hand. As
Caleb and Joshua waited on the Lord and kept his way, following him fully, and
so entered Canaan, and had a peaceable and comfortable possession there, Josh.
14.14. so they that wait on the Lord and keep his Way, shall have abundant
entrance into that heavenly Canaan, 2 Pet. 1.11. where there is fullness of joy,
and pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. And thus it appears to be the most
comfortable way. To conclude: this we say, All is well that ends well. Now,
Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright; for the end of that
man is peace.

Thus then we have cleared, That however it go with the People of God here in
this world, more especially when the wicked watch them to do them a mischief,
it is their best way to wait on the Lord, and keep his way; for that it is the
honestest, the wisest, the safest, and the most honorable and most comfortable
way. And though I doubt not but enough has been spoken to persuade and prevail
with those that have an understanding to discern, and a heart to perceive what
has been set before them: Yet I question not, but carnal reason has many
things to object, and such as may prevail with carnal hearts to disbelieve all
that has been spoken, so far at least as to prefer the ways of carnal wisdom,
before this Way of the Lord: But I rest satisfied with that answer of our
Savior, Matthew. 13.11. It is given to you to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom
of Heaven, but unto them it is not given.

Thus you have the Doctrinal part of the point: I proceed to the Application:
and we shall make use of this,

1. To admonish and forewarn all the followers of Christ, that have owned,
engaged, and walked in the way of the Lord, to take heed that they be not
stumbled, moved, and turned out of the way of the Lord. The Apostle in Heb.
12.13. advises them to make straight paths for their feet, lest that which is
lame should be turned out of the way, but let it rather be healed.

There is some lameness remaining with the Best; with some more, with some
less; but with all some: It lies therefore in all to take heed lest they be
turned out of the way: Hence that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.12. Let him that
thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall: and let him that thinks he is
stablished and settled in the way of the Lord, take heed lest he be offended and
turned out of the way: O that a holy Jealousy in this thing may possess and
fill all your hearts.

More particularly, I would forewarn you to take heed, lest you be offended,
through some things, and by some persons, in this day of temptation.

1. Take heed lest you be offended at the Cross: Our Savior in the Parable of
the Sower, Mat. 13. tells us of some, who though they hear and receive the Word
for a season with joy, yet when Tribulation or Persecution arises for the
Word, by and by they are offended. How is this fulfilled in our days! how many
are there, who while the Way of the Lord was the Way to preferment, did
profess and walk in it; who now that it is opposed and everywhere spoken
against, do decline and forsake it? Be you admonished to take heed, lest the
stumbling block of others sufferings, especially of faithful Ministers, do
turn you out of the way: The Apostle labors much in removing this
stumbling block, as you may see, 2 Cor. 1. Phil. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 3.3. Therefore I
do the more earnestly forewarn you of this; and take heed lest what sufferings
come on you for the Gospel sake, do turn you out of the way: you are no
Disciples for Christ, unless you take up your Cross and follow him, Luke
14.27.

2. Take heed lest you be offended by the falls and Apostacies of hypocritical
professors: This is that Satan and his instruments will lay before you to turn
you out of the way of the Lord; our Savior does therefore forewarn of this,
Mat. 24. so likewise his Apostles, 1 Timothy 4.1. 2 Pet. 2.1, 2. and 1 John 2.19.

3. Take heed that you be not stumbled by the scorn, contempt, and reproach
that is cast on the way of the Lord, and those that walk in it. This is that
Satan and his instruments will lay before you; That the way of the Lord and his
followers are every where under reproach and contempt: for as they said to
Paul, so has the false Church said to those that teach the way of the Lord
truly, Acts 28.22. For as concerning this Sect we know that every where it is
spoken against; the Original is, Heresy: the way of the Lord is commonly thus
branded in the world; and they that walk in it are counted a company of
Sectaries and Heretics. But this should stumble us no more than it did Paul,
who there (ver. 23.) boldly teaches this way, and ( Act. 24.14.) freely
professes it. But this I confess to thee, that after the way which they call
Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers.

4. Take heed you be not offended at the prosperity of the wicked, especially
when he brings wicked devices to pass: This was that had almost turned the
Psalmist out of the way, Psalm. 73.2, 3. As for me my feet were almost gone, my
steps had well-nigh slipped; for I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the
prosperity of the wicked. To see those that despise, hate, and persecute the
Way of the Lord, and those that walk in it, to prosper and flourish; while
those that love it, own it, and walk in it, are in an afflicted and suffering
condition; this not only overturns formal Professors, but many a time puts
sincere Believers to a stand. Hence that advice in Psalm. 37.7. Fret not thy
self because of him who prospers, because of the man who brings wicked
devices to pass: And as ver. 8. Fret not thy self in any wise to do evil.

2. Take heed of such persons, as by whom, if you be not the more watchful, you
may be so offended, as to be turned out of the way. More particularly,

1. Take heed of your selves. This is that our Savior calls for, in that, Mat.
16.24. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself. Our greatest danger
is from our selves, while we have within a deceiver and a traitor, who is still
conspiring to turn us out of the way. Take heed therefore of your own selves,
consult not with flesh and blood, Gal. 1.16.

2. Beware of Satan. This is that which the Apostle suggests, 2 Cor. 3. I fear
by any means least as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your
minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. And out of the
like fear concerning you, I beseech you beware of Satan; and the rather, for
that, as the Apostle says, verse. 14. Satan is transformed into an Angel of
light.

3. Beware of false Teachers. This is the advice of our Savior, in Math. 7.15.
Beware of false Prophets, which come unto you in sheeps clothing, etc. And
though I cannot say, I know, with the Apostle in Act. 20.29. yet I am greatly
afraid, that after my departing shall grievous Wolves enter in among you, not
sparing the Flock; and that of your own selves shall men arise, speaking
perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them.

4. Beware of worldly Friends, such as will counsel you to spare your selves,
such as savor not the things of God, but those that be of men. This our
Savior calls for in that of Luke 14.26. Answer them as Christ answered Peter,
Mat. 16.22, 23.

The proper use of this Point, with respect to the people of God, is, To exhort
and persuade them, to wait on the Lord, and keep his way, however it be,
whoever they are that watch and plot against them, however they may prosper in
bringing wicked devices to pass; however, they may prevail in oppressing the
poor Saints, yet this is the exhortation that I have received from the Lord for
you, Wait on the Lord, and keep his Way. There are two branches of the
Exhortation, I shall speak to both of them distinctly.

And because the latter of them is the main, and the former a help thereto in
bad times; I shall invert the order of the Text, and speak to what is here, the
latter in the first place, and to the other as time will give leave.

1. However it go, Saints, though the wicked watch to do you a mischief, yet
keep you the Way of the Lord, diligently observing the way of his Commandments,
the way of your duty to walk therein. Forasmuch as it has been the design of
my preaching all-along, to expound the Way of God to you, and to instruct you
in the Way of the Lord; And I am now directing my Speech to the Saints of God,
who know, own, and profess the Way of the Lord. I shall not spend much time
(while I have so little left) in recounting to you what I have taught you
concerning the way of the Lord, only in general, that Way of Truth and
Righteousness, the Way of Faith and Holiness which I have taught you from the
Word, is intended. You know the way of Gospel-Doctrin, Gospel-Fellowship,
Gospel-VVorship, Gospel-Discipline, and Gospel-Conversation, which I have
preached, and you have received. And here Beloved, I call God to witness, in
whose Name I have preached to you, that I have preached the Way of the Lord
sincerely and faithfully, as I have received of the Lord by the teaching of his
Spirit through the Word; I therefore beseech and entreat you, out of that
hearty love I bear to you, and that affectionate care I have for you, that as
you tender the Glory of God, your own Peace here, and eternal Happiness
hereafter, and the spiritual and eternal Good of others, that you will remember
how you have heard, and received, and keep the Way of the Lord.

In the prosecuting of this, I shall speak to these two things.

First, Open this duty in a few particulars.

Secondly, Give you some Directions to help you herein.

For the first of these, take it in these particulars.

1. Be exhorted to keep the Way of the Lord in your memories: So Rev. 3.3.
Remember therefore how thou have received, and heard, and hold fast. I am
speaking to those that have received the knowledge of the Way of the Lord,
that they retain what they have learned, and that they maintain an actual
remembrance of it: and the rather take heed to this, every one of you, with the
greater diligence, for that you are like to be deprived of the help of your
Remembrancers, viz. the faithful Ministers of Christ, 1 Timothy 4.6. you have had
their help a long while, in putting you, from Sabbath to Sabbath, in
remembrance; but this is taking from you: as the Apostle in another case, Heb.
2.1. Therefore ye ought to give the more earnest heed to the things ye have
heard, least at any time ye should let them slip.

2. Keep the Way of the Lord in your Judgments and Consciences: I am speaking
to those whose Judgments are enlightened, and Consciences renewed, to approve of
the Way of the Lord: As therefore the Apostle said unto them, 2 Pet. 3.17. Ye
therefore, Beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware, least ye also
be led away with the error of the wicked, and fall from your own stedfastness.
So say I, seeing ye know the Way of the Lord, and approve of it, beware, lest
being led away with the error of the wicked, and your own Judgments being
thereby corrupted, and your Consciences defiled, you fall from your own
steadfastness: And I the rather press this, for that as the Apostle has it, 2
Cor. 11.3. I fear lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his
subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ.

3. Keep the Way of the Lord in your Profession: I am speaking unto those,
who, as Romans 10.10. with the heart, believe unto righteousness; and with the
mouth, make confession unto salvation: And you have the Exhortation in the
words of the Apostle, Heb. 10.23. Let us hold fast the profession of the Faith,
without wavering: Be not ashamed of your Profession; as our Savior speaks,
Mark 8.38. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my Words, in this
adulterous and sinful Generation, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed,
when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with his holy Angels; with Mat.
10.32, 33. Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess
also before my Father which is in Heaven: But whosoever shall deny me before
men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in Heaven.

4. Keep the Way of the Lord in your hearts and affections, loving, rejoicing,
and delighting in the Way of the Lord: The keeping of it in your Memories,
Judgments and Profession, will be but in vain, unless you keep it in your
hearts. Lay up and hide the Word of God in your hearts; let the desire and
delight of your Soul be in the Way of the Lord, with the Psalm. 119.111. Thy
Testimonies have I taken for mine heritage for ever; for they are the rejoicing
of my heart: It Is the Character of the Godly man, Psalm. 1.1, 2. He delights
in the Law of the Lord; and in his Law does he meditate day and night.

5. Keep the Way of the Lord in your lives and conversations; walking therein
conscientiously; observing the Commandments of God to do accordingly: I am
speaking to those who have chosen the way of the Lord to walk in; and they may
read what the Lord says in that, Deuteronomy. 5.32. You shall observe to do as the
Lord your God has commanded you: You shall not turn aside to the right hand,
or to the left: you shall walk in all the Ways that the Lord your God has
commanded you: And to as many as walk according to this Rule, peace shall be
upon them, and upon the Israel of God.

Having thus opened this Duty, take these few Directions among the many that
might be given.

1. Let the Spirit of Christ be your guide and principle: I am speaking unto
such as have the Spirit of Christ: Now if you consult that, Ezekiel. 36.27. you
shall find that the Lord promises his People, that he will put his Spirit
within them: and to what purpose? viz. both to incline, enable, and guide them
to walk in his Statutes, and to observe his Commandments to do them. There is
no entering into the Way of the Lord, but by the Spirit, Joh. 3.3. we all
naturally being gone astray, wander from the way of the Lord, and it is the
Spirit only that can, and does reduce men into this way; and the best being but
lame, and having not only a principle of halting in, but declining from it,
there is no walking in this Way, but by the assistance and guidance of the
Spirit. Let therefore the Spirit of God be your guide; it is promised, that he
shall lead you into all Truth, John 16.13. Let the Spirit be your principle:
walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.16. then you shall not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh; but shall keep the Way of the Lord.

2. Make the Word of God your Rule. I have heretofore, from that John 6.39. and
1 Timothy 3.15. and several other places, cleared to you, that it is given of God
for this end, to be the Rule both for Faith and Practice. Keep therefore unto
this, and by no means depart from this, if you would keep the Way of the Lord.
Here you have the Lord revealing his Way, and that clearly and plainly, so that
the most simple, that apply themselves to it, may understand it: the Scriptures
are a perfect and a constant Rule: Therefore, as in that Isa. 8.20. To the Law
and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to this Word, it is because
there is no Light in them. There are some that make the Light within, their
Rule, and that in opposition to the Word: but the Light in such is Darkness;
for if they speak not according to this Word (if it be but diverse from,
though not directly opposite unto it) then there is no light in them. Indeed
the Light within, that is, Conscience enlightened, is a Rule; but it is Regula
Regulata, a Ruled Rule: There is Regula Regulans, and Regula Regulata, A Ruling
Rule, and a Ruled Rule: The former is a Rule to the latter, by which it is to
be tried and approved: The Word of God is a ruling Rule; and Conscience is a
ruled Rule, which is to be obeyed, as far as it speaks according to the Word,
and no further. If therefore you would keep the Way of the Lord, do not despise
Conscience; do not neglect the Light within; but make it not thy Rule: make the
Word of God thy Rule; admit not of any thing that is belonging to the Way of
the Lord, that is not grounded upon, or not warranted by his Word. If you would
keep the Way of the Lord, hold fast to what is written, stick to the Word.

That saying of Austin is famous;

Sive de Christo, sive de Ecclesia, sive de quacunque alia re non dico si nos
sed si Angelus de caelo vobis annunciaverit praeterquam quod in Scripturis
accipistes, Anathema sit: Not to say, If we, but if an Angel from Heaven shall
preach any thing of Christ, or of the Church, or of any other thing besides
what ye have received in the Scriptures, let him be accursed: Like to that,
Gal. 1.8, 9. The Word is the heavenly compass whereby we may be directed to
steer our course aright to the Haven of happiness: Keep you to the Word, while
one says, this is the way, and another that: Try all things by the Rule of the
Word, and make that your Rule to walk by. Hence, when Paul was taking his leave
of the Church at Ephesus, in that Acts 20. In his Farewel-Sermon, that after
his departure, they might keep the Way of the Lord: you may read, what he
commends to them, verse. 32. And now Brethren, I commend you to God, and the
Word of his Grace, which is able to build you up, and give you an Inheritance
among those that are sanctified: He recommends the Word of God to them. So,
Beloved, now that I may no more speak to you from this place, for the teaching
of you the right and the good Way, I recommend to you the Word of the Lord;
which will be a Light to your feet, and a Lanthorn to your Paths, to guide you
in the Way of the Lord, till you attain the end of your Faith, the Salvation of
your Souls. What knowledge I have of the Way of the Lord, what I have taught
you of the Way of the Lord, I have been taught by the Spirit of the Lord,
through the Word: and though you want the great help of a plain, powerful, and
faithful Ministry, for the future, yet let not those that are sincere, in
desiring to walk in the Way of the Lord, be discouraged by those who would
make them believe, that the Word is hard to be understood: for that, as it is
more from malignity in us, than difficulty in the Scriptures, that the most do
not understand them; so they are easy to be understood by them that sincerely
endeavor: it being not only most plain and clear in teaching the Way of the
Lord, but also appointed to enlighten the eyes, and make wise the simple, Psalm.
19.7, 8. Yea, the entrance of it gives Light: it gives understanding to the
simple, Psalm. 119.130. And how weak and simple soever any of the Saints may be
in worldly matters, and in the Worlds account, yet of them all is that spoken,
1 John 2.27. But the Anointing which ye have received of Him, abides in you,
and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you
of all things, and is truth, and is no lie; and even as it has taught you, ye
shall abide in Him. Though they corrupt and pervert this Text, that make use of
it to the disanulling of all Ministerial teaching; for if John had meant so, to
what purpose did he write this Epistle? yet when God depriveth us of this help,
this Scripture affords support and comfort to the Saints, that by the Spirit in
them, they shall be enabled to understand what he teaches in the Word, so as
to abide in the Lord and in his Way, as they have been taught.

Having then the Spirit for your principle and guide, let the Word be your
Rule, and you shall keep the Way of the Lord; according to that promise, Isa.
35.8. The way faring-men, though fools, shall not err therein.

3. Let the example of Christ be your pattern, that you may keep the Way of the
Lord; set this copy always before you. He always kept the Way of the Lord: as
he came down from Heaven to do the Will of his Father, John 6.38. so he did
always those things that did please him, John 8.29. He never departed in the
least from the Way of the Lord: He knew no sin, neither was guile found in his
mouth. If then you would keep the Way of the Lord, learn of him, follow him,
walk even as he walked: Indeed in the things that are proper to Christ, as God,
or as Mediator, therein he is not to be imitated by us; but in the things that
he did, or suffered as man, he left us an example or pattern, that we should
follow his steps, 2 Pet. 2.21. Hence that exhortation of his, Mat. 11.29. Learn
of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart. That then you may be directed as well
as encouraged to keep the Way of the Lord; look to Jesus, and walk as you have
him for an example. Indeed the Apostle exhorts to walk, as you have Him for an
example, Phil. 3.17. But knowing that he could give them but an imperfect copy,
he exhorts in that, 1 Cor. 11.1. Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of
Christ: It may be of good use to us, to mind the Examples of the Apostles and
faithful Ministers of the Gospel, that have walked on in the Way of the Lord
before us: But forasmuch as there is none of them, even Peter himself, but went
awry more or less: Therefore make the example of Christ your pattern. Time will
not permit to prosecute this at large: I shall only offer some few particulars
from the example of Christ to you, such as may be most seasonable to further
you in keeping the Way of the Lord.

1. It was the work and business of the Lord Jesus Christ to do the Will of
his Father, to do what pleased him. As he came down from Heaven to do his
Fathers Will, as you before heard from John 6.68. so he made it his work and
business. To this purpose is that, Luke 2.49. How is it that ye sought me? wist
ye not that I must be about my Fathers business? with that John 4.34. Jesus
says unto them, My meat is to do the Will of him that sent me, and to finish
his work. If then you will keep the Way of the Lord herein, be ye followers of
Christ; let it be your work and business to do the Will of the Lord, and to
walk in all well-pleasing before him: Let the Exhortation be in the words of
the Apostle, 1 These. 4.1. Furthermore, then we beseech you Brethren, and exhort
you, That as you have received of us how you ought to walk and to please God,
so ye would abound more and more.

2. It was the practice of the Lord Jesus Christ, to look on all the sufferings
that came upon him, as coming from the hand of his Father in accomplishment of
his Word, and therefore quietly to submit to them. To this purpose is it that
he tells Pilate in John 19.11. Thou could have no power at all against me,
except it were given thee from above; He looks beyond Pilate to him that was
above. So John 18.11. The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink
it? He over looks the instruments, and looks on his sufferings, as a cup put
into his hand by his Father: And as he observed the hand of his Father in the
sufferings that came upon him, so he takes notice that they are in
accomplishment of Scripture, Mat. 26.53, 54. Think thou that I could not now
pray to my Father; and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of
Angels? but how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?
and he takes notice that the Scriprure had foretold that thus it must be, and
that he must suffer, and enter into glory, as he clears it in that of Luke
24.25, 26. Therefore though he prayed, if it be possible, as Matthew has it;
and, if thou be willing, let this Cup pass from me, as Luke has it; yet he
quietly submits to his Fathers Will, with a, Not my will, but thine be done.
And as Mat. 26.42. If this cup may not pass away, except I drink it, let thy
will be done. Thus you see how by looking to the Fathers hand, he willingly
submits to what sufferings came upon him. That you may keep the Way of the Lord
in the midst of all the sufferings you are like to meet with, herein following
the Lord Jesus Christ, eying the hand of your gracious Father in all the
sufferings that come upon you, of what nature soever, and by whomsoever
inflicted; and whatever may be the ends of those by whom you suffer, yet that
they are all ordered by him in accomplishment of his Word. Do ye not believe
this? I know that ye do believe it by Faith; therefore improve it for the
quieting of your hearts in all your sufferings. This is that the Apostle
presses the Saints unto in the 12th of the Hebrews, where he takes for
granted, that all kind of sufferings, (more especially such as come upon us by
the contradiction of sinners) are fatherly corrections from the Lord, and so in
accomplishment of the Word of God, according unto that, Psalm. 89.30, 31. and
therefore humbly to be submitted to: so Heb. 12.9, 10. Furthermore, we have had
fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we
not much rather be in subjection to the Father of spirits, and live? for they
verily for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure; but he for our
profit, that we may be partakers of his Holiness. Seeing therefore whatsoever
befalls you in the Way of the Lord, is by your Father's ordering in
accomplishment of his Word for your profit, that ye may be partakers of his
Holiness: submit your selves to him, eye your Fathers hand and end, and be
quiet.

3. It was the practice of Jesus Christ in his state of humiliation, to give
unto Civil Magistrates and Rulers what was their due, yea to forgo somewhat of
his Civil Right rather than to offend them: For giving unto Civil Magistrates
their due, notable is that of Mat. 22.21. Render therefore unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's. And as he
taught them, so he practiced himself; for he was not of those who say and do
not, but his practice was always conformable to his Doctrine: When therefore
they that received Tribute-money at Capernaum, came and demanded of him; he
will rather recede from his Civil Liberty than offend them, Mat. 17.25, 26, 27.
Now go ye and do likewise. If ye will keep the Way of the Lord, give unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, be subject unto the King and all that are
in Authority: Let the exhortation be that, 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake. What is here meant by Ordinance of
man, is clear from what follows, whether to the King as supreme, or unto
Governors, etc. Be ye therefore subject, Saints, not only for wrath, but for
Conscience sake, for the Lord's sake; and as Romans 13.7. Render to every one
their due; Tribute to whom Tribute, Custom to whom Custom is due, etc. Such
subjection to Magistrates as thwarteth not our obedience unto God, lies within
the Way of the Lord: Yield therefore active obedience unto the King, as far as
Conscience toward God will give leave: Fear God and honor the King, 1 Pet.
2.17. Give all that honor to the King that is consistent with the true Fear of
God. Let nothing but Conscience toward God hinder you at any time from
yielding active obedience to all the King's Laws.

And here Beloved, I shall take occasion to open my heart sincerely to you. You
know what is required of me if I will continue a public Minister in this
Kingdom: I hope no sober persons can think me such a humerous perverse
Phanatick as to throw away my Maintenance, much less my Ministerial Capacity
(which is much more dear to me than Livelihood, yea than Life) out of a proud
humor and vainglorious fancy. In brief therefore, as I shall answer it before
the great God the searcher of all hearts, and the righteous Judge, did not
Conscience toward God forbid me, I would willingly and readily do all that the
Act requires. But seeing I cannot declare an unfeigned Assent and Consent, as
the Law requires: As from the fear of my God I dare not; so from the love you
generally have to me, I know you would not have me dissemble with God and men.
I do therefore humbly choose to submit to the Penalty, rather than by a
hypocritical conformity (for such it must be in me, if any) to dishonor my
God, wound my own Conscience, and dissemble with men; knowing assuredly that my
God has no need of my sin; And if he have any work for me in the public
Ministry, he will incline the King's heart to grant Liberty and Encouragement
therein to me, with the rest of those who desire to be faithful in preaching of
the Gospel; which that the Lord will grant, I promise my self the help of all
your prayers, who have been savoured with any spiritual blessings through my
Ministry.

4. It was the practice of Jesus Christ to be so far from making resistance by
the sword to keep himself from suffering, that he refused such help as was
offered him that way: So Mat. 26.52. Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy
sword into his place; for all they that take the sword, shall perish by the
sword, (...); it is not all that use, but all that take the sword without a
lawful call. So John 18.11. Put up thy sword into thy sheath: the Cup which my
Father will have me to drink, shall I not drink it? If you would keep the Way
of the Lord herein, follow Christ so, as not to resist those that are in
Authority, however unjustly you may suffer from them: for, 1 Pet. 2.19. This is
thank-worthy, if a man for Conscience Sake toward God endure grief, suffering
wrongfully.

5. It was the practice of Jesus Christ to be so far from avenging himself, as
to render good for evil, to forgive his enemies, to seek their good and
welfare. So in Luke 23.34. Then said Jesus, Father, forgive them, for they know
not what they do.

Thus follow Christ, according to that he teaches in Mat. 5.34. Love your
enemies; Bless them that curse you; do good to them that hate you; and pray
for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you. And what the Apostle
exhorts in Romans 12.19, 20. Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather
give place unto wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay,
says the Lord. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give
him drink, etc.

6. The Lord Jesus Christ had great compassion for poor wandering sinners, Mat.
9.36. Great love for his Saints, John 13.1. with tender pity toward them in
all their sorrows and afflictions, Isa. 63.9. Herein also be ye followers of
Christ, according to that, Col. 3.12, 13. Put on therefore as the Elect of God,
holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another; if any man
have a quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.

7. The Lord Jesus counted not his life dear, when that he was called to give
it up in bearing witness to the Truth; as you have it in that John 18.37. he
bears witness to the Truth when called to it, with the hazard of his life.

Herein follow Jesus Christ, in bearing Witness to the Truth of God, though
with the hazard of your lives, as Paul does in that, Acts 20.24. Whatever
mischief be threatened by wicked men, yet deny not, be not ashamed of the Words,
Truths, and Ways of Christ; for it is the Word of the true and faithful
Witness, which we have Mark 8.36. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me
and my words, in this adulterous and sinful Generation, of him also shall the
Son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy
Angels. And, Oh how sad, if this be thy portion! for if in that day Christ
shall be ashamed of thee, Woe be to thee for ever, thou shall be wretched and
miserable to all Eternity. But be faithful, courageous, and constant, in
confessing him, and his Ways and Truths; for he has said, Mat. 10.32.
Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess before my
Father that is in Heaven: And, Oh how comfortable, if this be thy Portion! for
if Jesus Christ confess thee at that day, Peace be to thee for ever, thou
shall be blessed and happy to all Eternity: Though therefore thy confessing of
him, be attended not only with Reproaches, and Revilings, but with Fines,
Bonds, Imprisonment, yea Death it self; yet herein follow him, in bearing
witness to the Truth, when called unto it, whatever hazard you run by it; yea
though it come to the drinking of the Cup that he drank of, and to the sealing
of your Testimony with your blood; knowing that if ye suffer with him, you
shall also reign together with him. Thus if you follow the Lord, walking in his
steps, in these and other Particulars, wherein he has given us an example, you
shall be sure to keep the Way of the Lord. And this shall suffice for the third
branch of the Direction.

4. Let the Glory of God be your End, if that you would keep the way of the
Lord. If you have sincerely entered the Way of the Lord, then the Glory of the
Lord is your last End; and if you would keep on steadily in this way, look to
the Glory of God as your main End. Though it be possible for a man that has
the Glory of God for his End, to step out of the Way of the Lord; yet it is
impossible for a man to keep the Way of the Lord, unless this be his utmost
End: Yea though it be possible for one that is right in his End, to err in this
or that particular, so as to stray from the Way of the Lord, in some lesser
matters that shall not prejudice his Salvation; yet it is impossible that such
a one should so mistake about the Substantials of this Way, as to turn aside,
and to walk totally and finally in the Way that leads to destruction, and
eternal perdition: Though the purity of the End, will not make amends for the
viciousness of the means; yet where a man is right in his End, much Error as
to the means shall be forgiven him; yea and to have the Glory of God for your
End, in all your natural and civil Actions, is the way to sanctify them, and
to inscribe Holiness to the Lord on them. Thus may the meanest actions of your
particular Callings become Religious, if they be done as to the Lord in
obedience to his Command, and with respect to his Glory: Therefore as the
Apostle has it, 1 Cor. 10.32. Whether you eat or drink, or whatever ye do, do
all to the Glory of God: Make this your scope, and it will be of special use to
guide you when the way is doubtful, being indeed propounded by the Apostle for
that end: As a man that is traveling on Salisbury Plain toward the City; he
comes sometimes where there is no beaten paths, and sometimes where two or three
ways meet; now to keep his eye on the City, is the ready course to keep him in
the right way: So if a man were to draw a straight Line to such a Point, and
has not a Rule to draw by, his readiest way is to keep his eye upon the Point.
So when your way is doubtful, and you know not which way to take, take that
which is most for the Glory of God: where you see not your Rule, keep your eye
on the Glory of God, and it will be of choice use to keep you straight in the
Way of the Lord. And so much for the first branch of the Exhortation.

2. Be exhorted to wait on the Lord, for without this you will not long keep
the Way of the Lord; there are such troubles, distresses and tribulations that
attend the Way of the Lord, that as the Apostle has it, Heb. 10.36. Ye have
need of Patience, that after ye have done the will of God, you may inherit the
Promise. So say I, you have need of waiting, that you may keep the Way of the
Lord, and continue therein to the end.

Wherein the Nature of this Duty lies, and what Encouragements there are to it
in the worst of times, I have lately shown you, when I preached on that, Lam.
3.26. It is good that a man hope, and wait quietly for the Salvation of the
Lord. Whence I observed, That however it go with the people of God, it is good,
it is best for them to hope, and wait quietly for the Salvation of the Lord. I
shall therefore only recommend this Duty to you, as the work of this dark Day,
and conclude with that of our Savior, Luke 12.35, etc. And let your Loins be
girded about, and your Lights burning, and ye your selves like to men that wait
for their Lord when he will return from the Wedding; that when he comes and
knocks, they may open to him immediately. Blessed are those Servants, whom
the Lord when he comes shall find watching. Yea, Keep the Way of the Lord, and
wait on him: For, as verse. 42, 43. Who then is that faithful and wise Steward,
whom his Lord shall make Ruler over his Household, to give them their Portion of
meat in due season. Blessed is that Servant, whom the Lord when he comes shall
find so doing.

FINIS.

