JUST WEIGHTS AND MEASURES: That is, The present STATE of RELIGION Weighed in
the BALANCE, and Measured by the STANDARD of the SANCTUARY, According to the
Opinion of HERBERT THORNDIKE.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for J. Martin, J. Allestry, and T. Dicas, and are to
be sold at the sign of the Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1662.

TO ALL Christian Readers.
I Have heard that, in the time of our Late Troubles, the Presbyterians were
put to nonplus by the Fanatickes; demanding of them a ground in the Scripture,
for a National Church. I let pass that mistake of both parties, which the term
of National involveth. For, the state of the Question must needs concern that
part of the Church, which every respective Sovereignty contains. Now, one
Sovereignty may contain several Nations: As there are two in this Kingdom of
England. But we need not marvel, that they could give no answer to a demand,
which their own Title allowed them no ground to answer. Had they believed the,
Creed (which they thrust out of the Church) and that Article of it, which
professes one Catholic Church, they might have had an answer to it; But such
a one, as would have destroyed the pretense of their Presbyteries. For, were
the Unity of the Church, which that Article professes, merely Invisible, with
God, by Communion in his Spirit, the Usurpers of Sovereign Power might make
Presbyteries Churches, by as good a Title, as that by which they make
themselves Sovereigns. But the Unity which that Article professes is Visible;
with that Church, which is, or ought to be always one and the same, from our
Lord and his Apostles; (by Communion in the Offices of Gods Service, especially
the Eucharist) to distinguish it from Haeresies and Schisms, whom the Title of
Catholic visibly distinguishes from the Church. That Title the Presbyteries
cannot pretend to; because it is as visible, that their authority is derived
from the Long Parliament, and their own consent, as it is visible, that the
authority of the Whole Church is derived from our Lord and his Apostles.

For, the Unity of the Church is not derived from Constantine, but from our
Lord and his Apostles, and the Law imposed by them upon all Christians, to
maintain Communion among themselves, upon those terms, which the Common
Christianity, supposed in the said Communion, may allow; Whereby the Church is
Visible, by being Catholic. It is manifest by what Title, and therefore, upon
what terms, Constantine first in the Empire, and after him all Christian Powers
in their respective Sovereignties, do make Religion a Law to their Subjects.
For, being to be baptized, and made a member of the Church, by the act of the
Church; If all Christians, by their Baptism, do consecrate themselves to the
service of God in his Church, then must he also, by being baptized, consecrate
the Power of the Empire to the maintenance of that Christianity into which he
was baptized; part whereof, is the Unity of the Catholic Church. And, as the
effect of this obligation is visible, in bringing the World into the Church; So
is it a visible advantage for the Church, that the profession thereof is a Law
to Christian States, by the rewards and penalties, whereby it is inacted. For,
when all are constrained to be Christians, according to the Laws of the Land,
so much the more will be Christians, according to the Laws of God, and of his
Church. And as it is evident that, without such Laws, Unity in Religion will
not prevail in the World, which cannot prevail with the help of them: No less
manifest is it, that, without Unity, Christianity will soon come to nothing. He
that considers the decay, which a little time of disunion has visibly made, in
the Christianity of this Kingdom, is past cure by reasoning, if he question
this consequence.

This is that Principle, which must justify the Reformation which we profess,
by maintaining the due bounds, and terms, and measure of it. This is that,
which must reunite the parties, which hitherto are at distance, if we will
have them united, to the purpose of saving souls, out of satisfaction in the
Laws which they are to execute; not only to the purpose of public peace, for
hope or fear of the rewards and penalties, which they are inacted with. This is
that which must secure the Conscience of the Kingdom, that those rewards and
penalties will be allowed, as for the service of God, at the great day of
judgment. And, how much this concerns the present Case, now that Religion is to
be reestablished, by the Law of the Land; it is manifest enough. Let the
Presbyterians submit to the due terms, upon which, the Fanatics may be
acknowleged members of this Church; as acknowleging the Covenant of Baptism,
for the condition of holding the State of Gods Grace; and the Recusants shall
stand bound to own the Faith of this Church, for the Faith of the Catholic
Church. Let the Laws of this Church be Ruled by the Laws of the Catholic
Church, in those times, which, he that owneth one Catholic Church from the
beginning, cannot disown; and all shall appear bound to be of this Church, as
visibly the same Church with that which was from the beginning. For, the Church
is Visible by the Laws of it. And therefore, if the Laws be the same, the
Church is visibly the same: And all that are not of it, shall be evidently
liable to such penalties, as belong to them that disobey those Laws of their
Country, which the common Christianity requires.

Let no man then marvel, that being, settled in this opinion, upon all the
consideration, which our long distractions have allowed me time to take; I am
not afraid to publish this brief view of it; referring my self, for proof of
the particulars, to that which I have published heretofore. Let it not seem
strange, that I deliver it, some times, with that resolution and assurance,
which seems to admit no contradiction to it. For, though the Faith of Gods
Church be always the same; yet I profess of my self, that the Laws of this
Church are to be Ruled by the Laws of the primitive Church; with that
allowance, which the difference of the present time, and that state of
Christianity which it has introduced, from that which then was, may require.
And, by professing this, I do really, (and not only for a formality) submit my
self to the authority of Superiors, as well as to the judgment and censure of
every Christian. For, how far the present times are capable of those Rules,
which all times are to go by, that would be one and the same Church, with that
which was from the beginning; I take not upon me to judge, as belonging to the
account of Superiors. Nay, before I have done, you shall see, I compromise my
Opinion it self, (and not only my own proceeding, according, or not contrary to
it) to the authority of Superiors, and to better judgment. And therefore, let
it be lawful to plead for the improving of the Laws of this Church, so long as
it is lawful to plead for the abolishing of the Laws of this Kingdom. For, as
it is manifest, that our Ecclesiastical Laws are the Laws of the Kingdom: So
would I not open my mouth for improving them, were it not to make them the Laws
of Gods only true Church.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. IF the Church of Rome be a true Church, Reformation is the restoring
of that which has been. If the Pope be Antichrist, and the Papists Idolaters,
the Church of Rome no true Church. If no Visible Church, then no sin of
Schism. Antichrist may be an Idolater, but cannot be the Head of a Church.
Though it were Idolatry to worship the Host, yet, to kneel at the Communion
would be Holy. That which the Church of Rome professes is not Idolatry, if it
be a true Church. They that separate from the Church of Rome as Idolaters are
thereby Schismatics before God. page 2 CHAP. II. The supposition of Antichrist
and Idolatry prejudicial to the truth. The supposition of one Visible Church
the ground of Communion, as well within the Reformation, as in the whole
Church. What the Romish Missionaries get by the charge of Haeresie, and the
pretense of Infallibility. What we get by the* charge of Idolatry and
Antichrist. Immoderate charges vain on both sides. The charge of Schism on
both sides moderate, as to the Church. The sin of Schism, as to God, horrible.
The Schism of the Donatists, in charging the Catholics to be Apostates. The
sad consequences of that Schism. 8 CHAP. III. They that hold by One Visible
Church are to own the consequences of it. Nothing to be changed, but upon that
ground. We cannot be the same Church with that which was, otherwise. Though
that which shall be settled will find advocates. Civil Laws of Religion to be
changed, till this Rule be attained. The beginning and rise of our
differences. The present state of them. What terms of agreement, with the
Presbyterians, we ought to allow. The Laws of the Primitive Church the
Standard of all change. Our present Case is ^ot the Case of our Forefathers.
The Acts of Henry VIII. no Acts of our Forefathers in Religion. Imperfection of
Laws, in Religion, no imputation to our Forefathers. The pretense of tender
Consciences is no Rule. It serves Papists, as well as Puritans. 15 CHAP. IV.
Erastians can acknowledge no Visible Church founded by God. Their opinion
inableth Sovereigns to persecute Gods truth by Gods Law. Persecuting the truth
is the use of a Power which no Sovereign can have. If any Sovereign may punish
for the Religion which he professes, then are Subjects bound to renounce
Christ, if the Sovereign command it. No offense, but charity, in declaring the
true ground of reconcilement, or punishment. Why it ought to be declared. The
declaring of it no offense to Superiors. 24 CHAP. V. We have the same evidence
for the Visible Unity of the Church, as for the truth of the Scriptures. The
Church founded upon the Power of the Keys. The Unity of the Church Visible by
the Laws of it. The Law which endoweth the Church with consecrated Goods. How
the Unity of the Church is signified by the Scriptures. How in the Old
Testament. 29 CHAP. VI. How far the Scriptures are clear to be understood, of
themselves. Tradition limiteth the sense of the Scripture. Difference between
the Tradition of Faith and Ritual Traditions. The difference between Haeresie
and Schism. The dependence of Churches evidenceth the Unity of the Whole
Church. The form of this dependence throughout the Roman Empire. No exception
to be made to it, for the British Church. Episcopacy, by this form, inviolable
in all Opinions; And the Church a standing Synod. The Church Visible by
dis^^^ing H^reticks and Schismatics. The breaches that have come to pas^
evidence the same. 35 CHAP. VII. Reformation to be bounded by that wherein the
Visible Church agrees. No change, without regard to the Rules of the Catholic
Church. Regular authority in the Church of Rome the means of Unity; absolute,
of Schisms. How we are visibly one with the only Church of God, reforming
without the Church of Rome. 45 CHAP VIII. What means God has provided private
Christians to discern the true Church. The duty of all Estates, for the
Re-uniting of Schism. The ground and extent of Secular Power in Church Matters.
How the conscience of Sovereign Power is discharged, maintaining the Church. 49
CHAP. IX. Difficulty in receiving the Fanatics into this Church. How their
Positions destroy the Faith. Absolute Predestination to Glory destructive to
Christianity. Justifying Faith includes the profession of Christianity. The
Nature of Faith, according to the Scriptures, shows the same. So does the
state of that Question which St. Paul disputes. The conse^^ of the Church
^erein; with the ground of it. The sense of this Church. 54 CHAP. X. Why
Justifying Faith is not trust in God through Christ. Of Justification according
to the Council of Trent. Of Justification according to Socinus. Wherein his
H^resie consists. How the misunderstanding of Satisfaction and Imputation
occasioned it. Upon what grounds he is to be refuted. The helps of Grace
granted i^ consideration of Christ's obedien^^. And therefore, they infer
Original Sin, by the fall of Adam. Wherein the Covenant of Grace consists.
That the state of Grace is forfeited by heinous sin. The danger of the contrary
Position according to the ground of it. 63 CHAP. XI. What Law of God it is,
that may be fulfilled by a Christian. Of doing more then Gods Law requires.
Whether our Lord gave a New Law, or not. Of the Satisfaction and Merit of
Christian Works. Original Sin is not Adams sin imputed to his Posterity.
Wherein Original Sin consists. What Original Righteousness signifies. What
good the Unregenerate are able to do by the Law of Nature. 73 CHAP. XII. Upon
what terms, that which is possible may become future. The difference between
necessity antecedent and consequent. The difference between freedom from
necessity and from bondage. Freedom from necessity always requires
indetermination, not always indifference. The Object determines the Will,
saving the freedom of it. Whence, the certainty of future contingencies
arises. How this appears in the Scriptures. God no cause of sin, according to
the Scriptures. Concerning the middle knowledge of God. 80 CHAP. XIII. No
absolute Predestination to Glory. Predestination to Grace, absolute. How Glory
is the end of Grace. In what terms the Faith of the Church stands, as
concerning this point. 86 CHAP. XIV. Duty of a Christian as a Christian, and as
a Member of the Church. How Anabaptists deny the Faith; how they are to be
reconciled with the Church. Their Error, in rebaptizing for want of dipping.
What concerns Salvation, in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. How the Elements
are consecrated into the body and blood of Christ, according to Gregory
Nyssene. The consequence hereof, in the Errors concerning the Eucharist. How
the Eucharist a Sacrifice, and yet no ground for private Masses. The Eucharist,
not the Sermon, the Chief Office of Gods service. 91 CHAP. XV. The ground that
determines the Form of our Service. The Offices, of which the Service is to
consist. Of the Use of the Psalms. Of reading the Scriptures commonly called
Apocrypha. What Preaching it is that the Scripture commends. There may be
Preaching without Sermons, and Sermons without Preaching. The difference
between the second Service in the Ancient Church, and our Communion Service.
The general Preface, and the Prayers of the Church at the Eucharist. The Prayer
of Oblation instituted by St. Paul; and the matter of it. The Lords Prayer at
the Eucharist. The place for the Common Prayers. 97 CHAP. XVI. Difference in
the state of Souls departed in Grace, before Judgment. The ancient Church
never prayed to remove them out of Purgatory. To what purpose they were
remembered at the Eucharist. The Saints departed pray for the Militant Church.
Of prayers to the Saints departed. No Common Prayer in the Pulpit by Gift; but
in a set form, at the Communion Table. Apostolical Graces subject to Order. Of
the Graces of the Spirit in St. Paul, and the Original of Litanies. The Prayers
of the Eucharist how prescribed by the Apostles. Prayers of the Reformed
Churches in the Pulpit; but by a form. The effect of the Long Parliament
Prayers by the Spirit. 105 CHAP. XVII. The Lords Day observed by the Authority
of the Church. Therefore other Festivals, and times of Fasting, are to be
observed. How places and persons become qualified for Gods Service. Preaching
not convertible with Ministering the Sacraments. Times, places, persons, and
things, cons^crated to Gods Service, under the Gospel. C^re^o^ie^ signifying by
institution n^^^ssary in Gods Service. What kind of signification requisite.
Not enough for the Presbyterians to allow Cer^monies. 112 CHAP. XVIII. Offices
which the Fathers call Sacraments, for their Ceremonies. Why the Bishop only
Confirms. The effect of Ordination requires Ceremony in gi^ing it. Why the
Ordinations of our Presbyters are void. The necessity of Penanc^. The
observation of Lent, and the Use of it. The necessity of private Penance, for
the cure of secret sin. Of anointing the sick, according to St. James. Marriage
of Christians not to ^ee Ruled by Moses Law. Instituted Ceremonies are
Sacraments with the Fathers. The Ceremonies of these Offices justify
Instituted Ceremonies. 118 CHAP. XIX. The worship of the Host, in the Papacy,
is not Idolatry. Christianity would sanctify kneeling at the Eucharist, though
it were. What Images the second Commandment forbids. Reverencing of Images
in Churches is not Idolatry. Of honoring Images, and of having them in
Churches. Mutual forbearance, which St. Paul enjoyneth the Romans, not enjoined
elsewhere. Tender consciences ar^ to submit to Superiors. 125 CHAP. XX. The
Declaration of V. Eliz. enableth Recusants to take the Oath of Supremacy. What
further ambiguity that Oath involveth. What scandal, the taking of it in the
true sense ministers. That this Oath ought to be enlarged, to all pretenses
in Religion, that abridge Allegiance. The extent of secular Power in Reforming
the Church. 131 CHAP. XXI. The pretense of Infallibility* mak^s* the breac^
unr^concileable. So does the pretense of perspicuity in the Scripture. The
Trial must suppose the Catholic Church. The Fanatics further from the truth
of Christianity, then the Church of Rome. The consequence of their principle
worse then that of Infallibility. The point of Truth in the middle between
both. How s^lvation is concerned in the matter of Free Will and Grace. Salvation
concerned in the Sacraments upon the same terms. The abuses of the Church of
Rome in the five Sacraments. The Grace of Ordination. The Reformation
pretended, no less abuse, on the other side. The point of Reformation in the
mean between both. The Superstitions of the Church of Rome. The Superstitions
of the P^ritans. Why the Pope cannot be Antichrist. How it is just to Reform
without the Sea of Rome. 136 CHAP. XXII. The present State of the Question
concerning our Service, The Reformation pretended, abominable. Such Preaching
and Praying as is usual, a hindrance of salvation, rather then the means to it.
What Order of Service, the continual Communion will require. What form of
Instruction this Order will require. Of that which goes before the Preface, in
our* Communion Service. of the Prefaces, and the Prayer of Consecration. Of the
Prayer of Oblalation, and the place of it. Of the Comm^^^oration of the dead,
in particular. Why the Communion Service at the Communion Table, when no
Eucharist. A secondary Proposition, according to present Law. 150 CHAP. XXIII.
How the Law distinguishes Moral Precepts from Positive. How the spiritual sense
of the Decalogue concerns Christians: The meaning of the First Commandment, in
this sense. The extent of the Second Commandment. Of the Third Commandment.
What the sanctifying of the Sabbath signifies. The meaning of the Fifth, as to
Christians. The meaning of the five last, according to Christianity. 164 CHAP.
XXIV. That no Clergy man ought to be of more Dioceses then one. Of inferior
Orders in the Clergy, and their Offices. The conversation of the Clergy, and
the use of Church goods. The ground for promotions to higher degrees. The
Universities may be serviceable to some part of this Discipline. Reasons for
it. Public fame of sin to b^e purged by Ecclesiastical process. Sinners
convict by Law not to communicate before Penance. The Cure of notorious sin the
Bishops Office. The Church not Reformed without restoring Penance, Public or
Private. What means there is left, for the restoring of it. 172 CHAP. XXV. Gods
mercies and judgments require the perfecting of the Reformation which we
profess. The restoring of the Ecclesiastical Laws is not the restoring of the
Church. Yet are we not, therefore, chargeable with Schism, by the Church of
Rome. What Schism destroys the Salvation of what persons; by instances, in the
most notable Schisms. Difficulty of Salvation on both sides, the Reformation
remaining unperfect. An instance hereof, in the Cure of souls departing, by the
Order in force. A Supplication for a full Debate of all matters in difference.
The ground of Resolution, one Catholic Church, the first and chief point of
the Debate. The consequence of it, in Uniting the Reformed Churches. An
instance, in the having of Images in Churches. An Objection for the Church of
Rome answered. That which excuses the Reformed Churches excuses not our
Schismatics. 184 A Letter concerning the present State of Religion amongst us.
Under the Act of Establishment, prosecuted by the Ordinances constituting the
Triers, and Commissioners for ejecting of Scandalous Ministers. 207 The due Way
of composing the differences on* Foot, preserving the Church; According to the
Opinion of Herbert Thornedike. 223
JUST Weights and Measures.
CHAP. I.
If the Church of Rome be a true Church, Reformation is the restoring of that
which has been. If the Pope be Antichrist, and the Papists Idolaters, the
Church of Rome no true Church. If no Visible Church, then no sin of Schism.
Antichrist may be an Idolater, but cannot be the Head of a Church. Though it
were Idolatry to worship the Host, yet, to kneel at the Communion would be
Holy. That which the Church of Rome professes is not Idolatry, if it be a
true Church. They that separate from the Church of Rome as Idolaters are
thereby Schismatickes before God.

SInce the time that I could understand the Dispute about If the Church of Rome
be a true Church, Reformation is the restoring of that which has been.
Religion, when it was demanded, on the behalf of the Church of Rome; Where was
your Church before Luthers time? The Answer has always been; Even where it is
now. The answer was; That it is the same Church that it was; A Church which was
sick, and is now cured; Which was corrupted, and now is cleared of her
Corruptions. This answer supposes, that the Church of Rome was a true Church,
when that Change, which we call Reformation, was made. And therefore grants,
(as it has always been granted) that so it is at present. For it cannot be
questioned, that it is the same Church now which then it was; Though the
Council of Trent may have increased the corruption of it. And upon these terms,
all dispute of choice in Religion comes to trial upon this issue; Whether the
change that is made has restored that which was in the beginning, or not. An
issue not to be tried, but by going to trial, upon the particulars in which the
change consists.

But are we all content to go to trial upon this issue? It If the Pope be
Antichrist, and the Papists Idolaters, the Church of Rome no true Church.
were good that we did understand one another, whether we be agreed upon it
or not. For if we be, then may we expect to build Solomon's Temple, without
any noise If not, we shall be the Builders of Babel; We shall never
understand one another Language. For, of a truth, there is another reason
alleged for the breach between us and the Church of Rome; to wit, that the Pope
is Antichrist, and the Papists Idolaters. If this pretense be true, we need
not seek farther for the reason of the distance. We are to own the Separation
for our own Act, and to glory in it. For it is done by Gods express Command;
Come out of her my People; As to the Jews, in the Captivity of Babylon, so to
the Christians, in the Apocalypse; If it be the Church of Rome that Babylon
there signifies. But if this plea be good, it may be inconsistent with that
which the former plea supposes. And though we cannot go to trial upon the
truth of it, without going to trial upon the particulars in difference; Yet it
is necessary to provide, that we contradict not our selves. It is necessary
also to consider the importance and consequence of it; Whether the reason of
the distance amount to so heavy a charge or not. It is necessary, that we
understand our selves, whether we admit the consequence of our own supposition
or not.

And indeed it concerns us to the purpose. We all believe If ^o ^isible
Church, th^n no sin of Schism^
one Catholic Church, for an Article of our Creed, upon which the hope of our
Common Salvation hangs. If any man be allowed to say, I believe it not; I
must be allowed to say; I must not be of that Church in which he is allowed
^o say it. It were good to understand, Whether the Unity of the Church, (out of
which no man is saved) be the Visible Unity of those that communicate in the
Offices of Gods Service; Or whether it be enough, that, being invisibly United
to Christ, they are invisibly United to one another by Christ. For if the
Visible Unity of the Church be not founded by God, then is there no crime of
Schism in breaking that Unity; But only of Heresy, in breaking it upon an
error in the Faith. If there be such an Unity; And therefore such a crime in
breaking it; Care would be had, that we ground not our selves, in this state
of Separation, upon that which will render us accessory to it.

Now, I do not doubt, that whosoever has gone about, or Antichrist may be an
Idolater, but cannot be the Head of a Church.
shall go about to persuade the Jews, that he is the Christ whom they
expect, must needs, ipso facto, be Antichrist. For the word signifies no more
than one that pretends to be Christ, in opposition to the true Christ. And
therefore to Christians, who believe in the true Christ, a false Christ and an
Antichrist are both one. And S. John, 1 John II. 18, 22. IV. 3. II John 7.
signifies nothing else by that name, but those whom our Savior calls false
Christ's Mat. XXIV. 24. Mark XIII. 22. And therefore, he that pretends to be
such a Prophet and a Prince, as the Jews expected that their Christ should
be, in opposition to the true Christ in whom Christians believe; As he is a
false Christ, so is he Antichrist. For, there is no other mention of
Antichrist in all the Scriptures, but this. Other Scriptures are only supposed
to speak of Antichrist. But presumption, without evidence, must not be taken
for truth. I do not doubt then, that Mahomet is really Antichrist; Though the
Mahumetans expected no Christ. Because he is the author of a Law, which they
take for Gods Law: And of a power founded upon that Imposture; As the Jews
expect that their Christ shall restore Moses Law, and the power which God first
founded upon it. But neither can the Jews Antichrist, nor the Mahumetans
Antichrist be Idolaters, without rooting up the Alcoran, or the Law of Moses;
which was not the way to win, either the Jews, or those whom Mahomet had to do
with. Notwithstanding, I believe Manicheus was Antichrist and an Idolater both.
I believe he taught the Idolatry of the Persians, in his two Gods; the
principles, one of good, the other of evil. He pretended, indeed, to come from
Christ, as having his Spirit; And therefore sent out his twelve Apostles, as
our Lord Christ had sent his. But yet, that he brought in his own new Law
instead of Christianity, no man that knows his positions can doubt. And is not
he Antichrist, that pretends to do what Christ indeed has done? Therefore, I
deny not, that the Pope may be Antichrist, though the Papists be Idolaters.
But I do not grant, that the Pope can be Antichrist, granting the Church of
Rome to be a true Church. For, to be a ttue Church presupposes the profession
of so much Christianity, as is necessary to the salvation of all Christians.
But the salvation of no Christian can stand with the profession of a false
Christ. And therefore, granting the Pope to be Antichrist, they that own him
can be no Church. So, this plea will be inconsistent with the former, which
supposes the Church of Rome a true Church, when the Separation fell out.

As for the charge of Idolatry, it is at present alleged in Bar Though it were
Idolatry to worship the Host, yet, to kneel at the Communion would be Holy.
to the Law of this Kingdom, and the effect of it, that the Worship of the Host
in the Papacy is Idolatry; Therefore we must not receive the Communion
kneeling, if we would be commended for breaking the Brazen Serpent, with
Hezekiah. I say nothing to the consequence, though it were easy enough to say;
That the people committed Idolatry to the brazen Serpent till that very day, 2
Kings XVIII. 4. And to allege the Practice of the Catholic Church; Who, while
there was appearance of offense, did not make use of Idol Temples for Churches:
But, when the offense began to cease; As in the time of Honorius; common reason
obliged them to do it. Let them pursue the consequence of their own reason;
That is, let them mete by their own Standard; and then they must pull down all
the Churches in the Kingdom. I shall prefer the wisdom of St. Gregory of Rome,
by whom this Nation received Christianity; Ordering the Pagan Festivals of our
Ancestors, to be converted to the Assemblies of Christians. For, if
Christianity sanctify not all times, places, and gestures, that may pretend,
in common reason, to advance the service of God; Wherein differs it from
Judaisine? For in Judaisme, the day, the place, the circumstance prescribed by
the Law, sanctified that action to be the service of God, which, it had been
abominable to tender God for his service, at another time, or in another place,
or otherwise. As rest on the seventh day of the Week, dwelling in a Booth at
the Feast of Tabernacles, was the service of God, according to the Law of
Moses. But to pretend to serve God thereby at another time, had been to usurp
upon God, and his power which gave the Law. On the contrary, the service of God
according to Christianity, sanctifies all times, all places, all gestures, all
circumstances, that can pretend to express, to procure, to advance that
attention of mind, that devotion of spirit, wherewith Christians profess to
worship God, in spirit and truth. Otherwise, the Kingdom of God must consist in
making a difference of meats and drinks, in despite of St. Paul, (And, for the
same reason, of times, and places, and gestures) not for unity in the service
of God, or increase of devotion, as all reason requires; But as the Subject
matter, wherein, the service of God, according to Christianity, consists.

But I set aside this consequence; though I could not let it That which the
Church of Rome professes is not Idolatry, if it be a true Church.
pass without setting this mark upon it. The assumption who will undertake to
prove? Who will take upon him to show us, that the worship of the Host in the
Papacy is Idolatry? They who grant the Church of Rome to be a true Church, and
salvation to be had in it, and by it, may, if they see cause, spare
contradicting those that take it for granted before it be proved; But they
cannot take it for granted themselves. A Church is a company of Christians; And
all Christians profess the true Christ: And all that profess the true Christ
profess the true God; And, professing the true God, if they believe that which
they profess, they cannot honor any creature as they honor God: For they
profess that there is only one true God: And that there is infinite distance
between him and all creatures; so that they cannot esteem any creature to be
God; And therefore they cannot so honor any creature, as if it were God.
Christianity supposes the belief of one true God, and the being of the Church
supposes Christianity. It took away Idolatry, in point of Fact, which Judaisme
could not do, though it showed reason enough to take it away. And therefore,
let no man think it easy for a Church, to build up that, (either by express
Law, or by silent Custom) which, the profession upon which it is built
destroys. Let us be as careful as you please, that Idolatry, which is put
out at the great gate of the Church, get in at no backdoor of it. The true God
of Israel, and our Lord Christ, might be Idols to them that professed not one
true God. If they who profess the true Christ can be bred in such ignorance,
as not to acknowledge the difference between God and his creature, all their
Religion may come to be Idolatry in Gods sight, however the Church be obliged
to esteem it. For certainly, some Witches commit Idolatry to the Devil, though
there be Witches of all Religions. And so there may be Idolaters of all
Religions, supposing that men may act contrary to that which they profess. But
that is not the question which we have in hand, when we Dispute; Whether we
are to forsake the Church of Rome as Idolaters, or not. For it is the public
profession thereof, that we are to forsake: We are not to forsake it, for the
actions of private persons, contrary to that which they publicly profess.
Now, they which profess the only true Christ, and therefore, the only true God,
do necessarily profess to detest all Idolatry; which, the profession of
Christianity effectively rooted out of the World, wheresoever it prevailed. And
so does the Church of Rome still as seriously profess, as they who charge them
to be Idolaters. And therefore, cannot easily be convinced to profess
Idolatry. For, without expressly renouncing this profession, they cannot
expressly be Idolaters: without renouncing it by such consequence, as may
convince common reason that they contradict themselves, and renounce all of
them, that which all of them profess, they cannot be Idolaters by consequence.
And therefore, it is not easy to make it appear to common reason that they are
Idolaters; (And so, that we are to forsake them as Idolaters) because then it
must appear to common reason, that so great a part of Christendom does, by
their profession, contradict that which themselves profess. They that separate
from the Church of Rome as Idolaters are thereby Schismatickes before God.


And what will they that stand upon this plea say to me, who pretend to have
proved, that the nature of Idolatry consists in that which I have said; And
therefore, that the Papists are not, by their Common profession, Idolaters? Can
they pretend so much charity to me, as to have attempted the answering of my
Reasons, and the rectifying of my mistakes. Or will they show me who has
answered them; and so, that they need not be troubled for me? If they will not
be tied to this, would they have the Law of the Land changed, upon a
supposition which I have destroyed, and they cannot pretend to have restored?
Nay, would they have it changed to no better effect, then to make me, and all
that are satisfied with the Reasons which I have advanced, Schismatics in the
sight of God, allowing and consenting to the change that shall be made for
their sake? This were indeed an incomparable piece of charity, to purchase
peace and unity with them, at the charge of answering for all the mischiefs
which our Schism with the Church of Rome produces. For in plain terms, we
make our selves Schismatics by grounding our Reformation upon this pretense.
For on the one side, we profess the Separation to have been our intent, not a
consequence of the Reformation, by the fault of the Church of Rome, in not
complying with it. Because we give such a Reason for it, as if be true, we
cannot, without renouncing our Christianity, hold communion with those whom we
charge with it. Whereas Reformation is indeed, and always was the thing
intended. Division in the Church, which it has occasioned, is the crime of
those that refuse to come in to it, upon such terms as the common Christianity
requires. On the other side, this cause; which would be more then sufficient
to justify Separation, did it appear to be true; Charges the mischiefs of the
Schism upon those that proceed upon it, before it be as evident as the
mischiefs are, which they run into upon it. So that, should this Church
declare, that the change which we call Reformation is grounded upon this
supposition; I must then acknowledge that we are the Schismatics. For, the
cause not appearing to me, (as hitherto it has not, and I think, will never be
made to appear to me) the separation, and the mischiefs of it, must be imputed
to them that make the change. And as they who justify the Reformation by
charging the Pope to be Antichrist, and the Papists Idolaters; So, on the
other side, they who overcharge the Reformation to be Haeretickes, make
themselves thereby Schismatickes before God.

CHAP. II.
The supposition of Antichrist and Idolatry prejudicial to the truth. The
supposition of one Visible Church the ground of Communion, as well within the
Reformation, as in the whole Church. What the Romish Missionaries get by the
charge of Haeresie, and the pretense of Infallibility. What we get by the
charge of Idolatry and Antichrist. Immoderate charges vain on both sides. The
charge of Schism on both sides moderate, as to the Church. The sin of Schism,
as to God, horrible. The Schism of the Donatists, in charging the Catholics
to be Apostates. The sad consequences of that Schism.

FUrther, as I began to say before, supposing for Disputes The supposition of
Antichrist and Idolatry prejudicial to the truth.
sake, but not granting for truth, that the Pope is Antichrist, and the Papists
Idolaters; And that, thereupon, we are to have no communion with the Church of
Rome; are not the particulars to be decided by the same Reasons, (and
therefore upon the same terms) as if neither the Pope were Antichrist, nor the
Papists Idolaters? For, this being clear beyond Dispute, what do we gain by a
supposition, so impossible to be set in the light of competent evidence? Even
that which we see is come to pass; An unchristian, rather then an unreasonable
apprehension; That, the further we run from them, the nearer we shall come to
the truth of Christianity. Whereas, we are to take no less heed, that we run
not beyond the Church of God; The Unity whereof, if it be indeed ordained by
God, is ordained to no other purpose, then to render the true bounds of
Christianity (that is, the means of salvation) visible to all Christians. For,
the truth of the particulars in difference stands where it would stand, whether
the Pope be Antichrist, and the Papists Idolaters, or not. But, they that
believe them so, must needs thereupon incline to believe them further from the
truth, then indeed they will appear to be, if it be not true. And therefore
must needs have a hand in the Schism, in departing further from them then they
ought to do. He that takes the Pope for Antichrist, and the Papists for
Idolaters, can never weigh by his own Weights, and mete by his own Measures,
till he hate Papists worse then Jews or Mahumetans, who cannot be Idolaters;
which some, but few of them, profess to do. Is not he, that runs from Rome with
this Opinion, in danger to forget the Proverb; Ita fugias ne praeter casam; and
run by the door of Gods Church?

Now, suppose we can have no Communion with the Church The supposition of one
Visible Church the ground of Communion, as well within the Reformation, as in
the whole Church.
of Rome, because it appears that the Pope is Antichrist, and the Papists
Idolaters; Yet ought we to hold Communion with all Christendom besides, that
own not Antichrist, nor his Idolatries. I say, if the Visible Unity of the
Church appear to be the Ordinance of God; in the next place to holding the
truth of Christianity, we shall stand obliged to hold Communion with the rest
of the Church. But this Communion cannot be maintained, without an express
profession, that the Visible Unity of the Church is the express will of God,
and his Ordinance; though the will of man render it frustrate. This profession
it is, that obliges all, to stand to those grounds, and those term^, upon
which it is to be maintained; Whatsoever differences may arise, to render it
questionable. And it is the not acknowledging of th^se grounds, that has made
way for those Divisions, which have succeeded within the Reformation, in
several parts of it. For, as they have all proved incurable, for want of this
Principle of Unity; So it is not possible that ours, which have come to pass in
the last place, should be cured upon any other principle of Christianity, to
the salvation of souls; however the benefit of public peace may prevail, to
keep them from doing that mischief in the World, which they have done.

The truth is, they of the Church of Rome have overcharged What the Romish
Missionaries get by the charge of H^re^ie, and the pretense of Infallibility.
us, in calling us Haereticks; Taking that charge to signify division upon
matter of Faith. But they that would have the Pope Antichrist, and the Papists
Idolaters, have revyed it upon them, and taken their Revenge beyond the bounds
of blameless defense. For, the profession of Idolatry necessarily signifies
utter Apostasy from Christianity to Paganism. There is nothing else known by
the name of Idolatry in the Scriptures; By which they must prove, if they do
prove them Idolaters. For, the Idolatry of the Gnostickes (which, I am
confident, is mentioned in diverse Texts of the New Testament) may well be
accounted the Idolatry of the Pagans, though pretending to be Christians.
Because they did not stick to exercise the same Idolatries with the Pagans,
when occasion was offered; though they had their own Idolatries besides;
whether peculiar to their several Religions, or as Magicians. This is the
reason of that which I said before, that we need not Dispute, which side is
the true Church, if we can prove them Idolaters. But it is to be feared, that
the Romish Missionaries do advantage themselves more by the pretense of
Haeresie, then they by the pretense of Idolatry, or Antichrist. For, having
obtained this great truth, that there is no salvation out of Gods Church: and
then, that the Church of Rome is Gods Church; (which, as I said in the
beginning, has always been granted) how easy is it to infer; That there is no
salvation, but in Communion with the Church of Rome? For, how many of them whom
they deal with can distinguish a Church from the Church; or give a Reason how;
God having founded one Church; it may nevertheless stand so divided, that
salvation may be had on both sides? Which Reason being once overseen, the
Infallibility of the present Church is swallowed ipso facto, and all the
Decrees of the Council* of Trent must down, with the same assurance as the H.
Trinity. Nor need you distinguish between Haeresie and Schism, when once the
Church shall have pronounced. Thus save they the labor of proving
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Prayers to Saints, Latin Service, the half
Communion, and other points of difference; all of them too tough to be
overcome. All of them are clearly gained, by the prejudice which men have
imposed upon themselves, that the Church which enjoins them cannot err.
Whereas nothing can be more evident then that which I proposed at the
beginning; That it cannot be tried which side is the true Church, but by going
to trial upon the particulars in difference.

But they who charge the Pope to be Antichrist, and the Papists What we get by
the charge of Idolatry and Antichrist.
Idolaters, the higher their charge, the more to do must they have to persuade
common reason, that so great a part of mankind should expect to besaved, by
professing to contradict that which themselves profess. And, suppose that a
prejudicate zeal can transport a man, to think the wisest people upon earth
(those that Govern the Sea of Rome) and all those whom their wisdom carries
along, so far out of their wits, as to contradict, by their profession, that
which themselves profess. When all this is done, every Text of the Scripture,
that cannot be expounded to this supposition, will be a peremptory bar to
their pretense. And, how much is there of the Apocalypse it self, that is
acknowledged not to be fulfilled, as yet, in that sense? how much of the rest
of the Scripture, that cannot, without violence, be reconciled to it? And when
a Novice, grounded upon this supposition, is forced from his ground, upon
Remonstrance of such Reasons; How ready is he to fall into the snare of the
Missionaries? Whether or not this be the reason of that which wise men have
observed; that the passage from the one extreme to the other is more easy and
frequent amongst us, then from the mean to the extreme; let men of discretion
judge. Let not them lead the people by the Nose, to believe that they can prove
their supposition when they cannot; and then expect that it be maintained, by
them that own the Church of Rome for a true Church; And therefore must
contradict themselves if they maintain it.

It is then Achitophels Counsel that has prevailed on both Immoderate charges
vain on both sides.
sides. For make the quarrel irreconcilable, and nothing but Conquest must end
it. But what joy have they of their expectation, on either side? In all
troubles of Christendom since Luthers time, what gaping has there been for the
sack of Rome, and the downfall of the Pope, upon a Prophecy, ten for one more
probably fullfilled, in the sack of Rome by the Goths and Vandals, many
hundred years ago? And all the Civil blood, all that abominable desolation in
Religion which we have seen, our late Usurper seems to have accounted mere
godliness, in order to that work, which God had designed him for; as he thought
himself inspired to believe. Nay, did not some of the Reformation prick up
their ears, and begin to think well of his Christianity, for that works sake?
And yet this expectation has not been more vain, then the deep designs of the Sea of Rome, to reduce the Reformation to the obedience thereof by conquest, do
now, after a long trial, appear desperate for the future. Now, if the parties
be willing to abate of their charges, as they have reason to do, there is a way
for both to come off with credit. For the charge of Haeresie naturally shrinks
into the Measure of Schism, whenever they shall be pleased to explain
themselves. And they seem to do it; at least as many of them, as now insist
upon the charge of Schism. Let our people follow their example, and extend the
Idolatry they charge them with to all Superstition; And I will undertake to
find them Idolaters in all professions; Namely, all those that commit Idolatry
to their own imaginations.

As for the mutual imputation of Schism, it is a civil and a The charge of
Schism on both sides, moderate, as to the Church.
moderate challenge, in comparison of those. For, Schism is nothing but civil
War in the Church. And in civil Wars, as in all Wars, though it be rather
impossible then difficult, to name a War that shall be just on both sides; yet
it is easy to find a War that is unjust on both sides. St. Augustine commends
the saying of one in his time, that declaimed upon the Rape of Lucrece; Mira
res, said he, duo fuerunt and Adulterium ^^us commisit; A strange thing, that a
man lying with a woman, only the one should commit Adultery. I will not compare
War with Adultery; which carries sin in the name of it. For I will not say that
all War is sin. But he that can look upon the mischiefs, either of civil War
in the World, or of Schism in the Church, with the heart of a Christian, will
not think strange that both sides should be Schismatics to God, though only
one part can be Schismatics to the Church. For when the cause may be visibly
decided (as in the Schism of the Donatists) then the one side are
Schismatics, the other is the Church. But when it cannot, (as perhaps it will
prove, between the Reformation and the Church of Rome) then if the blame of the
Schism fall on both sides, both sides shall be Schismatics to God, neither
to the Church.

But, though I make it a moderate charge, as to the Church, The sin of
Schism, as to God, horrible.
when one side challenges the other to be Schismatics; Yet, as to God, the
sin of Schism is of an horrible tincture. For an Haeretick, or an Apostate, in
the sight of God, destroys only his own soul. But he that causes division in
the Church, either peremptorily destroys, or probably hinders the salvation of
all that are parties to it. So the Authors of Schism must answer for all the
souls that perish by it. How the means of salvation depend upon the Unity of
the Church; is a thing that must appear, by proving that God has ordained it
for that purpose. But if so it prove, then may every man see, how heavy a
charge the crime of Schism will prove in Gods sight. The mischief of Haeresie
will lie in the Schism which it involveth, when Division falls out upon a
point of Faith. Now, breach of charity, in hindering the salvation of all that
divide, is abundantly enough to destroy salvation; though more then enough, if
upon a point of Faith, which is Haeresie to the Church.

But he that would consider first, how much the excessive The Schism of the
Donatists in charging the Catholics to be Apostates.
charges on both sides contribute to the Division of the Church; then, how much
the Division of the Church to the ruin of Christianity; Let him compare our
present divisions with the Schism of the Donatists; the case whereof is thus
to be stated. It was pretended, that Caecilianus was made Bishop of Carthage,
by Traitors and Apostates. For, those that were called Traditores for
delivering the Scriptures, and other Utensils of Gods service, to their
persecutors for present safety, they accounted no less then Apostates, for
betraying the common Christianity. And that upon this Account. If Eleazar, and
the Maccabees had redeemed their lives, by eating Swines Flesh, their crime had
not been the bare breach of that Precept; It had been Apost^^ie; because done
at the instance of him that pressed them to forsake the Law. So, the Crime of
those that delivered such goods to Persecutors, they justly took to be the
Crime of Apostafie, as done at the instance of Persecutors, that pressed all to
depart from Christianity. And, when the rest of the Church did acknowledge
Caecilianus, and communicate with him as Bishop of Carthage, then did they
openly forsake the whole Church, as guilty of the same Apostasy, for
communicating with Apostates, and rejecting them, because they rejected
Apostates. And had they not reason on their side, if the Church of Africa,
under Caecilianus, had been really Apostates? Admitting the Visible Unity of
the Church, it is not to be avoided. For, this Unity must be founded upon
supposition of Christianity. If Christianity be evidently renounced, they who
acknowledge manifest Apostates members of Gods one Church, must be accounted
Apostates themselves, by them that would indeed be members of it. But there
was great difference between professed Apostasy, and the crime of those, who,
dissembling their Christianity to save their lives, had been permitted to hold
their degrees in the Church; professing it as well as the best when the danger
was past. For, though the Rule of the Church allowed not that they should hold
their degrees in the Church; yet it was found necessary to abate of the Rule,
that Unity (for which the Rule was provided) might be preserved. And, being
allowed to hold their degrees in the Church for that reason, there was
difference enough between them and Apostates. All this supposing the matter of
Fact; That those who ordained Caecilianus were indeed such as had given up such
goods; Which, if it were true, never appeared to the Church to be true.
Whereas they who began the Schism, by ordaining another Bishop of Carthage
against him; were diverse ways convicted to be such themselves.

But it is strange to consider, how the Donatists abhorred the The sad
consequences of this Schism.
Catholics, merely upon this supposition, without any other occasion of
difference, either in Faith, or in the Rites and Customs of the Church. For, it
is the ground why they rebaptized all those whom they seduced from the
Catholic Church; as baptized by Apostates. Whereas the Catholics, taking
them for Schismatics as they were, sought only to win them upon such terms, as
the reconciling of Schismatics to the Church requires. But it is hard to
relate the slanders, the murders, the violences, the mischiefs, which this
Division brought forth; And that, so far as I can understand, till Christianity
was utterly destroyed in Africa by the Mahumetans.

CHAP. III.
They that hold by One Visible Church are to own the consequences of it.
Nothing to be changed, but upon that ground. We cannot be the same Church
with that which was, otherwise. Though that which shall be settled will find
advocates. Civil Laws of Religion to be changed, till this Rule be attained.
The beginning and rise of our differences. The present state of them. What
terms of agreement, with the Presbyterians, we ought to allow. The Laws of
the Primitive Church the Standard of all change. Our present Case is not the
Case of our Forefathers. The Acts of Henry VIII. no Acts of our Forefathers in
Religion. Imperfection of Laws, in Religion, no imputation to our Forefathers.
The pretense of tender Consciences is no Rule. It serves Papists, as well as
Puritans.

ALL this while, you see, I take it not for granted, that They that hold by One
Visible Church are to own the consequences of i^.
it is one Visible Church which our Creed professes. But I say, those who take
it for granted, and admit not the due consequence of it, are they that weigh
not by their own Weights, nor mete by their own Measures; but keep a Weight and
a Weight; a Measure and a Measure; which must needs be a thing accursed,
because they cannot both be the Weights and Measures of the Sanctuary. The
order of Bishops, and the right of the Church goods have both recovered their
possessions, by the Law of this Land. In both these points, the Law of this
Land acknowledges the authority of the whole Church of Christ; the evidence
whereof is indisputable in both Titles. They that are not content to go by the
same Weight and Measure, both with Papists and Puritans, in all other matters,
they must answer God, for weighing and measuring by their own Weights and
Measures in other things, weighing and measuring by his Weights and Measures in
these.

The rest of our differences seem to consist in two points; the Nothing to be
changed, but upon that ground.
one; concerning the Covenant of Grace, and the dependences of it; seems to be
of great consequence to the substance of Christianity. The other must
comprehend all the noise that is made, of Ceremonies, and Forms of Praying,
and Power of Discipline, and in fine, all that is questioned concerning the
Laws of this Church. These are Punctillios indeed, one by one, but all
together they make a great sum. And, take them one by one, it is considerable,
that the changing of any one is the changing of a Law of this Kingdom. But if
the change should be made, without providing for the substance of our
Christianity, in that which is notoriously questionable amongst us; then must
we think of a new Answer to the Papists demand, where was your Church before
Luthers time? And in all cases, if the Laws of our Church be changed for
peace sake, without regard to that truth, which made it Reformation to change
the Laws of the Church of Rome; may it not become questionable, whether the
Church of England remain the Church of England or not? For I am well assured,
that there is so much in question amongst us, as if it were decided for the
Puritans, would cast the advantage on the Papists side. And therefore, they who
believe no salvation out of Gods Church are to change nothing for other
reasons, then such as the Visible Unity of it may justify, in case it appear
to be founded by God.

For that Principle, as it is evidence in matters of Faith questionable We
cannot be the same Church with that which was, otherwise.
amongst us; so it is the Standard in matter of Church Law, to measure the
distance between the true point of Reformation, and the present Church of Rome,
by that which is visible in the Catholic Church; allowing for that
difference, which the change of time may have brought forth. They that find
themselves bound by this principle, to be visibly one and the same Church with
the Catholic, will find it easy, to impe, and to ingraffe the Faith and Laws
of this Church, into the Original and Catholic Faith and Laws of Gods whole
Church, by this Rule; But impossible, to make us visibly the same Church with
it upon other Terms.

I do no ways doubt, that, though a change should be made Though that which
shall be s^tled will find advocates.
for the worse, (which God forbid) there would be found men to maintain it.
For, the Laws of Kingdoms and Commonwealths are of great force to frame the
opinions and manners of particular persons: And that in matter of Religion, in
this Estate, where Christianity is settled by the Laws of Sovereignties. And
the Church goods, which are now recovered out of the hands of Usurpers, must
then be the reward of those, that shall have most to say for the Laws that
shall be made. And therefore, while we are upon this plea for our selves,
against the Church of Rome; I find it no unreasonable freedom that I take, to
set forth the consequence of it, in the change that is or may be pretended.

I know it is a Maxim necessary to the quiet of all States, Civil Laws of
Religion to be changed, till this Rule be attained.
that Laws are not to be changed, for hope of amendment. But it is no less
necessary to enter an Exception to it, for those Laws, by which the
Reformation is to be settled, in several Sovereignties of Christendom. For, if
the Visible Unity of the Church be Gods Ordinance, then they ought all to have
been made, of necessity, ambulatory, as provisions only for the time; and not
to be taken for settled, till all had been agreed upon a Rule, whereby
Communion might be maintained amongst them all, whatsoever differences might
fall out any where. And I am well assured, that they could never have attained
any such Provision, without supposing the Visible Unity of the whole Church;
the grounds and consequences of which Supposition, being taken for Gods
Ordinance, first brought it to pass. And having attained it, I am well
persuaded, that the breach between the Reformation and the Church of Rome could
not have subsisted. Now, that several Sovereignties have made their several
changes, without communicating with one another; (that is, as not tied to the
Visible Unity of the Whole) it is become infinitely more difficult to unite
them, without expressly agreeing in this principle; then it would be to unite
all, agreeing in it. For the grounds and consequences of it would be,
necessarily, the Scale to balance, and the Standard to measure all differences.

They who, for the present, are not divided about Religion The beginning and
rise of our differences.
as we are, may perhaps think these considerations too far fetched to trouble
themselves with. We that cannot make up the present breaches without new
provisions, are only to advise, whether we will trust God, and our Lord
Christ, with the success, weighing by our own Weights, and meting by our own
Measures. For our case is evidently this. The Reformation under Edward VI.
raised a party against it, not as preferring Luther before Calvin, but as
preferring Unity with the Catholic Church, before difference from the present
Church of Rome. The Relation of the troubles at Francford, published by the
Puritans, shows, that they were as much divided about obedience to their
Sovereign, persecuting the Reformation which they professed, as about obedience
to their Bishops, and the power of erecting Churches of themselves. When the
Bull of Pius V. against Queen Elizabeth came forth, the Papists, who, from the
beginning of her Reign, had outwardly conformed to the exercise of Religion
established by her Laws, withdrawing themselves, in obedience to the Bull, got
thereby the name of Recusants. About the same time, they that rested not
content with the Reformation established, appearing in a party, got themselves
the name of Puritans. Whereby it appears, that the Jealousy of the State
upon the other party, together with the hatred of the people against it, for
the persecutions under Queen Mary, gave them boldness and opportunity to show
themselves, and success to make them considerable. That abatement of the Form
settled under Edward VI. which, to content them, had been made under Queen
Elizabeth, gave them appetite to demand more. The Recusants in the mean time,
as consenting to the attempts that were made against the person of the
Sovereign, and the State, by virtue of that Bull; (because, in matter of
Religion, they all gave obedience to it) were involved in such penalties, as
the severity of the Laws, occasioned by the hainousness of those attempts,
provided.

Thus passed the time on, till the same appetite, animated The present state of
them.
by the Credit of the late Parliament, helped the pretenses thereof for
reforming the Government, to set three Kingdoms, upon pretense of Religion
also, on the Fire of one Civil War. For the Irish Rebellion, which the
example of the Scottish Commotion had brought forth, falling in with the one
party, (though not so heartily, as the new Insurrection of Scotland with the
other) made the breach wider, by uniting all into two parties. The quarrel
being decided, they who pretended no more for the War, but Episcopacy,
Liturgy, and the Ceremonies, brought in a new Confession of Faith, and new
Catechismes, as well as a Directory, and an Ordinance for Church Government.
The sword, that had decided the quarrel, it seems, was to make good the
difference, without pleading the Word for the trial of it. In the mean time, I
will not say that those damnable Doctrines, preached by the Sects which the
War had brought forth, are the necessary consequences of the Doctrine brought
in of new: And of the difference between it, and that which was before. But
this I will say, that there is no Visible difference between the Presbyterians
and the Phanatickes; These sheltring themselves under the quality of those,
whenever the Law forbids their peculiar Assemblies. And I say farther, that,
if there be such a thing as a Catholic Church, all the Phrensies of the
Phanaticks are justly imputable to those that distinguish not themselves from
Phanaticks; But admit them to their Communion as Phanaticks. Upon this account
I use the name of Puritans, though seeming a term of disgrace, to comprise all
the Sects, into which, that once common name has since been divided. For I use
also the name of Papists, not intending any disgrace by it, though first taken
up in that sense; Because it seems, that use has rendered that sense
insensible.

Hence it may appear, why it is not to be said, that; The What terms of
agreement, with the Presbyterians, we ought to allow.
Papists standing stiff in maintaining all the abuses, which, we are called
Protestants for protesting against, it will not be for the honor of the
Reformation, to own any imperfection in it: It will occasion weak Souls to
fall away to the Church of Rome. For, supposing him a Christian that objects
this, I would ask him, in the first place; Whether it be not more for the
purpose of a Christian, to have a plea that will bear him out at the great day
of Judgment, than to have a Plea that may advantage his party here? Whether he
and I can agree upon any better Plea, for the Change which we call
Reformation, and our adhering to it, then their evident rigor, in maintaining
their evident abuses; That they admit no terms of peace and reconcilement, but
those upon which they united their own party against us, at the Council of
Trent? And would he have u^ to imitate them here, in that which we mean to
plead against them, at the day of Judgment? For, if there be such a thing as a
Visible Church, then ought the Church of Rome to condescend to such terms as
may restore Unity; Preserving and improving, as much as may be, the Common
Christianity. It is the best Plea that we shall have for our selves at the Day
of Judgment, why we continue divided from them; That they give us no
appearance of hope, that they will condescend to any such terms. And therefore
we ought to condescend to terms of Agreement, in such matters as we have in
dispute, with our Brethren the Presbyterians. But not such terms as Faction and
Prejudice imagines, but such as the Common Christianity, and the Original
Unity of Gods Church determines. For, if we use that Rigor which we charge
the Church of Rome with, we weigh not by our own Weights, nor mete by our own
Measures. But i^ we stand not upon that with them, upon which we defend our
selves against the Church of Rome; Again we weigh not by our own W^ights, nor
mete by our own Measures.

And indeed, supposing that the reconciling of them to this The Laws of the
Primitive Church the Standard of all change.
Church will require a Law of the Kingdom, that may authorize them in their
Ministeries; What appearance is there of hope, that the Laws which they have
broken from by the Schism, will serve to bring them back? What appearance is
there of despair, that the Laws of the Primitive Church will not serve; With
that allowance, which the change of times, and the difference of the case may
require? Such a change would reconcile them, and not as Presbyterians. Such a
change would clear us from all Imputation of Schism, with the Church of Rome.
Such a change would produce that Improvement in Christianity, which the name of
Reformation pretends. The Church of Rome would have no cause to laugh at such
a Change; Unless they would laugh for joy, at that Improvement of the common
Christianity, which they themselves would presently stand obliged to imitate.
They themselves, who would be accounted Infallible, were glad to provide for
Unity among themselves, by new Decrees, at the Council of Trent. Those that
think they may fail, and know, that all positive Laws, saving the Gospel,
which our Lord Christ came in person to preach, (for that also, may, in some
respect, be accounted Positive) are subject to that Imperfection, which the
change of time either produces or discovers, are to think it no reproach to
change for the better, when the necessity of reconciling a Schism requires
it. Let Papists glean up here and there a weak Proselyte; (such for the most
part, as, little troubled in Conscience with the matter of difference, seek
only what to palliate their Interest with) Who can propose a general good,
without danger of particular offense? It was a divine saying of an Heathen;
That the good cause passes from that side that refuses reason, to that side
that proffers it.

Again, shall we charge them at the day of Judgment, for Our present Case is
not the Case of our Forefathers.
adhering to Custom against Truth; To their Forefathers, against that which
was from the beginning; And adhere our selves to that, wherein, we cannot say
that our Forefathers have restored it? Certainly, if we will weigh by our own
Weights, and mete by our own Measures, we are not to engage with our
Forefathers against the Catholic Church, if we suppose it Gods Ordinance. For
their Case is not our Case, now the Case is put, that Unity in Religion cannot
be had, without a new Law of the Kingdom. The Council of Trent has succeeded
since the Reformation which they made. If it be the second blow that makes the
quarrel, it is not the Reformation, but the ^ouncil of Trent, that has formed
the Schism between us and the Church of Rome. The publishing of it is the
declaring of a Law, upon admitting whereof, we may communicate with the Church
of Rome; otherwise not. And so on our side, the settling of Religion by a new
Law of the Kingdom will be a Declaration, that we will have no peace, without
so much more, then our Reformation hitherto has demanded. For if the Unity of
the Church be Gods Ordinance, it is not in the power of any part of it, to
unite themselves upon those Conditions, which they ought not to stand upon,
with the rest of the Church, if they could not be reunited to it, without such
conditions. So, they may be no Schismatics in Gods sight, for changing
without the Church of Rome, which they knew would not consent to the change;
And yet we may be Schismatics, in defying it upon new terms of distance.

When I speak of our forefathers, I account not the Acts of The Acts of Henry
VIII. no Acts of our Forefathers Religion.
Henry the eight the Acts of our forefathers, in matter of Religion. For it is
manifest, that he left not the Sea of Rome, upon any pretense of reforming
Religion; Further then the removing of that power, which indeed hindered it; nor
as hindering it, but as burdensome in his own case. If any beginnings of the
Reformation were brought in upon this occasion, during his time, we have
reason to own the things done, without disputing the reason for which they were
done. Otherwise, we are not engaged to his proceedings, because they made way
for the Reformation to succeed. They who declaim against the persecutions
raised by the Church of Rome, as they deserve; (while the bloody Law of the six
Articles, and the persecuting of the Popes authority at the same time, is
buried in silence;) do not weigh by their own Weights, nor mete by their own
Measures. The pretense of Reformation under Edward VI. excuses much defect in
the form of proceeding, by the matter which it introduced. They might make use
of that which had been done to another intent. We are not to measure their
Actions, by the Actions of them which were guided by other reasons.

In fine, to maintain other men's Actions, is to make our selves Imperfection of
Laws in Religion, no imputation to our Forefathers.
accessory to their sins in doing them. The Church of Rome, standing to that
which they received from their Forefathers, stand but to that corruption, to
which, that State of Religion, which the Apostles brought in, has degenerated
by tract of time. That our Forefathers should not at once see, or seeing should
not at once be able to restore all that was decayed, is no Imputation to men
not pretending infallibility. Why they have not since proceeded to restore the
rest; I have showed evident reason, in the contrary Factions of Papists and
Puritans, and the effects of them, which our times have seen. They themselves
profess an imperfection, in not restoring of Penance; a matter of such
consequence, that all the judgments of God, which we have suffered, may
justly be imputed to it. And therefore, the necessity of this time requiring a
change, the introducing of that which never was, for the contenting of men,
instead of restoring that which was, and therefore ought to be, will be the
sin of the Nation; the declaring of this, will be the discharge of him that is
so persuaded.

As for the Plea of tender Consciences, to him that considers The pretense of
tender Consciences is no Rule.
our Case, in which it is made, it will easily appear to be a Saddle for all
horses; A pair of Stirrups, to be lengthned or shortened to all statures. For
we are tied to this supposition; The Law is to be re-established, according
to which God must be served by the Church of England, for the future. And, to
pretend tenderness of Conscience against the Law of the Church and Kingdom, is
to proclaim disobedience to all Laws, that are not made by them who allege it.
For, why may not any Law meet with tender consciences, if some do? And,
tenderness of conscience is a thing invisible, which no Law can take for
granted on any side. But, supposing the Unity of the Church ordained by God; to
forbear those Laws which it requires, because tenderness of conscience may
be alleged against them, is to offend the whole rather then a part. For, the
same might have been alleged against any Law of Gods Church. So, there could
have been no such thing as a Visible Church, if that plea could have served
men's turns.

And why should not a Papist have a tender conscience, as well It serves
Papists, as well as Puritans.
as a Puritan? Why should not the one expect to be free from the penalties,
which the Laws assign to those that refuse them: as well as the other, to have
right to the rewards, which they assign to those that embrace them; both
professing the same reason, though the one only makes a noise with pleading it?
If it be said, that English Papists are not considerable, in comparison with
English Puritans; It is to be considered, how great a part of Christendom is
engaged in the cause of English Papists; How small a part of the Reformation is
engaged in the cause of English Puritans. In the mean time, it is the Papists
that are under the penalties of the Laws; Which, Puritans are scandalized,
that they may not make. And certainly, no man can truly have a tender
conscience in this case, but he who, for his part, labors, that neither
Papists may have cause to continue Papists, nor Puritans to continue Puritans.
But the conscience of the Kingdom, that is, our hope of Gods blessing, or our
fear of his vengeance, will be concerned to the life in it.

CHAP. IV.
Erastians can acknowledge no Visible Church founded by God. Their opinion
inableth Sovereigns to persecute Gods truth by Gods Law. Persecuting the truth
is the use of a Power which no Sovereign can have. If any Sovereign may punish
for the Religion which he professes, then are Subjects bound to renounce
Christ, if the Sovereign command it. No offense, but charity, in declaring the
true ground of reconcilement, or punishment. Why it ought to be declared. The
declaring of it no offense to Superiors.

THat which has been said of Henry the VIII. and his Acts, Erastians can
acknowledge no Visible Church founded by God.
shows; That Acts of Parliament cannot be the Measure of Religion, though
they should be the Fense and the Bulwark of it. Let me now, upon this
occasion, conjure our Brethren the Presbyterians, to lay to heart the unknown
danger which this time threatens, the evident mischief which it produces. It
was a complaint visibly just in the late Usurpers time; that, while one side
was for this Religion, another for that, they that were for no Religion would
prove the strongest side. Presbyterians contest with their Prelates, who shall
give Law to the Church; that is, who shall be the Church. They are desirous to
have authority in point of Fact, without and against their Prelates, which they
will never make out any title to in point of right, but from their Prelates.
They believe, all the while, that the Church is founded by God: and, all the
rights upon which it is founded, of Right; And yet can find in their hearts to
stand wrangling out the time, while they grow the greatest party, that would
have no Church at all, and by consequence, no Christianity. We call them
Erastians, because the disputes of our times have made it evident; that, if no
Excommunication, as he pretended, then no Church. Yet it is not to be granted,
that he ever saw through the consequences of his own Position; or would have
held no Excommunication, had he thought it would infer no Church. I will not
say the learned Seldom saw not the consequence. For, why should I speak of the
opinion of a man, that was too wise to declare it? I am sure he mistook the
state of the Question, when, beginning to declare his opinion, in the point of
Excommunication, (for, he never argued for any part of his opinion, till he
published his Books de Synedriis) he defined Excommunication to be a censure
inferring a civil penalty. For it was evident, that all his Adversaries,
deriving the power of Excommunication from the Apostles, must deny any civil
effect of Excommunication; which they knew it could not have before Constantine.

This opinion is liable to an objection visible enough. For if Their opinion
inableth Sovereigns to persecute Gods truth by Gods Law.
it were true, then all Subjects, all private Christians, would stand bound in
conscience, to profess that Religion which the Sovereign power enacteth, by the
Laws which it gives. Which if it were so, in vain do we Dispute, whether the
Papists, the Prelatick, or the Puritans be in the right. Whatsoever Religion
the Law of the Land shall establish, shall be that which God enjoyneth. And,
the Sovereign shall be able in point of conscience to punish those that refuse
it, whether right or wrong; though it cannot be denied, that, as Christendom is
at present divided, some Subjects must needs be punished for the right. I know
but one that has looked this objection in the face. His first Answer was; that
they that are punished for the right Religion shall be gainers by their
sufferings; they shall have their share in the reward of Martyrs. This is the
Answer that Julian the Apostate made the Christians, complaining of their
sufferings under him. Therefore it is evident, that a Christian must not allege
it. For, if he that suffers shall have a Martyrs reward, what reward shall he
that punishes have, but a Persecutors? So, a Christian Sovereign, for using
the power that God gives him, shall have a Persecutors reward.

If it be said; No marvel. Because he uses it amiss, not because Persecuting
the truth is the use of a Power, which no Sovereign can have.
he goes beyond the bounds of it; Either God has enacted the contrary of that
which the Sovereign enjoyneth, or not. If not, then is that which the Sovereign
enjoyneth contrary to no Law of God. And therefore it obliges the Subject. If
so; then cannot the Sovereign Power enjoin it. And therefore it is extended
beyond the bounds of it, in that case. Again, either, abusing his power, by
enacting that Religion which he ought not, he obliges his Subject in
conscience to God, to profess and to exercise the Religion, which he enacteth,
or not, If not, then must the Subject, for the security of his conscience, be
Judge whether the Sovereign abuse his power or not. If so, then, as before, we
Dispute about Religion to no purpose; For every man is bound to that which the
Law of his Country enacteth. Nay there will be no reason why Christians, under
the Turk, shall not live as Mahumetans. For the quality of a Christian is one
and the same, in the Subject, as in the Sovereign. And therefore there can
appear no reason, why it should give the one the right, by the Act of his Will
to oblige the will of the other; which an undoubted Sovereign, a Pagan, or a
Mahumetan has not. And indeed he has answered otherwise since. Namely; That a
man is bound to renounce Christ with his mouth, if the Sovereign command it;
For he shall be saved by believing in him with the heart the same time, which
is all that his Christianity requires. This Answer is plain English. But it
comes to this point; That a Christian is saved by the inward act of Faith, If
any Sovereign may punish for the Religion which he professes, then are
Subjects bound to renounce Christ, if the Sovereign command it.
without the outward; By believing, without professing.

There is another that intended, it seems, to show the late Usurper, by what
right he might protect both Presbyteries and Congregations, dealing with
others according to his Interest. He supposes that a Christian, being
justified by his Faith, is at his choice to make himself the member, either of
an Independent Congregation, or of one that shall associate it self into a
Presbytery with others. Whereupon the Sovereign, supposing both of them to be
the Godly party, must needs find himself bound to protect them both. He says
not by what right he could punish those for their Religion, whom he took not
for the Godly party; By what right he could hinder them in the free profession
and exercise of their Religion; which indeed is a greater punishment then a
Christian, neither Haeretick nor Schismatic, can be bound to endure. But he
need not tell him, by what right he could exclude them from belonging to the
Godly party. Those whose Religion cannot stand with Usurpation cannot seem
Godly to Usurpers. In the mean time, as you see, this Author stands upon the
same ground with his fellow; that a Christian is justified by the inward act of
Faith without the outward, by believing without professing. Only he says; by
believing before he profess; the other, though he profess the contrary of
that which he believes. But neither of both has offered to say; either that
the Will of the Sovereign is, by Gods Law, the Rule of Religion to the will of
the Subject, which he is to answer God by at the day of Judgment; Or, that
Gods Law can allow the Sovereign to punish the Subject for that Religion, which
it enableth not the Sovereign to oblige his Subject to profess. All must come
to this point; that a Christian is bound to renounce Christ, if his Sovereign
command it. For if a Christian be bound in conscience, to obey whatsoever his
Sovereign commands, in point of Religion; then, if the Great Turk command
his Subjects to renounce Christ, they are bound to obey it. Which whether it
be not a position for Macchiavellian Atheists; that make no more of
Christianity, then of an expedient to Govern people in peace; I leave to all
that are capable to judge. Thus much for certain, he that thinks himself tied
to renounce his Christianity, if his Sovereign command him, is no longer a
Christian; As having recalled the Vow of his Baptism, to profess Christ until
death. And this is that which I conjure our Brethren the Presbyterians to lay
to heart; That the visible growth of this opinion, by their continuing this
distance upon trifles, threatens to render them that would have no Religion at
No offense, but charity, in declaring the true ground of reconcilement, or
punishment.
all the strongest side.

In this open and stiff opposition of four Religions, though not distinguished
into four Communions; Recusants, Prelatickes, Puritans, and Erastians; (For I
oversee the Fanatiques, as swallowed back into the belly of the Presbyterians)
shall it be a crime, shall it be an offense for me to say, what point of
Christianity, in my poor opinion, reconciles all to unity, that admit Gods
truth? That, believing two Articles of our Creed; One Catholic and Apostolic
Church; and one Baptism for remission of sins; if we believe that they
signify any thing, we are all bound to submit all partialities, to that which
they signify. Not as if Recusants, depending upon a Forain communion, and the
head of it, that shows no inclination to Unity, upon terms of Gods truth, were
likely to take notice of one man's poor opinion, concerning the consequences of
common principles. But because we are our selves so far chargeable to God, for
our Schism with the Church of Rome, and the mischiefs of it, as we neglect
those consequences: And, because the Justice of the Kingdom, in the penalties
of all Recusancy, may easily be rendered visible, if we keep close to them;
but not possibly otherwise. As for those that make the Pope Antichrist, and the
Papists Idolaters; can they be allowed to forejudge my opinion, because it
makes our Reconcilement with the Church of Rome easier then they would have it?
For, if division in the Church, without evident and valuable cause, be a sin
to God, it will certainly be the sin of the Kingdom, to bear them out in it,
by stating our Reformation upon undue grounds. For the terms of it must needs
be according to the grounds of it; which, being either invisible, or
inconsiderable in comparison of the benefits of Unity, must needs translate
some part of the blame to rest upon that side which exceeds.

And therefore, to excuse my freedom, in publishing that Why it ought to be
declared.
which follows; Let no man grudge me this Plea for my self at the day of
Judgment; that being convicted, that our agreement cannot be acceptable to
God, but upon the consequence of those two suppositions, according to that
which follows; I am not at rest till I have said it. Could there be peace had,
by compounding the Interest of two parties, without providing for the Interest
of our common Christianity, in those two Articles; what joy could a Christian
expect, of that which should be purchased at so unconscionable a Rate? Here is
nothing said, but that which has been said, when Arbitrary power might have
made it a pretense for Persecution, had the Interest of Usurpers allowed it. It
is a short view of that which I have published heretofore, presented to those
that may desire to see, in one prospect, what is the true consequence of it, in
the composing of those differences, that remain still on foot. And, the danger
of being involved in the Crime of Schism before God, obliges me to declare
that opinion, which being not declared, may render me liable to that charge in
Gods sight.

Therefore there is no offense to Superiors in declaring it. The The declaring
of it no offense to Superiors.
Laws of Kingdoms go by a Rule, that is made of such metal as may bend, and be
fitted to the body which they are to rule. Only they are to aim at an
inflexible Rule of Gods truth; which is the Inheritance of every Christian. And
therefore, he that sees it made crooked, is bound to set it straight. This is
not to say, what public Authority should do; but what it should intend to do.
A thing necessary, to be said, when there be those, who would have it intend
that which it ought not to do. In fine, the difficulty and danger of our case
seems to supersede, for the present, the Rule of Obedience in the Church.

CHAP. V.
We have the same evidence for the Visible Unity of the Church, as for the
truth of the Scriptures. The Church founded upon the Power of the Keys. The
Unity of the Church Visible by the Laws of it. The Law which endoweth the
Church with Consecrated Goods. How the Unity of the Church is signified by the
Scriptures. How in the Old Testament. We have the same evidence for the
Visible Unity of the Church, a^ for the truth of the* Scriptures.


I Say then, that the Unity of the Church signifies nothing, unless it signify
the Visible Unity of Communion, in the outward offices of Gods Service; Not
only the Invsible Unity of the heart, in Faith and Charity: Unless the Church
be founded by God for an outward Society, Visible to the common reason of man;
Not only for an Invisible Number, the Unity whereof, only his own Invisible
Wisdom inwardly designeth. And I say it, because I conceive I have proved it by
the same evidence, upon which we accept the Scriptures for the Word of God:
Upon which we hold our common Christianity. For I have showed, that we
believe the Scriptures for the Scriptures; the matter of Faith for the Motives
of Faith, there related. That is, we hold those things which the Scriptures
relate, sufficient to oblige all the people of God before Christ to be Jews;
All the people of the world after Christ to be Christians. This, in the nature
of a reason obliging a man to be a Christian. For, in the nature and kind of
an effective cause, I do not suppose, much less grant, that any thing is
sufficient, much less effectual, without Gods Spirit. ^ut if an Unbeliever
should ask me, why I believe that to be true, which, being true, I grant
sufficient to oblige me to believe; It will not serve my turn to say, that I
find it written in the Scripture; So long as the question is, why I believe the
Scripture. My answer must be, that the consent of all Christians, in
submitting to the Gospel, (which they would not have done, had they not known
the motives to be true, for which they did it) assures me as much, that they
are true, as if I had seen the things done, which moved them to believe.
Especially, being as much convicted by the light of Reason and Nature, that
Christianity goes beyond Judaisme, for advancing the Service of God and
goodness; as that Judaisme goes beyond the Religion, either of Pagans, or
Mahumetans.

For, this being the reason why we believe, that must be The Church founded
upon the Power of the Key^s.
alleged, by all that will allege any reason to Unbelievers; It must needs have
the same force in evidencing the sense, that we allow it in evidencing the
credit of the Scriptures. If the consent of all Christians, in submitting to
Christianity upon Motives recorded in the Scriptures, assure me that they are
true; And therefore the Scriptures the Word of God, and Christianity the only
Religion by which we can be saved; Then the consent of all Christians, in
owning the obligation of holding Visible Communion with the Church, is to
assure me that it is Gods Ordinance. For the act, or the acts of our Lord,
upon which the Church is founded, I allege the Power of the Keys, described by
the effect of binding and loosing; and to that effect granted to St. Peter Mat.
XVI. 18, 19; To the Disciples assembled after the Resurrection John XX. 19-23.
in the terms of remitting and retaining sin; To the Church Mat. XVIII. 15-18.
in the same terms as to St. Peter; to the effect of rendering him that obeys
not, a Heathen man or a Publican, to him that would be a Christian. Here you
have a certain Power, deposited with certain Persons, the effect whereof is
Visible, in the succession of Person, deriving the authority which they claim,
from the visible act of those Persons which are here trusted with it: And in
the maintenance of Visible Communion amongst true Christians, by excluding the
false. It is true; Haereticks and Schismatics exclude themselves out of the
Church. For, they would be the Church themselves, if they could tell how. But
it is the authority of the Church that obliges Christians to avoid them, as
the Jews, to whom our Lord spoke, did then avoid Heathen men and Publicans.
And it obliges, by declaring them Haereticks and Schismatics. I know there
be those, that would have the imputation of Haeresie and Schism to be now
mere Bug-bears, to fright children with. But would any of them own any of the
Sects, which were shut out of the Church for Haereticks or Schismatics, from
the time of our Lord till the time of Constantine, for true Christians? Whether
they would or they would not, is not considerable. For if all good Christians
then did, then did all good Christians own the Visible Unity of the Church.
And there is as great a consent of Christians in the Visible Unity of the
Church, as in the truth of Christianity, saving this difference; That all
Christians, good and bad, true and false, agree in the truth of Christianity;
Only those that are neither Haereticks nor Schismatics in the Unity of the
Church.

Let no man mistake this evidence, as if so great a truth The Unity of the
Church Visible by the Laws of it.
were read only in two or three Texts of Scripture. They who take upon them to
argue of such matters as these, ought to know, that the Laws of all
Commonwealths, when first they are founded, are the wills of their Rulers;
according to that measure of Power whereby they Rule. Therefore, if our Lord
trust his Disciples, and their Successors, with the Rule of his Church, he
trusts them also to make Laws for the Ruling of it; Provided that they tend to
enforce, not to avoid those Laws, which he in person has left them as
Christians. For Disciples, that is, Christians, he left them actually; Not
actually Members of his Church, as not yet actually formed, though virtually
founded, in the Power of the Keys which he left his Disciples. These Laws
are as Visible, as the Laws of any Kingdom or Commonwealth that is or ever
was, are Visible. I do not own the Popes Canon Law to have the force of
obliging us. For I maintain a great deal of Usurpation in the Power by which it
was made; as well as a great deal of abuse, in making the Law given by our Lord
of no effect, by the matter of it. But I maintain the Popes Canon Law (and the
same is to be said of that Canon Law, whereby the Patriarch of Constantinople
now governs in the Eastern Church) to be derived from those Rules, whereby the
Disciples of our Lord and their Successors governed the Primitive Church in
Unity. And this no less evident, then the Christianity of this time is to be
derived from the Christianity of that time. For, as the present Law of the
Church is but the corruption of the Primitive, no more is the present
Christianity, (whether of the Reformation, or of the Church of Rome) but the
corruption of the Primitive. For why shall I make nice to say it, pretending
all Reformation to be nothing, but the restoring of Primitive Christianity;
And, to that end, of such Laws in the Church, as may be the means to restore
it?

Among those Laws there is one, which, obliging those who The Law which
endoweth the Church with Consecrated goods.
have given up themselves to God for Christians, to give up their goods to
maintain the Assemblies of the Church, for the Service of God; (wherein the
Communion of the Church consists) estateth the Power of dispensing the
maintenance thereof upon the Rulers of the Church. This provision, how little
soever notice many take of it, who pretend to understand the Scriptures; began
first in our Lord, and the Disciples that attended upon him continually. For,
it is evident by the Gospels, that those Disciples which did not attend upon
him continually furnished, by their contributions, a stock whereupon they
subsisted. Judas you know was trusted with it, and was the first that committed
Sacrilege, in robbing the poor of Church goods. For the poor could not have
attended upon the Doctrine of our Lord, had they not been provided for, by the
richer of his Disciples. And the goods of the Church are still the patrimony of
the poor, for the same reason; that being provided for, they may attend upon
Gods service. Therefore the reason was the same, when the Christians at
Jerusalem gave up their lands and their goods, to maintain the Church, in
contitinual attendance upon the Service of God: When the Corinthians maintained
their Feasts of Love: When the Christians afterward built those Churches, and
laid those lands to them, which, Eusebius says, being pulled down and
confiscated by Diocletian, were restored by Constantine: When Christian
Kingdoms and States, by a civil Law, endowed the Church with Tithes, and
Glebes, and Mansions. A thing as general as Christianity; no People, no Country
being known, where the Church was ever settled, without maintenance estated upon
it; by the Church it self at the least, if not by the Law of the Country, over
and above.

The form of Government, in every Commonwealth, is stated How the Unity of the
Church is signified by the Scriptures.
upon certain powers, wherein Sovereignty consists; which Lawyers and
Philosophers call sometimes Jura majestatis. Here you have, in the Governors of
the Church, the power of admitting into and excluding out of the Church: The
power of giving Laws to the Church: The power of dispensing the Exchequer
which God has provided for the Church: And in fine, the power of propagating
these rights to their successors. Whereby it pretends not to be a
Commonwealth; Because Christianity pretends to maintain Civil power, and the
right of this World, in the same hands, and upon the same terms which it
finds. But it appears to be a Visible Society, founded by God, under the
name of the Catholic Church, upon the command of holding communion therewith;
to which he obliges all Christians. And all those Scriptures of the New
Testament, that mention any of these rights, signify no less, when the meaning
of them is measured by that Rule, without which there is no means to determine
the sense of any Scripture, that is questionable. And the same is signified by
those Scriptures, which mention sometimes several Churches, sometimes one
Church containing all Christians, and all Churches. For the parts; that is,
particular Churches; being Visible B^dies, the Whole must needs be understood
to be a Visible Church. The practice of all Christians; owning an obligation
in point of Right, to maintain the powers, which the Scriptures for the most
part, only mention as matter of Fact; determines them to signify more then they
express.

As for the Scriptures of the Old Testament; the calling of the How in the Old
Testament.
Gentiles, to be one new people of God with the Jews that should believe, is
but foretold in them by Prophecy. And therefore the Visible Unity of the
Church, consisting of them, cannot be otherwise declared in them, then by that
correspondence, in which the Church answers the ancient people of God. The
Unity thereof was the Unity of a Commonwealth, maintaining it self by force of
Arms, in the possession of the Land of promise; in which God had placed them,
upon condition to live by his Law. The Unity of the Church, consisting of all
Nations, and maintaining all S^ates in their rights of this World, pretends
not to any power of this World, to maintain it self by. It becomes Visible by
the free will of Christians, believing it a piece of their Christianity, to
live and die members of one Visible Church. The Unity of the Jews State,
tending to a temporal end, of enjoying the Land of promise, answers not the
invisible unity of Christian souls, but the Visible Unity of a Catholic
Church; according to that rate, in which the Law answers the Gospel. And so is
this point of Christianity no less clearly delivered, by the Old Testament,
then other points of the Christian Faith are.

CHAP. VI.
How far the Scriptures are clear to be understood, of themselves. *Tradition
limiteth the sense of the Scripture. Difference between the Tradition of Faith
and Ritual Traditions. The difference between Haeresie and Schism. The
dependence of Churches evidenceth the Unity of the Whole Church. The form of
this dependence throughout the Roman Empire. No exception to be made to it,
for the British Church. Episcopacy, by this form, inviolable in all Opinions;
And the Church a standing Synod. The Church Visible by disowning Haeretickes
and Schismatickes. The breaches that have come to pass evidence the same.

FOr, though all that is necessary to be known, for the salvation How far the
Scriptures are clear to be understood, of themselves.
of all Christians, be not only sufficiently, but abundantly contained in the
Scriptures; yet, how clearly there laid down, depends upon the purpose, for
which, God declares that he gave the several parts of it. It is manifest, that
God intended to veil the New Testament in the Old, and to reveal the Old
Testament by the New. Therefore Christianity cannot be clearly delivered in
the Old Testament. Till our Lord was to leave the world, he declared not the
condition of Christianity, by which we are saved. He declared not that which
he declared when he was to leave the world; to wit, that it was thenceforth
to consist in undertaking to profess the Faith of the Holy Trinity, and to live
by Christ's precepts, though ones life lie upon it. For he declared not the
promise of sending the Holy Ghost, till he was ready to leave the world. And
therefore the Baptism of Christ, by which Christians do make that prosession,
which saves us, was not instituted till his departure. And though our Lord had
clearly preached the precepts of Christian life, from the beginning; yet is the
Visible estate of his Mystical Body the Church, as well as the invisible estate
of particular members, darkly figured and typified, not only by the parables of
the Gospel, but, as well by that which befell him, as by that which he did,
during the time of his preaching. Therefore, neither is Christianity clearly
delivered by the Gospels. To them, to whom the Apostles writ their Epistles,
the substance of Christianity must needs be known; for they had been made
Christians upon the professing of it. But their Epistles, therefore, suppose
it, and therefore cannot pretend to deliver it. Besides, the greatest part of
them is spent in proving that we are saved by Christianity, out of the Old
Testament: And therefore, by that correspondence, in which the Law answers the
Gospel, the Church, the Synagogue, and the Kingdom of Heaven, the Land of
promise. And though our Lord opened his Disciples hearts, thus to understand
the Scriptures; yet are not all that shall be saved able to make out this
correspondence; the professing and performing of that Christianity, whereby
they are saved, not requiring it. Therefore, neither are the Apostles writings
clear in things necessary to salvation, but supposing the knowledge of that
Christianity, whereby we are saved; nor absolutely clear, but to those that
are able to make out that correspondence. Without this limitation, it is not to
be granted, that all things necessary to salvation are clear to all that seek
salvation, by the Scriptures alone. For, what mark is there extant in the
Scripture, to distinguish that which is necessary to salvation, from that which
is not?

Nor is there any inconvenience in all this, to them that are Tradition
limiteth the sense of the Scripture.
content to lay prejudice aside, and to see that which they cannot but see. For
it will appear by the writings of the Apostles, that they committed the
Doctrine of Christianity to them whom they trusted with the founding and
governing of the Church; for the instructing of them that were to be baptized,
and formed into Churches, whereof the whole Church was to consist. So that, as
they to whom the Apostles writ, having received their Christianity from those
that were so trusted, were to limit the meaning of their writings within that
Faith which they had received; So is all interpretation of Scripture still to
be confined within that, which the Church, from the beginning, has received
by their hands. Which is not to make any man lord of any man's Faith. For this
Tradition of the Faith is before the very being of the Church; Because,
whosoever became a Christian; and so a member of the Church; it is supposed
that he undertaketh the same. And therefore, being in force before there be
any Church, it cannot depend upon any authority to be claimed by the Church.
And the evidence for it is the same ground, into which, the reason of believing
resolves; The consent of all Christians. Which, as it could not have been
preserved and obtained, had it not been required to make a man a member of that
Church, which, by professing it, stood visibly distinct from all that profess
i^ not; So, since as much as is necessary to salvation has been already
declared, by the consent of the Church; to confine all interpretation of
Scripture within that which all the Church, every where, at all times has
received, can make no man lord over the Faith of the Church.

But there is a vast distance between this Tradition of Faith, Difference
between the Tradition of Faith and Ritual Traditions.
and other Traditions, which may have proceeded from that authority, and trust
for founding the Church, which our Lord left with his Apostles, and they with
the Church. For that, being the condition upon which all Christians are saved,
remains always the same, neither to be increased nor diminished till the
Worlds end. But the productions of Ecclesiastical power vested in the Apostles
and their successors, can be no more then the limiting of circumstances,
according to which, the public Service of God is to be performed: and those
powers exercised, which God has granted the Church, for the maintaining of
Unity, in serving God according to that Christianity which our Lord teaches.
Christianity is concerned in them but two ways. The first; when they are so
far from advancing the service of God, which Christianity requires, that it is
impaired and destroyed by corruption in them. The second; when a part of the
Church proceeds to a change in them, upon pretense that so it is, though
indeed it be otherwise. The first is the plea of the Reformation against the
Church of Rome; The second, the plea of the Church of Rome against them, as to
this point of Traditions. And the issue is the same, that is to be tried,
between the Church of England, and those that stand at this distance from it.
For, the Unity of the Church being a part of the common Christianity; the
breach of it will be chargeable upon that side, which makes such a change, as
the rest have not reason to embrace. If the pretense thereof be either not
evident, or not sufficient, the fault is in them; If both, in those who refuse
to join in i^. The Rules, and Customs, and Rites of the Church which are called
Traditions, are not commanded because good, but are good because commanded. And
therefore, even the Traditions of the Apostles, being of this kind, may cease
to oblige, by the change that may-succeed in the state of the Church, for which
they are provided. Instances hereof, recorded in the Scriptures, have been
produced.

They therefore that break from the Church, upon any point The difference
between Haeresic and Schism.
of the Tradition of Faith; which is before the Church, as being requisite to
make a man a member of the Church; are properly called Haereticks. For, if they
only disbeleeve in the heart, they may be counted Haereticks to God; but that
is nothing to the Church, of which we now speak. But they that will not stand
to the authority of the Church, in matters subject to it, are Schismatics. For
those things, to which the authority of the Church extends, are the matter of
Schism. Not that this difference is always observed. For many times, the name
of Haeresie extends to all Sects, which man's choice, not the will of God
creates. But because there is that difference visible in the matter of
Christianity, which many times appropriateth the common name of Haeresie to the
most eminent; that Separate upon matter of Faith. These things are here
premised, to make way for the evidence which I tender, for the Visible Unity of
the Church, from the consent of all Christians. He that sticks at any point
of it, may have recourse to the proof which I have made in due place; taking
all, therefore, here, for granted.

But I will advance another assumption, tending ^o set the The dependence of
Churches evid^n^eth the Unity of the Whole Church.
same evidence in better light, by stating the form, in which, the whole
Church, from the Apostles, has always been governed, without repeating the
proofs whereby it appears. A Church then, in the sense of all Christians
before the Reformation, is the Body of Christians contained in a City, and the
Territory of it. For the Government of such a one, the respective Authority of
the Apostles, conveyed by the overt act of their Ordination, was visibly vested
in a Bishop; in a number of Presbyters, for his advice and assistance; and in
Deacons, attending upon them, and upon the executing of their Orders. I say,
the respective authority of the Apostles; because, as less Cities are subject
to greater, in Civil Government; so have the Churches of less Cities, always
depended upon Churches of greater Cities, throughout Christendom. Rome,
Alex^ndria, Antiochia, were, from the beginning of Christianity, visible heads
of these great resorts, in Church Government, which the Council of N^c^^ made
subject to them by Canon Law, for the future. The eminence of other Cities,
over their inferior Churches, appears in the Records of the Church, as soon as
there is any mention of them to make it appea^. In these Churches, and in the
Governors of them, the whole Authority of the Apostles was vested; For they
constituted the Church.

In process of time, the Government of the Roman Empire The form of this
dependence throughout the Roman Empire.
was molded anew under Constantine, otherwise then it had been by Augustus.
But this new model was designed by Adrian. It made the chief Cities of the
chief quarters of the Empire the Residences of the chief Commanders of the
Armies, with civil Jurisdictions respective; Which civil Jurisdictions
Constan^ine left them, when he took from them their commands over the Armies.
Carthage for Africa, Milane for Italy, (that part which was not under Rome)
Triers for Gaul, Thessalonica for Illyricum, Ephesus for Asia,: Caesarea
Cappadociae for Pontus; the pre-eminence of the Churches is as visible over the
Churches of their inferior Cities, in the records of the Church, as the
pre-eminence of the Cities in the records of the Empire. And, according the
course of all humane affairs, must not this, pre-^minence, of necessity, be
further limited, enlarged, or abated, in process of time, whether by written
Law, or by silent* custom? For the effect hereof, I present to your
consideration the Canons of the Council of Sardica; whick I take to be the
greatest advantage, that ever lawfully, and by regular means, accrewed to the
Church of Rome, toward that greatness, which since it has irregularly
obtained. For it is visible, that they were the means to extend the superiority
thereof over Illyricum; which continued, till the Eastern Empire, having the
Church of Rome in jealousy, laid that whole Jurisdiction under the Church of
Constantinople. The increase of which Church, upon the seating of the Empire at
that City, (the ground which I allege for the superiority of all Churches) as
it has been unjustly opposed by the Church of Rome, so it is justly owned, by
those who protest against the Usurpation of it.

They that would except Britain out of this Rule, upon the No exception to be
made to it, for the British Church.
act of the Welsh Bishops, refusing Austine the Monk for their head; should
consider, that St. Gregory, setting him over the Saxon Church, which he had
founded, according to Rule, transgressed the Rule, in setting him over the
Welsh Church. For the Canon of the Apostles maintains every Nation to be
governed by their own Bishop. Which the Welsh had reason then to insist upon,
because of the jealousy which appeared from the Saxons, of their incroaching
upon the Nation, if their Bishop should be owned for the head of the Welsh
Church. Setting this case aside, the rest of that little remembrance that
remains, concerning the British Church, testifies the like respect from it to
the Church of Rome, as appears from the Churches of Gaul, Spain, and Africa;
of which there is no cause to doubt, that they first received their
Christianity from the Church of Rome. And if so they did, then is there reason
to conclude, that they owed it the respect which was due to their Mother
Church; But, that they either owed it, or showed it the respect of a Subject to
the Sovereign, which none is challenged, none at all. As for Illyricum, which
showed the same respect after the Council of Sardica; it cannot be thought to
have owed it before, because it received not Christianity Episcopacy, by this
form^ inviolable in all opinions; And the Church a standing ^ynod.
from Rome.

Hereby it may appear, that the Visible Unity of the Church must stand or fall
with Episcopacy; And, therefore no marvel that it should not be acknowledged,
by them who acknowledge not Episcopacy. For, the soul of this unity consisting
in the resort of inferior Churches to superiors, and in the correspondence of
parallel Churches; neither can this resort, nor this correspondence ever appear
to have been had and exercised, but between Bishops, as heads, in behalf of
their Churches. Whether by a treaty of Bishops, personally assembled in
Council, or by correspondence between Bishops, by means of their Presbyters,
Deacons or inferior Clergy, good intelligence were preserved between Churches,
toward the maintaining of communion in the whole; it matters not. The Church,
in the form which I state, is a standing Synod, able, by consent of the chief
Churches, containing the consent of their resorts, to conclude the whole. In
all the records of the Church, let them show me one Presbyter that ever
answered for his Church, to the rest of the Church, at least in his own name;
(for, if in the name of, and by Commission from his Bishop, it is for my turn)
and let them take all. And therefore, though Episcopacy must needs be declared
for part of Gods Law, by the Scriptures, understood as the consent of the
Church directs; (against which, no Scripture can be rightly understood) yet,
supposing the Church Visible by Gods Law, I have enough to make them
Schismatickes that oppose it; though I should make Episcopacy no part of Gods
Law, but introduced by consent of the whole Church. For, that part which
submits not to the consent of the Whole, in matters which Gods Law refers
to the Whole, for the preservation of that unity which it enacteth, are justly
to be taken for those that violate the Unity which Gods Law enacteth;
Epecially, in a Law of that consequence, as one of those Rights, wherein the
chief power of the Church consists. It is strange to see how fondly men
argue; that Presbyters have the power of the Keys, which made the Apostles
Apostles; Therefore much more are they equal to Bishops. As if they could not
have that power in private matters, between God and the conscience of particular
Christians; Reserving the same power for the Bishops peculiar, in things,
which, being public, concern the Body of each Church. For, in the cause of
Arius, this power was in the Council of Nicaea, and in no less. Had Athanasius
of Alexandria, or Alexander of Constantinople loosed him, whom the Synod had
bound; though at the instance of Constantine; they had been sinners to God and
to his Church, in violating the Unity thereof; which he has made more
inviolable then any temporal endowment of it.

How far are we now, from having evidenced the Visible Unity of Gods Church to
be a part of the common Christianity; The Church Visible by disowning
Haeretickes and Schismatickes.
supposing these things proved, the proofs whereof have no way been insringed?
Haeretickes are condemned by themselves, says Paul; because they know they
forsake that profession, upon which they were baptized members of the Church.
But it is Titus that is to refuse them. The Church avoids them because the
Bishop finds them incorrigible. If other Bishops, and their Churches, duly
informed from Titus, do the like, then is the Visible Unity of the Church
visible in their proceedings. If they do not the like, then must they break
communion with Titus and his Church; by a perpetual Rule of the Church, holding
all Excommunicate, that shall acknowledge an Excommunicate person to be a
member of the Church. But we read of no breach in the Church, for any of those
whom the Church has declared Haeretickes; Except what shall by and by be
excepted. Thus far all the Church owneth the Visible Unity of the Church. As
for Schism, how many occasions of it have been prevented? The difference about
keeping Easter; the difference about rebaptizing Haeretickes; Many other
differences have threatened breaches in the Church, which have been prevented,
through the conduct of Christian Prelates. Other divisions that have come to
pass, have been reunited sometimes, sometimes not. The communion of the Church
of Sardinia with the rest of the Western Churches stood interrupted, by the
discontents of Lucifer Archbishop there; And therefore, I conceive, for his
time and no more. The Church of Antiochia stood divided within it self, under
two Bishops, for a matter of threescore years; till, by the intercession of the
West as well as of the East, it was reunited. The East, under Constantinople,
stood divided from the West, under Rome, upon the cause of Acacius, for some
seventy years; till the Church of Rome was satisfied. How long the Schism of
Montanus lasted, (for at the first it was but a Schism, if we judge by
Tertullian; who is the best record that remains of it) I say not. It seems to
have turned into an Haeresie first, and then to nothing, as other Haeresies
have done. The Schism of the Novatians (for it was no more) seems to have
returned to the Church by pieces. And so that of the Meletians. The Donatists
seem to have continued, till Africa was overrun by the Mahumetans. In all these
breaches, what signifies the attribute of one Catholic Church, but a Visible
Unity opposite to so many visible Apostasies? St. Austine says, that if a
stranger asked an Haeretick or Schismatic the way to the Catholic Church, he
durst not show him the way to his own Church; because the title was not
questionable. Not merely because the Catholic had more belonging to it; (as
some would have us judge of Religion by counting Noses) but as Optatus says,
quia rationalis, and ubique diffusa; because the due reason, why men are
Christians, swayed men to stand to the unity of the Church all over; The undue
reason, that moved men to break with it, prevailed but here and there. At all
hands, discounting Haeretickes and Schismatickes; whom they that follow do
seldom approve; so many Christians, so many witnesses of one Catholic Church,
which, by being Catholic, was always, and must needs be Visible. And thus
far we have the same evidence for one Visible Church, as for the rest of
Christianity.

After the Council of Ephesus, the reputation of Nestorius held The breaches
that have come to pass evidence the same.
entire in the East, notwithstanding the Decree of the Council. The Records of
the Church have preserved us no intelligence, how, or by what means. Those that
write of the Wars of the holy Land afterward, represeut us the Nestorians in
the East so numerous, as might well stumble those that pretend to decide the
Controversy of Religion by the Poll, in our Western parts. But, whether the
breach stood upon the opinion, or upon the person of Nestorius; is more then I
am able to decide. For in Egypt likewise, after many troubles about the
Council of Chalcedon, and the condemning of their Bishop Dioscorus by it; at
length these Churches are counted Jacobites, from the name of one Jacobus
Zanzalus, or little Jacob, of Syria, who is said to have taught them the
position of Eutyches, condemned by that Council. Whether so, or whether a fond
zeal for the reputation of Dioscorus has served to divide that people from the
Church, upon a mere difference in terms; the breach still continues, and the
Abyssines, depending always upon the Church of Alexandria, are said to
continue in it. Since that, what breach of intercourse and communion has
fallen out between the Greek and Latin Church, or upon what cause, and how far
it continues, I need not relate. But there can be no question, that it
disposed these Western parts to that breach, which the Reformation has made.
Within the Reformation, I need not speak of the Division between the Calvinists
on the one side; and the Lutherans in the Empire, the Arminians in the Law
Countries, on the other side. I am only this to demadn; did ever any of these
parties declare that the Visible Unity, which these breaches interrupt, is not
Gods Ordinance? That one of the Parties is not always guilty to God, for the
mischief of Schism? That Christian charity is not highly concerned, in
violating that Communion which Christianity enacteth? Until the dregs of our
times, I do not know that it was ever Disputed, that Christians are not bound
to be members of one and the same Visible Church. I have already said, that
the Reformation was not made by common consent. I must now acknowledge futher,
that it proceeded not expressly upon the profession of one Visible Church;
though neither denying nor questioning the same. No marvel then, if in all
things it be not confined to the consequences of it. And therefore, no marvel,
that dissentions have fallen out in it. No marvel that they, who dare not look
so clear a principle in the face, can wrangle out the salvation of souls upon
pety scruples, which the admitting of it must needs presently disperse.

CHAP. VII.
Reformation to be bounded by that wherein the Visible Church agrees. No
change, without regard to the Rules of the Catholic Church. Regular authority
in the Church of Rome the means of Unity; absolute, of Schism. How we are
visibly one with the only Church of God, Reforming without the Church of Rome.

AS for the Church of England, where Episcopacy stands Reformation to be
bounded by that wherein the Visible Church agrees.
settled by the Law of the Land, as well as by the Law of God: and the right of
goods consecrated to the Service of God, by investing them upon his Church, is
maintained by the same; Are we not to fear the curse of God, if in all things
of Religion we mete not by the same Standard, if we weigh not by the same
Weights? Can we pretend to weigh by the same Weights, unless we admit the
whole Faith, and all the Laws of the Catholic Church? Unless we confine the
Reformation to the restoring of that which has been, without introducing that
which cannot appear to have been? Men see new fanfies every day in the
Scriptures, which the same man sees not to morrow, another man never sees. The
Prof^ssion of Faith, the Rules of Government, the Rites of Gods service are the
things, that must make a Church a part or no part of the Whole Church. For if
the Church be a Visible Body, it must be visible by the Laws which it uses.
And, if it be to continue one and the same Body from the first to the second
coming of our Lord, the Laws of it will necessarily change, as the Laws of
all Bodies do; but the authority whence they proceed must needs continue the
same. If corruption and abuse be to be Reformed, and those in whom the
authority visibly rests, agree not; Restoring that which was, you have the
Authority of the Apostles and their successors, for the reviving of their
acts; Introducing that which was not, you go by the spirit of the Fanatickes,
the dictate whereof appears not in the Scriptures, by the consent of the
Church. In fine, matter of Faith is, to the worlds end, the same that the whole
Church has always, from the beginning professed. If you impose more, the
Church of Rome will have a better pretense then you can have; namely, a better
claim to the authority of the Church. For it is an imposture to induce any man
to think, that, professing Christianity, they can renounce the Scriptures. The
issue is, and will be, whether you or the Church shall be judge; Until you
distinguish between the present Church and the Whole Church; not contesting the
Faith of the present Church, so far as it holds with the Whole. But, in matter
of Church Law, which, for the reason that has been said, is necessarily
changeable; though the difference of times, and the estate of things, will not
endure the restoring of Primitive Discipline; yet shall it be easy thereby to
discern, what is abated for Unities sake, what is rejected, because the
Catholic Church and the Laws of it are not owned.

And upon these terms, it will be easy to answer all demands, No change,
without regard to the Rules of the Catholic Church.
not only here, but at the great day of Judgment; at which, otherwise, the
account cannot be clear. They that would have it thought, that the mischiefs
which we have seen have not been acted for nothing, would have the Law of the
Kingdom, in matter of Religion, changed to give them content; without
considering what cause we give the Church of Rome, to take us for
Schismatickes, balking the Whole Church, that we may be reconciled to those
that have broken from us. For, supposing for the present, though not granting,
that all Papists are Idolaters, and the Pope Antichrist; The Unity of the
Church, is nevertheless, as it has been proved, a part of Christian truth. Nor
can Papists be Idolaters, or the Pope Antichrist, for believing any thing
which the Whole Church believes; for commanding, or for practicing that, which
the Whole Church has commanded or practiced. Nay, not for that, which the
Whole Church of any age has allowed part of the Church to practice. For, God
forbid it should be said, (which it were senseless to imagine) that part of
the Christian World should own part of it for Christians, being indeed
Idolaters, and Partisans of Antichrist. The Church must have been utterly lost
in that case; and the Reforming of it must not be the mending of the old
Church, but the making of a new Church. Yet is it not enough for these men, to
allege the ancient Church in any particular. They must weigh by their own
Weights, and mete by their own Standard, if they will not fall under Gods
curse. They that stand not to the consent of the Church in all things, answer
themselves when they allege it. Nay, they may invite us to be Schismatickes
for their sakes, in that, for which they truly allege the ancient Church. A
justifiable, nay a commendable custom of the ancient Church may come out of
use, without any violence, any fraud, any purpose, to defeat that pious intent,
to which such a custom was instrumental. They who had rather break with the
Church of Rome, then comply with a change, which the change of time, and the
state of things by time, has brought to pass, should be, in my opinion,
Schismatickes. But, what if our Fanatickes should be content, silently to
return into the communion of this Church, as Presbyterians? What if it appear,
that they are Bullion Haeretickes, for the positions they profess; though not
stamped by conviction, and contumacy succeeding, and the Declaration of the
Church upon that? It will not then be clear how we shall wipe off that
imputation, to which we shall be liable by the perpetual Rule of Gods Church;
for receiving and communicating with those that have stamped themselves
Schismatickes as Schismatickes, those that have declared themselves Bullion
Haeretickes, as Bullion Haeretickes; without any ground to presume that they
are changed. Certainly, we cannot allege the Catholic Church for our selves,
but it will rise in judgementagainst us, when we stick not to it.

What condition we fall into, if we submit to the Church Regular authority in
the Church of Rome the means of unity; absolute, of Schism.
of Rome, upon terms of conquest, it is manifest enough. For, wherein the Pope
has not limited his own authority, by the Council of Trent, we render our
selves to the mercy of it. Missionaries shall have done a great effect, if they
persuade us that we are Schismatickes, unless we return to those abuses,
which we see with our eyes, which we handle with our hands, they are so
evident and so gross. Well may they persuade simple Christians, that they must
first resolve which is the true Church, and then, what is true and what is
false in Religion, by that which the Church, so resolved, teaches. This is a
great deal the shorter way, then to justify the particulars, which by this
means, they impose upon them. And if we render our selves upon these terms,
what remains, but that we admit whatsoever the Pope shall impose for the
future; though we know, that the Power of the Whole Church extends not to it?
Which, how shall we answer at the Day of Judgment, either for our selves, or
those that depend upon us? And yet I have showed, that the Church of Rome has,
and ought to have, when it shall please to hear reason, a regular pre-eminence
over the rest of Christendom, in these Western parts. And, he that is able to
judge, and willing to consider, shall find that pre-eminence the only
reasonable means, to preserve so great a Body in Unity. And therefore, I count
not my self tied to justify Henry the VIII. in disclaiming all such
pre-eminence; when it was enough for his purpose, to disown it, as not
extending to his case. For, by the regular constitution of the Church, which I
have described, if the Pope excommunicate any man injustly, he does it in his
own wrong; he excommunicates himself thereby, from all that shall adhere to
him whom he excommunicates. His advantage is only this; If more adhere to the
chief Church then to the less. For which, though there be regularly a
presumption; yet, if Usurpation appear, either in sentencing, or in the matter,
or in the effect of the sentence, he that exceeds his authority breaks it upon
him that exceeds not; like the waves of the sea against a rock.

But, of the Usurpations of that Church, wherein they consist, How we are
visibly one with the only Church of God, Reforming without the Church of Rome.
and by what means effected, in due place; that the difference may be Visible,
between the infinite and the regular power of the Pope. In the mean time, what
I have said of this point, I must say of all matters in difference; That, as the
Church of Rome cannot hinder us of restoring our selves to the Primitive Right
of the Church, by which a Christian Kingdom, duly may maintain the Service of
God; (neither consenting to the abuses which other Churches maintain, nor
breaking with them in other matters) so are we to go no further, then the
consent of the Church will bear us out. For if we make new and private
conceits, of the Scripture, and the sense of it, Law to the Church, which we
Reform, we found a new Church, upon that Christianity, which the only Church
of God never owned. But if we only restore that, which, by abuse of time, may
appear to have come to decay; we impe and ingraffe the Church which we
Reform, into that only Church, which they that Reformed not succeed. For how
should we depart from Unity with that Church, the authority whereof we follow
in the change which we make? If therefore we are to be without offense to
Jews and Gentiles, and to the Churches of God; as St. Paul commands; then are
we to be without offense also to the Church of Rome. Now it is no offense to
the Church of Rome, that we build Unity among our selves upon an opposition to
the abuses of it. But, if upon an opposition to that which it holds from the
Whole Church, we give them cause to take us for Schismatickes, as not
reverencing in her, the Whole Church, which we are bound to hold with.

CHAP. VIII.
What means God has provided private Christians to discern the true Church.
The duty of all Estates, for the Re-uniting of Schism. The ground and extent
of Secular Power in Church Matters. How the Conscience of Sovereign Power is
discharged, maintaining the Church.

UPon these terms, the choice of Religion would become What means God has
provided private Christians to discern the true Church.
more clear (which otherwise must become far more doubtful) by the settling of
our present differences. For, I grant it a thing too difficult for every
Christian, that is concerned to choose his Communion, to try the particulars in
controversy by the consent of the Church. But I maintain the same difficulty
in trying which Church it is, that preaches the true Word of God, and rightly
and duly administreth the Sacraments; which others would have the marks of the
true Church. For, without trying the particulars in Controversy, how shall it
appear where the Word is preached, where the Sacraments are ministered as they
should be? And how shall they be tried, but by the Scriptures, expounded
according to the consent of the Church? As for them that would have us take the
decree of the present Church to be Infallible; they are first to tell us, upon
whose credit we take that Infallibility. For, you see, we believe not the
present Church that it is the Church; to wit, founded by God. We accept it
upon the consent of the whole Church. Neither is any thing Infallible in
Christianity, but upon the same ground. It is not the decree of the present
Church, but the witness and agreement of the Whole Church, that renders any
thing Infallible. Now, it is true, every Christian has the Judgment of
discretion, in the choice of Religion, in point of fact; That is to say;
supposing the division, or rather the divisions that are on foot in the Church.
But in point of Right, it ought to be otherwise; God having provided the Unity
of the Church, on purpose, that simple Christians might not be put to so hard
a choice. For, when the Catholic Church was so Visibly distinct from all
Sects, that a Sectary would have been laughed at, had he called his own Church
the Catholic Church of that City; Wilfully must he perish, that should
forsake that Church, which he could not mistake. But in our case, what avails
it to allege the Title of Catholic, while the ground of the Title remains
disputable? Especially, the division between the Greek and Latin Church having
rendered it almost insignificant before: And the number of Protestants, as I said
of Nestorians, rendering it questionable, where the signification will light.

Seeing therefore, that the malice of man, by dividing the The duty of all
estates, for the re-uniting of Schism.
Church, renders it Invisible, as hard to be seen; though not Invisible, as
not possible to be seen; What remains, but that all public persons, and
whosoever is interessed in the divisions of the Church, understand and consider
what account they owe, for the Souls that must needs miscarry, by the
divisions, which they maintain wheu they need not? For how shall he be clear,
that professes not a desire of condescending to all that which truth will
allow, on either side, for the advantage of peace on both sides? And seeing
neither side can make peace without the consent of both, but either may have
truth alone; What remains, but that all Reformation be confined within those
bounds, which the Faith and the Law of the Catholic Church fixes? For, though
they that profess and intend to Reform by that Rule may fail, in applying
their Rule to some matters; Though, seeing what the Rule requires, they may be
fain to abate of it, because the Body which they intend to regulate is not
capable of the strict Rule; Yet it is a reasonable ground of confidence, for a
single heart, that the right Rule is expressly professed to be intended. For,
though in all divisions, the parties, acknowledging One Visible Church, must
needs hold the one the other Schismatics, unless they will bear the blame of
the division themselves; Yet is there no appearance in reason, that God will
take them for Schismatics, that follow so fair a profession in general, though
it may not come to effect in some particular.

And this is the only way, to provide a clear discharge for the The ground and
extent of Secular Power in Church matters.
Secular Power, that is Sovereign; in establishing such a Reformation by Law,
to the people of it, and enacting the same with such privileges and penalties,
as Christianity either allows or requires. For it is manifest, from the
premises, that the Church, by Gods Law, is Judge in the matter of all Laws,
according to which, Religion is to be enacted by any Sovereign. Yet is the
Sovereign Power Judge also of their Judgment, as not only it self, a Member of
the Whole Church, and Heir to all right, which the Unity thereof intitleth any
Christian to; but as Protector of the Church, and of the Faith, and Laws of
it; That is, as Protector of all Subjects within the Church of the respective
Dominions, in all right, which the Law of the Church in the Dominion thereof
setleth. And therefore bound to judge, whether that which the Church, either of
the respective Dominion, or united with the same, shall determine, be such, as
the Uuity of the Whole Church either allows, or requires; or not. For, it is
only the Sovereign Power, that can enact it for a Law upon all the Subjects
thereof, to the effect of Secular privileges or penalties. And, seeing the
Faith and Communion of the Church is the inheritance of the Secular Power, that
is Christian; It is manifest that he is trusted for his Subjects, in matter of
Religion, to no purpose, if he be to trust the Church at large, in the matter
of his Office. And yet, Gods Law having provided the Church, to limit all
matters questionable upon the constitution of the Church; It is also manifest,
that all Secular Power is to suppose the Faith of the Church, as always the
same from the beginning: And the Laws in being, as acts of the same authority
which was founded by God in the Whole Church from the beginning, before any
Secular Power was Christian; Which if it protect not, why is it Christian? I
say it is bound to acce^t them for such, in case it appear not, by the Faith
and the Laws of the Whole Church, that they are otherwise. And in that case,
though the Secular Power be Judge for it self; yet the Church, and the Law of
the Church, is the Rule by which it is to judge. As for that which present
necessity requires ^o be restored, or settled a new for the Church respective
to every Sovereignty; It is also mani^est, that the Secular Power both may, and
ought to see the Church under it to do their Office; Knowing that it is their
Office, as to preserve the Faith, which is always the same; So, to maintain
Unity, by suiting the Laws which are to be, with those which have been from the
beginning; Whereof common reason, in all public Powers, is a competent Judge.
I need say nothing, that Secular Powers may, and are to see, that, under
pretense of Ecclesiastical Power, or Jurisdiction, their own rights be not
invaded; having said; That the power of the Church produces no Secular effect.
But, as the enacting of the Church Laws, with Secular privileges and
penalties, is only the effect of Secular Power: So is it accountable to God
alone for the use of it.

And as the Unity of the whole Church must needs be concerned, How the
Conscience of Sov^reign Power (...)*
in the Laws of the Church, respective to this or that Sovereignty; So is it
not possible, that any Sovereign should be Judge, in the concernments of those
that are not his Subjects. The divisions of Christendom, which I alleged
before, make full evidence for this. For what need further dispute about
Religion, were Subjects, as Subjects, by Gods Law, bound to stand to the will
of their Sovereigns, in that which concerns them as Christians? This shows, how
much Sovereigns are concerned, for their discharge to God, to seek the peace of
Christendom. For, if, as at present, it cannot be had upon just terms, it is
not the opinion of this or that Divine; It is not the opinion of any person
whatsoever, not acting in a quality capable, by the constitution of the Church,
to oblige the Church respective to the Sovereign; Much less is it his personal
skill in matters of Religion, (though as great as any man's) that can serve for
his discharge to God. He is answerable to God, notwithstanding any such
advise, for any wrong, that the privileges and penalties otherwise enacted may
do. But maintaining, first the express profession of the Rule hitherto
established; bounding all Reformation of the present Church, by that which the
consent of the Whole Church either allows, or requires; Then, maintaining
them in their Office, whose Office it is, to form that, which his act must
make Law to his Subjects; There will need no more for his discharge to God,
then the use of that Judgment which God has endowed him with, to discern,
whether the Rule which he protecteth be duly applied to that which he
enacteth, or not. For as no reason can be excused to God, transgressing that
which it sees; So, in things doubtful, to prefer any reason before that
which God trusts, in the matter of such trust, is to render a man's self
accountable to God, for that wrong which may be done; for which, otherwise,
those that are trusted by God should be accountable.

CHAP. IX.
Difficulty in receiving the Fanatics into this Church. How their Positions
destroy the Faith. Absolute Praedestination to Glory destructive to
Christianity. Justifying Faith includes the profession of Christianity. The
Nature of Faith, according to the Scriptures, shows the same. So does the
state of that Question which St Paul disputes. The consent of the Church
herein; with the ground of it. The sense of this Church.

BUt I must now profess, that the weightiest point, in re-uniting Difficulty in
receiving the Fanatics into this Church.
the breaches of Religion in this Church, is the Condition, upon which, the
Fanatics may be, either reconciled to it, or shut out of it; whether with
free exercise of their several Sects, or under certain penalties, as Recusants.
I see that they are not afraid to pretend a further liberty, of Public
Preachers, even since the Laws of this Land were in force. For I find that
such of them, as are not Ministers of Congregations, do, notwithstanding, style
themselves Public Preachers. Which is nothing else, then to pretend that
authority, from the Secular Power, which they had by the late Usurpation; to
seduce as many of his Majesty's Subjects as they can to their Conventicles. But
that I will say nothing of, because I make certain account, that, whenever
we come to any settlement in Religion, they will find that their pretense to
be vain. That which I insist upon is that, which, I conceive, I have proved;
that the positions which they notoriously challenge are downright Haeresie;
wanting only conviction, to produce, either conversion or contumacy: and the
declaration of the Church upon the same. For it is notorious, that they
challenge the present endowment of Gods Spirit, and the certainty of Salvation
for the future, upon no further consideration, then of their persons; As not
depending upon the Christianity which they either profess or perform. So far
they are from acknowledging, that it depends upon their being Members of Gods
Church, by living according to that Christianity which it professes. For,
because they think themselves Members of Christ, before they be Members of
Gods Church; Therefore they think themselves enabled by God, to divide the
Church in infinitum: And, that the Conventicles of their Congregations are
Churches to the same effect, with those which were founded by the Apostles;
Though they profess not the Faith, though they renounce the Unity of one
Visible Church. Therefore they openly allow those who maintain, that God can
see no sin in his Elect; That their sins are pardoned from everlasting, before
they be done; That God shall not judge by our works, but by his own decrees;
That there are Inspirations of the Holy Ghost without the Word, though not
against it; for dear Members of Christ, and the cream of Christians. And hence
comes the everlasting divisions which they maintain. For, to renounce those
bounds, which the Faith of the Church, and the Unity thereof fixes, is enough
to commend them to all parties that do so, for the Godly. In fine, the whole
fry of this error resolves it self in two Positions; That God praedestinateth
to Salvation, merely in consideration of men's persons, and not of any
Christianity, which they shall be found to have professed and performed: And,
that the knowledge of this Praedestination, revealed by the Word, and sealed by
the Spirit, immediately, not supposing the Christianity which they profess and
perform, is that Faith which only justifies.

I cannot say that the Presbyterians do expressly profess these How their
Positions destroy the Faith.
Positions. For they have an express Confession of their Faith, which
expresses them not. But seeing them, in all occasions of public confusion,
render themselves considerable by these Fanatics, as being of one and the same
party; I must take it for granted, that they think their Profession
reconcilable with these Positions. Especially knowing how many particular
Divines, and Preachers of that party, have maintained the same; Namely, all
that maintain justifying Faith, and the Knowledge and Assurance of a man's
Salvation, without and before Repentance. I do not then say, that the belief of
absolute Praedestination is Haeresie in the sight of God. Because it may be
held with other positions, which are an antidote to the venime of it, as being
really contradictory to it; Which contradiction, did those that hold it
perceive, they could not hold it. For, this contradiction suffers not the
consequence of Haeresie to take effect. But, both positions together, I have
maintained to be downright Haeresie. Neither have I been showed, or of my
self discovered any reason, sufficient to think otherwise. And therefore, I
must continue to weigh by my own Weights, and to mete by my own Measures.

For, that the ground and substance of Christianity is utterly Absolute
Praedestination to Glory destructive to Christianity.
inconsistent with the Decree which they imagine, is manifest, if any thing can
be manifest in Christianity. Because, if there were any such Decree, then
could not men be judged at the last day; as judged they shall be; by their
works. There is no Decree of God that shall not be executed. If God decree
from everlasting, to give glory and torment for everlasting, without
consideration of men's works, then must he, without such consideration, give it
in time. For otherwise, he should not execute that which he decrees. And
indeed, such a Decree can no way be undefeasible; as all Gods Decrees must
be; Unless God determine and move every man, to every thing that he does,
every moment of his life, upon the account whereof he shall be saved or
damned; And that before his own will determine or move it self. But if God
should so determine and move man's will, then would the tender of the Gospel be
a mere abuse, and a mockery; Inviting mankind to Salvation upon a Condition,
which, unless God determine and move him to perform, he cannot; If he do, he
cannot but perform. The justice of Gods proceedings, at the last day, stands
upon this; That a man might have transgressed that, for which he is rewarded
or punished: And the obligation of Christianity in this; That, by the help
which it tendreth, a man is able to do that which it requires. Again, if we
may be assured of the effect of our Christianity, (the endowment of Gods
Spirit here, and everlasting Salvation in the world to come) before we be
assured that we have performed it; How can we be obliged, either to profess
or to perform that, which, it is to no effect, either to profess or to perform,
if the effect be had, without either professing or performing it? For, I
challenge the common reason of men, to question this; That no effect can depend
upon any condition, which a man can be sure of, before he be sure, whether
he have the condition or not. So that, he that is sure of his Salvation,
before he be sure, whether he be a good Christian or not, cannot think it a
condition necessary to Salvation, that he be a good Christian. And therefore
must needs think, that he may be saved, without being a good Christian. Nor
will it serve the turn to say, that he is not therefore saved without being a
good Christian; Because, if he be so assured, he is also assured, that God
will make him a good Christian. For in that case, Christianity would not be
the condition upon which Salvation; and therefore the assurance of Salvation;
should depend. But a mean, by which God would save him, whom he should decree
to save; upon no condition of being a Christian. Whereas, if Christianity be
true, and if God shall judge us by our works, we must be saved by performing
that Christianity which we are to profess, and not otherwise.

For I must here begin, where I left before; when I said, that Justifying Faith
includes the profession of Christianity.
they who define justifying faith, without including the profession of
Christianity in it, do mistake the very ground of the Christian Faith. No man
can be a Disciple of Christ, (that is, a Christian; For they who were called
Disciples of Christ before, were called Christians at Antiochia) without taking
up Christ's Cross; That is, professing to dye for Christianity, if it be
requisite; If not, to forgo any advantage of this world, which a man cannot
hold, doing the duty of a good Christian. It is manifest, that it is not the
inward belief of the heart, but the outward profession of the mouth, that
rendereth a Christian liable to Christ's Cross. For, could a man be saved
denying Christ, there were no cause why he should suffer for Christ. Seeing
therefore that Christ manifestly requires a Christian to take up his Cross; it
is manifest, that Justification, which Christianity promises, is not to be
had without professing Christianity. Who ever believed it, but the disciples of
Simon Magus, the Gnostickes; that would needs go for Christians with
Christians, but do as Jews or Gentiles did, to avoid persecution from Jews or
Gentiles. With the heart a man believes to righteousness, says St. Paul. Good
reason. For, he that believes, that God sent our Lord to preach that
righteousness which Christianity professes, must be a strange creature, if
he find not himself obliged to the righteousness, which God sent him to
preach. But it is inherent righteousness, to which, the belief of Christ's
message and commission induces. That righteousness to which salvation
belongs, by that positive will of God which his Gospel declares, is an
attribute which the said gracious will of God allows, when the worth of
inherent righteousness cannot challenge it. Therefore, with the mouth a man
professes to salvation, says St. Paul. The positive Will of God has tied the
promise of salvation for the future, and justification, (the title to
salvation) for the present, to the positive act of professing Christianity; not
to the perpetual obligation of all righteousness. And therefore this profession
was not necessary, till our Savior commanded to baptize in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, at his going out of the world. Not that, before
that time, the Disciples of Christ could be saved, denying Jesus to be the
Christ. But because, the profession of Christianity was not properly the
condition of salvation, till the Baptism of Christ was instituted; till the
Apostles were commanded to make men Christians, ( teaching them to observe all
that Christ had given them in charge;) by baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. So that, by this precept; wherein, the sum and
substance of Christianity consists; the profession of Christianity, which our
Lord had required, for the condition of his Gospel, before, was limited to the
Faith of the Holy Trinity, for matter of belief; though extending to all that
our Lord had taught before, concerning the life of a Christian. And herewith
agrees the doctrine of St. Peter, 1 Pet. III. 20. ascribing salvation to
baptism, not in regard of cleansing the flesh, which is the outward ceremony,
but of the profession of Christianity, when it is made with a good conscience;
whereby a man solemnly undertakes that righteousness which Christianity
requires. And hereupon, the belief of one Catholic Church becomes a part of
the common Christianity: as the founding of it becomes a necessary consequence,
of making salvation to consist in professing Christianity. For, as it were
ridiculous to think, that any man can attain salvation, by making that
profession, which, out of a good conscience, he intends not to perform: so
were it ridiculous to think, that a man should attain the state of salvation,
by prefessing that for Christianity, which the profession of one Catholic
Church of God does not allow.

Add hereunto the consideration of the name and nature of The Nature of Faith,
according* to the Scriptures, shows the same.
Faith, and the attributes and effects that are ascribed unto it, in holy
Scripture. It is certain, that Faith signifies, commonly, the belief of
Christ's Gospel. It signifies also, often enough, trust and confidence in God; and
that through our Lord Christ, when the Faith of Christians is meant. But the
one of these goes before justification, the other comes after, and presupposes
it. For, who will undertake that all those who believe that Christ's Gospel is
true are justified, though they live not as it requires? And yet it is plain,
that no man is justified but he that so believes. Now, trust in God is either
confidence that God will be, or that he is reconciled. The Gospel is
sufficient ground of assurance, that God will be reconciled with whosoever will
undertake the condition which it requires. But he that has this confidence is
not justified by it, but by undertaking the condition which it requires.
Therefore he has this confidence before he be justified. For, being once
justified, he has ground to trust in God as reconciled. But he must be
justified before this confidence can be well grounded. For otherwise, it will
be so far from justifying, that he will be condemned for it. There is
therefore a third signification of Faith in holy Scripture* comprizing the
outward act of professing, as well as the inward act of believing: And
supposing this outward act of profession limited, by the positive Law of the
Gospel, to the Sacrament of Baptism. According to which signification, the
ancient Church counted not Christians Fideles, faithful or believers, till they
were baptized. This is in the middle between the other two. For, as belief goes
before it, so, it is the ground of the trust and confidence of a Christian. And
this, therefore, is that, which all those Scriptures, that ascribe the promises
of the Gospel to Faith, make properly justifying Faith. For, according to the
use and custom of all Languages, they are ascribed to belief, bya Metonymy of
the cause going before; to trust and confidence, by a Metonymy of the effect
following upon it. But this will not hold, till we pitch upon that which comes
between both, as that which qualifieth a Christian for those premises. When
therefore, the belief of Christ's Gospel causes a man to take up Christ's Cross,
in Baptism, then has he that Faith which justifies; though that which
prepares to it, and that which insues upon it, are honored with the same
attribute, for being so near of kindred to it.

But the consideration of the question which St. Paul disputes, So does the
State of that question, which St. Paul disputes.
visible in the writings of the Apostles, suffers no doubt of his meaning,
when he argues; that Faith alone justifies. It is as clear as the Sun at
noon, that all his Dispute is with those Christians, who, having submitted to
the Gospel, could not conceive, that the Law had no hand in justifying them,
whom they saw live according to the Law: And that, by the direction of that
Apostles themselves, for the gaining of the Jews. A thing which they dispensed
with for a long time, till St. Paul was constrained to declare against it, as
rooting up the necessity of Christianity, and salvation by it alone. That this
is the state of the Question; all the New Testament, after the Gospels, is
witness. And therefore, to be justified by Faith alone, is with St. Paul, to
be justified by Christianity alone. And whereas they were all assured, that
salvation was to be had under the Law; he shows every where, that the Fathers,
who were justified before, or under the Law, were not justified by the Law, but
by the Gospel, that was veiled under it; notas Jews but as Christians. And
therefore, that the Gentiles which turned Christians were saved by the same
Grace, as believing Jews. For as no works, which they were able to do by the
light and strength of Nature, were able to bring those that were without the
Law, to the state of Gods Grace; no more could the outward observation of Moses
Law, by those works which mere nature was able to produce, (as tending no
further, then the temporal reward of the Laws of Canaan, expressly promised by
Moses Law) render men acceptable to God, for the reward which Christians expect
in the world to come. But, by Heg^sippus in Eusebius, we understand; that the
Gnostics, teaching that the bare profession of Christianity, without bearing
the Cross for the performing of it, was enough to save those, that should
attain to the secrets which they taught; debauched and deflowred the Church of
Jerusalem, as soon as St. James was dead. And therefore, seeing that could not
be done in a moment; we have cause to think that they went to work in his
life time. The consideration whereof shows, that St. James; in arguing that a
Christian is justified by works, and not by Faith alone; intended to teach,
that the profession of Christianity justifies not when it is not performed.
And therefore St. Paul intended the same, in arguing, that a Christian is
justified by Faith alone, without the works of the Law. To wit, that he is
justified by professing Christianity so cordially, and with so good a
conscience, as to perform it.

And for this sense of the Scriptures, there is as current and as The consent
of the Church herein, with the ground of it.
general a consent of all the whole Church, as for Christianity it self; the
life and soul whereof stands in it. Show me any Author approved in the
Church, that ever allowed salvation without Baptism, when it could be had;
(when it could not, the profession of him that desiveth it is as clear, as if
his flesh were cleansed) that compriseth not the taking up of Christ's Cross, by
professing Christianity, in the nature and virtue of justifying Faith; that
opposes that Faith which alone justifies to any other works, then those of
Moses Law. But there is no such thing to be showed. This is every where to be
showed, in all writings any way allowed by the Church; that the justification
of a Christian depends upon the performance of that which he professes: And
the Promises of the Gospel, which he attaineth by undertaking to live as a
Christian, upon the good works whereby he performs the same. And the honor
of Christianity cannot stand otherwise. There is no sin which it cleanses not.
The reason is, because there is no righteousness to which it obliges not. He
who believes, that our Lord Christ tendereth salvation, upon condition of
believing and living as a Christian, cannot expect that which he tendereth,
without returning that which he requires. But he that is overtaken in sin,
by this Faith, can do no more for the present, then undertake so to believe,
and so to live for the future. Thereby he undertakes all righteousness for the
future. And by undertaking ^^* is translated, from the state of damnation for
sin, to the state of salvation by grace. Which if he attain without
undertaking, if he retain without performing, then does not Gods glory appea^
by his Gospel. But there is no thing so particular to this purpose, as those
sayings, whereby the Fathers declare, that a Christian is justified by Faith
alone, in case he dye upon his Baptism; If he survive, then, that he is
justified by the works, whereby his profession is performed. Of which sayings,
having produced a considerable number, I am by them to measure the meaning of
all the rest of their writings.

The Articles of this Church, setting forth justification by The sense of this
Church.
Faith alone, for a most wholesome Doctrine, and full of comfort; for the sense
of it, refer us to the Homily upon that subject. I will not say that my
Position is laid down in that Homily. For there are many Passages of it, which
show them that penned it, no way clear in that point. Yet there are diverse
sentences of the Fathers alleged in it, which cannot be understood to other
purpose; and other passages well agreeing with it. But in the Church
Catechism, and in the Office of Baptism, it is so clearly laid down, as will
serve for ever to silence any other sense. And though that which the Clergy
subscribeth be, as it ought to be, a wholesome Doctrine; to wit, if soundly
understood; yet, that by which Christian people are saved, ought to be that,
which the Offices of the Church, and the instruction which it proposes contain.

CHAP. X.
Why Justifying Faith is not trust in God through Christ. Of Justification
according to the Council of Trent. Of justification according to Socinus.
Wherein his Hieresie consists. How the misunderstanding of Satisfaction and
Imputation occasioned it. Upon what grounds he is to be refuted. The helps of
Grace granted in consideration of Christ's obedience. And therefore, they infer
Original Sin, by the fall of Adam. Wherein the Covenant of Grace consists.
That the state of Grace is forfeited by heinous sin. The danger of the contrary
Position according to the ground of it.

NOw I confess, there is another opinion of justifying Faith, Why justifying
Faith is not trust in God through Christ.
in which I find nothing of any consequence, that is destructive of
Christianity; Namely, that which places justifying faith in trust and
confidence of Gods mercy through Christ. For this opinion necessarily supposes
Repentance to go before justifying Faith. And Repentance, understanding it to
be the Repentance of one that turns from all sin to all Righteousness; such as
is the Repentance of him that first turns Christian; signifies as much as the
undertaking of Christianity. Only it signifies this resolution in the way not
in the end, not made but in making, in fieri not in facto esse. But,
understanding the Repentence of a Christian, turning from some particular sin
to God, according to the obligation of his Christianity; his being justified of
that sin, or from that sin, will, of necessity, require and presuppose his
Repentance of that sin. Notwithstanding, because this opinion expresses only
the inward act of Faith to be the condition, that qualifieth a Christian for
the promises of the Gospel; though it does not exclude the profession of the
outward man; I have laid it aside, not only as not true, for the reasons that I
have gsven already, but as not sufficiently expressing the condition of the
Covenant of Grace. For it is, therefore, the means to continue those
everlasting Disputes, about Justification by Faith alone, which, the very
mention of the outward act of profession, limited, for the manner of it, to the
Sacrament of Baptism, utterly extinguisheth.

As for the Decree of the Council of Trent, seeming to confine Of Justification
according to the Council of Trent.
the justification of a Christian to the infusion of habitual righteousness
into that soul, which, being truly contrite for the sense of sin, and the
offense of God by it, resolves, for the love of God above all, to live as a
Christian for the future, professing so much by being baptized; It is liable to
a twofold challenge. First, for excluding the positive act of Gods Law, which
the Gospel enacteth; by accepting the righteousness of a Christian, as a
condition sufficiently qualifying for the Promises of the Gospel, by Gods
original justice. Secondly, for excluding the imputation of Christ's obedience
from the consideration, in which a Christian is justified, and saved, and in a
word, entitled to the Promises of the Gospel. A thing which that Council need
not have done. For it is manifest, that Pighius, Gropper, Cardinal Contarine,
Cassander, and many others, the best studied in Luthers controversies of all
that communion, had owned and embraced it for the Doctrine of St. Bernard, and
diverse other highly approved Authors. Besides that, including the Sacrament of
Baptism; that is, the outward act of professing Christianity; in the condition
upon which a Christian is justified, it is not possible to exclude, either the
act of Gods positive will, to which the Gospel engages him, or the
consideration of Christ's obedience, from the same. And including the
consideration of them, the justification of a Christian will of necessity
consist in the gracious account of God, accepting of him that is chargeable
with sin, for righteous; though it presupposes in him that habitual
righteousness, whereby he resolves to live and dye a good Christian. And
therefore they also, not excluding expressly that which they do not expressly
include, the worse Divines they would be, as to this opinion, the better
Christians they are; that is, the less they depart from the right Rule of Faith.

And indeed the Haeresie of Socinus, which has appeared Of justification
according to Socinus.
since that Council, gives cause to believe, that the imputation of Christ's
righteousness to the justifying of a Christian (which the Reformation, for good
reasons, insisted upon) was not distinctly understood between the parties, as
it ought to have been. He makes the belief of Christianity to be that Faith
which alone justifies, in this regard; because he that believes it to be
true, must needs find himself obliged, for his salvation, to live and dye a
good Christian. Which had been a very good reason, why justification should not
be ascribed to Faith alone. For, if a man be saved by living and dying a good
Christian indeed, not by finding himself obliged so to do; then is he
justified by undertaking to profess Christsanity, and not by believing it;
though by believing it, he is obliged so to do. But, as for the profession of
Christianity; I do not marvel, that he who intended to bring in a new
Christianity should make no reckoning of it, in the condition upon which a
Christian is saved. For it is the Christianity of the Catholic Church, which
he that will be saved must profess, if he mean to be saved by professing true
Christianity. And therefore, the profession of one Catholic Church is a part
of it. And therefore, he has found the true consequence of his own position;
when he makes no more of Baptism, then of an indifferent ceremony, which the
Church may use or not, at pleasure. For, how should any man make any more of
Baptism, that allows salvation before it; and therefore without it? Otherwise
Socinus is free enough, in ascribing the effect of justifying, not to the worth
of that Faith which believes, or of that Christianity, to which it resolves;
But to the mere grace of God, of his own free goodness, sending, by Christ,
salvation to mankind overtaken in sin, upon the condition of their Christianity
for the future.

The venim of his Haeresie lies in excluding the consideration Wherein his
Haeresic consists.
of the obedience and sufferings of Christ, either from the reason, for which
God Grants the grace that makes men good Christians, or for which he rewards
their Christianity, with the life of the world to come. The Decree of the
Council of Trent fully acknowledges the consideration of Christ's merits, in
the helps of grace, without which we are not good Christians. But, in as much
as it makes Christians righteous before God by their habitual righteousness;
insomuch, and so far, must it needs exclude the consideration thereof, from the
condition qualifying for everlasting life. That is, as they expressly include it
not, so, they may be said to exclude it; Though on the other side, as they
expressly exclude it not, so, they may be said to include it. But Socinus has
plainly taken up diverse Articles of the Haeresie of Pelagius; affirming that
Adam must have dyed, though he had not sinned: and that Christ came not to
cure any sin, that by his fall is become Original to his Posterity: Or to
procure any Grace, which Original sin renders necessary to make us good
Christians; But only to assure the World, by his Doctrine, and by his example,
that God will make good his Message, if we fail not on our side. And having
thus excluded the consideration of his merit, either in declaring the Gospel,
or in performing it; what necessity remained, why he should be God? This is
the Pedigree of this Haeresie, complicated of the Haeresies of Pelagius and
Paulus S^mosatenus; as this later, of the Haeresies of Ebion and Artemas, and
of Sabellius. For, as Liberatus, Archdeacon of Carthage, has well observed,
in his Abridgement of the Troubles of Nestorius and Eutyches; Samosatenus,
denying the Godhead of Christ, with Ebion and Artemas, as concerning the Holy
Ghost, must of necessity say with Sabellius, as Socinus does; that he is the
virtue and efficacy; that is to say, a mere notional attribute, of the Fathers
Godhead.

In the mean time Socinus, excluding satisfaction by Christ's How the
misunderstanding of Satisfaction and Imputation occasioned it.
Obedience, has expressly excluded all imputation of it; being the immediate
consequence of satisfaction: and the effect of it, in order of reason; but, in
nature and being, the same thing with it. Now, it appears by the body of his
Doctrine, that he had conceived a deep dislike of the opinion which I count
Haeresie; that places justifying Faith in believing a man's self to be
predestined to life from everlasting. And therefore understood the imputation
of Christ's righteousness, as that opinion must needs understand it; Namely,
that men are reconciled to God by the death of Christ, (their sins being
pardoned before they be done, and they adopted to the glory they shall one day
have) without consideration of any condition qualifying for it; Which uo man of
common reason will take to be the sense of St. Bernard, or other learned
Divines of the Church of Rome, that have allowed imputation to righteousness.
And therefore, it will be necessary to distinguish a twofold sense in the
imputation of Christ's obedience, and the satisfaction which it follows; to
wit, according to the effect, to which it is thought that satisfaction is made,
and imputed, or put to account. For, in the opinion which I call Haeresie, the
merits of Christ are immediately imputed to them, for whom they were intended
for righteousness and life everlasting. But, in the Faith of Gods Church,
Christ's sufferings are immediately imputed to mankind: because, in
consideration of them, God declares himself ready to be reconciled with all
that turn good Christians; and accordingly, makes good the promises of his
Gospel to them, performing their Christianity. So that, in the sense which
Socinus rejects; which is the sense of our Fanatickes; imputation, as well as
satisfaction, is immediate and personal; in the sense of the Church, mediate,
and real, or causal; because it is, immediately, to no further effect, then of
procuring the Gospel, to the effect of salvation, by the means of that
Christianity which it requires.

Had Socinus considered the consequence of this distinction, Upon what grounds
be is to be refuted.
he would never have put himself upon the task, of confining all that is said
in the New Testament, of Redemption, Reconciliation, and Propitiation by
Christ, and by his blood, to the effect of assuring us, that God will stand to
the Gospel which he publishes. He would never have wrested the signification
of all sacrifices, and types, figuring our Lord Christ and his death in the Old
Testament, to intend no more, then the inducing of us to that Christianity
which he preached, in confidence of that Grace, which he, for his obedience,
is advanced to bestow. He would never have declared against the Faith of the
Holy Trinity, out of a presumption, that the salvation of Christians is
provided for, setting aside the Godhead of our Lord Christ, and the
satisfaction, at which his obedience is valuable, in consideration of it. In
fine, he would not have transgressed the Faith of the Church, had he
understood it. But, having before condemned the Pope for Antichrist, and the
Papists for Idolaters, and derived this Apostasy of the Whole Church from the
very death of the Apostles; no marvel that he would not be confined to the
Faith of the Church, that he could not see the ground of it. No marvel that
he oversaw the prosession of the Faith of the Church, by being baptized, in
the condition of our salvation; knowing that he transgressed the Rule of that
Faith. No marvel, that they who see him in the wrong, in refuting him and his
followers, are sometimes worsted in a true cause; because they consider not,
that the punishment of Christ for our sins may so be understood, as to make
the reward of Christianity due, before, and therefore without the performing of
it. Whereas, understanding his sufferings to concern immediately no particular
man's person, but the common cause of mankind; The immediate effect thereof is
the procuring of a new Law, for God to proceed with us by. Which Law, being set
on foot upon the fall of Adam, was first fully revealed, by the Gospel of
Christ; The Original Law, which man in his original uprightness was subject to,
remaining still the Rule of Righteousness, according to those terms which the
Gospel declares; Though, for the effect of taking vengeance on us, abrogated,
or dispensed with, in consideration of Christ's obedience.

Now, those helps of Grace which the Gospel tendreth, for The helps of Grace
granted in consideration of Christ's obedience.
the undertaking, and performing of that Christianity, which it requires, are
also granted in consideration of Christ's merits, and sufferings, put to our
account, That is, the helps of preventing Grace, or the actual motions of Gods
Spirit, without which the Gospel were a mere abuse, supposing original sin;
upon the common account of mankind; The helps of following Grace, or the
habitual endowment of Gods Spirit, upon the personal account of him that is
saved by Baptism. But both kinds presuppose, that the coming of the second
Adam was to repair the breach, which the first Adam had made. Both condemn the
Haeresie of Pelagius, which Socinus, in some Articles of it, reviveth. And
indeed, to deny bodily death to be the effect of Adams sin, what is it else,
but to deny the Resurrection of the flesh to be the effect of Christ's
righteousness? For, though it is the power of his Godhead that shall raise
them again who shall rise to shame; Yet, if it be the Spirit of holiness,
which raised Christ from the dead, that shall raise the mortal bodies in which
it dwelt here, up to life; is it not the sin which the fall of Adam brought
into the world, that first brought in death after it? The same Spirit of
holiness it is, that our Lord, according to promise, sent his Disciples in his
own stead; and sent it with visible signs of his presence, to make his word
effectual in them first, and by them, to the conversion of the Nations. And
this means, as no Christian can deny to be sufficient, to oblige all the world
to be Christians; So, there can be nothing wanting on Gods part, to render it
effectual with those that embrace it. For it is manifest, that the Grace of God
works the conversion of all, by showing the world sufficient reason to be
Christians. A thing which can by no means be done, but by showing them, that
they are the causes of their own damnation if they be not. They that are
convicted hereof, it is sure, would be persuaded by concupiscence, not to act
according to that conviction; were there no more then conviction of reason to
turn the balance. But, when Gods Spirit manageth the motives of Christianity
which it self provideth, (for, this conviction consists in the works, whereby
God has made good the preaching of our Lord and his Apostles) what can be
wanting to the efficacy of it? And this is signified in the Old Testament, by
ascribing the conquest of the promised Land to God, and not to the strength or
valor of his people. So that, wheresoever we find, that they are delivered
out of their enemies hands by Gods assistance, there we are assured, that the
powers of darkness are not to be overcome by Christians, but by Gods Grace.

And the inclinations of man's heart to evil from the Mothers And therefore they
infer Original Sin, by the Fall of Adam.
womb, the frailty of humane flesh, and the mortality thereof, are so expressly
delivered in the Old Testament, that the Jews themselves do acknowledge the
effect of Adams transgression in them. Neither is it possible to give any
account, of any necessity, for the coming of our Savior, otherwise. For,
whatsoever can be required to convict the world, that the tender of the Gospel
shall be made good to all that embrace or preserve it, might have been, as
well without the death of the Son of God, as by it. Therefore the consent of
the Church in this point has been evidenced against Pelagius, not only by the
custom of baptizing Infants, but by the Ceremonies which they were baptized
with; signifying the ejecting of the evil Spirit, to make way for Gods Spirit.
Not that it was a Law from the beginning, that all children of Christian
Parents should be baptized Infants. For it is evident, that they thought it
better to be baptized at man's age. Because then, they are more able to
understand what they undertake. But because they never did presume of the
Salvation of any that dyed unbaptized. And therefore, since the world came to
profess Christianity, and that the care and zeal, either of Parents, or
Ministers, could not so well be trusted for the preventing of death, by
procuring Baptism for Infants; especially with that reverence which the
Sacrament requires; it has been agreed upon, by the silent practice of
Christendom, to baptize all while they are Infants. And this consent whosoever
infringeth, in the overt act of Schism which he commits, he involveth a
presumption of Haeresie against himself. For, what could move a man to such an
outrage, who did believe, that profession which saves a Christian to include
in it the Sacrament of Baptism?

And thus it remains evident, that it is a Covenant of unspeakable Wherein
the Covenant of Grace consists.
Grace on Gods part, which his Gospel brings; notwithstanding that it
requires, upon the condition of our Salvation, that we live and dye
Christians. First, as tendering the assistance of Gods Spirit, as well to
undertake as to perform: And then, having performed, as tendering a reward which
our performance cannot challenge. And both in consideration of Christ, whose
merits and sufferings are free, pure, mere Grace, before all helps of Grace
which they have purchased for us.

It is a thing prodigious and deplorable to consider, that they That the state
of Grace is forfeited by heinous sin.
who would be Reformers of the Church should, notwithstanding all this, think
it no state of Grace that can become forfeit by sin. As if, because, without
daily sin, Christians do not live; therefore, that reconcilement with God were
no reconcilement, that can become void, by gross and heinous sin. But, till
that which has been said of Justification, and that Faith which alone
justifies, be destroyed, there can be no pretense for so dangerous a
doctrine. That which is granted upon a condition fails with it. And it must
be a secret which the Old and New Testament has not revealed, that shall make
good our title to Heaven, though we make not good that Christianity which
intitleth us to it. And therefore, when S. Paul is persuaded, that nothing
shall separate us from the love of God in Christ, Romans VIII. 28. he supposes
us to be such as he describes all along the Chapter before. Such as he found
himself resolved to be: Such as live not according to the flesh, but according
to the Spirit. Of such he might well be persuaded, that nothing should
separate them from the love of God in Christ; Knowing the helps of Gods
All-sufficient Grace to be promised all that so live; not to fail, till they
receive them in vain. Whence S. John says, that he who is born of God sins
not, because the Unction which he has from God abides in bim, and teaches
him all things, 1 John II. 20. 27. III. 9. he supposes him that is born of
God to be the Son of God; who shall be no Son of God, if he sin such sins
as he means. And therefore he supposes this Unction to abide in him; which
abides not in them that sin. When our Lord says to the Samaritane, John IV.
14. that whosoever drinks of the water which he shall give, shall never thirst
any more; he supposes, that the water which he gives is not vomited up
again; he opposes this water, so drunk, to the water of Jacobs Well, which
did make room for thirst in time. Whereas this water, so drunk, shall spring up
to life everlasting. All Haeresies have the superficial sound of some Texts of
Scripture, to set against the whole stream of Scripture, and the current
Doctrine of it. He that considers, how much of the Old and New Testament, that
which I have said of Justification involveth, will think it reason to measure
the meaning of two or three Texts by that; not to rack all the rest to the
length of these. As for the sense of the Church, seeing the consent thereof is
evident, in the condition upon which we are justified; It is a part of
madness, for any man that believes the Unity thereof, to imagine, that any
Doctor that held with that Unity can be found to teach otherwise. S. Augustine
is remarkable. The stress lies upon him: and upon those Books, the occasion
whereof is to enquire; how it comes to pass, that so many, that had attained to
the state of Gods grace, do not dye in it.

But, though I admire at the wilfulness with which this mistake The danger of
the contrary Position according to the ground of it.
is maintained, against all Christendom, Old and New, but those who follow
Calvin; Yet I value the dange^ of it, to the Salvation of him that has it,
according to the opinion of Justification which it is joined with. For, if it
come from an assurance of a man's Praedestination; As if such a one, being once
justified, cannot incur the state of damnation by any sin; Taking that
opinion for an Haeresie, I must needs take this for a Position destructive to
Salvation. It is otherwise with those that make Repentance to go before
justifying Faith. For it is true, that, if a man have no ground that he is
reconciled to God, till his first conversion; he can have no ground that he
is reconciled to God of any sin, that he falls into afterward, till he have
performed his Repentance. And therefore they contradict themselves, if they
imagine; that, being actually in the state of damnation, a man may have that
trust in God which justifying Faith signifies, before he turn from his sin by
Repentance. But the worse Divines the better Christians. And the truth which
they hold suffers not the venim of that opinion, which is indeed inconsistent
with the same, to operate.

CHAP. XI.
What Law of God it is, that may be fulfilled by a Christian. Of doing more
then Gods Law requires. Whether our Lord gave a New Law, or not. Of the
Satisfaction and Merit of Christian Works. Original Sin is not Adams sin
imputed to his Posterity. Wherein Original Sin consists. What Original
Righteousness signifies. What good the Unregenerate are able to do by the Law
of Nature.

BUt this Resolution perfectly reconcileth two of those Controversies, What Law
of God i^ is, that may be fulfilled by a Christian.
which we have with the Church of Rome, about Justification and the points
annexed to it: That of the possibility of fulfilling Gods Law, for a Christian:
And that of satisfying for sin, and of meriting Grace or Glory, by the good
works of a Christian. For it is certain, that the Law which God gave Adam in
Paradise, as having created him in his Original Uprightness, can never be
fulfilled, by the Grace which the death of Christ tendreth, in this bondage
under Original Sin. But, if we speak of the New Law, which the Gospel of
Christ enacteth, (S. James calls it the Law of liberty, S. Paul, the Law of
the Spirit of life) it is evident by the premises, that, if it be not
fulfilled, then is Christ dead in vain: then do we receive his Grace in vain;
and cannot be saved, but are still in our sins. For every Covenant, every
contract, is a Law to the parties. And, though God need not contract with his
creature, which he may give Law to at pleasure; Yet, if he condescend to
treat and to contract with man, he intends not to abuse him, by contracting
for that which cannot come to effect. Therefore he does not contract with him,
upon condition that he shall not sin; who, born in Original Sin, sins
daily. But, upon condition, that, if he fall into sin he return by
repentance: and, blotting out his former sin, by works meet for repentance,
proceed in newness of life for the future. And upon these terms, the Original
Law of Righteousness in Paradise does not become void; but continues in force,
for the regulating of the righteousness which Christians are to live by, and to
aim at. Whether or no, inhaunsed, in consideration of that great Grace of God,
bringing Salvation to all, which has appeared by the Gospel; above that
measure, which the Original Righteousness of Paradise required; I dispute not
yet. But the Law of Moses, upon these terms, will be the reviving of the
Original Law of Paradise, as to the effect of attaining and holding the Land of
Canaan, (a figure correspondent, as well to the earthly, as to the heavenly
Paradise) by that outward obedience, which the letter of the Ceremonial and
Judicial Law required: And upon these terms, the Thief upon the Cross, dying in
the state of Grace, fulfilled Gods Law; Fulfilling all that, which the Covenant
of Grace required of him for his Salvation, in that estate. And, if there be
such a thing, as Repentance effectual to Salvation, upon the bed of death;
which, the Rules of the Church do not warrant us to presume of, though they
oblige us not to despair of it; Then, he who is effectually converted to God,
upon his last bed of death, has fulfilled Gods Law.

As for going beyond the Law, by works of Supererogation; O^ doing more then
Gods Law requires.
It is easy to see, that, according to the premises, he that cannot do what
Gods Original Law requires, cannot do more. But it is as easy to see, that
some circumstances may conduce to the performance of our Christianity, that are
no part of it; And therefore the Vow of Baptism binds not to them. If Marriage
stand with Christianity, what Christian is forbidden Marriage? Yet single life
is the safer way to perfection in Christianity. So is the profession of the
Clergy, and all the means, of further retirement from the world, then the
taking up of Christ's Cross signifies. And the Grace which our Lord, and S. Paul
after him ownes, in them that do this, is not a peculiar temper of the body,
obliging him that has it to live single, and him that has it not, to marry;
But a singular zeal, to wave that which God makes lawful for us, that we may
the better come to his Kingdom. Which, when it proceeds with a single eye,
proposing to it self nothing of this world, but the means of attaining to the
world to come; Well may we be assured of Gods help to perform it, by virtue
of that promise which the Common Christianity challenges, intending nothing
but the effect of it.

I do believe further, that we, who live under the Gospel, Whether our Law
give a New Law, or not.
are tied to a higher degree of goodness, then those who lived under the Law
were; as for the condition of continuing in the state of Gods Grace. And that
this is the best reason for many actions of holy persons, sometimes not
condemned, sometimes commended in the Old Testament; which, notwithstanding,
agree not with that perfection which our Lord, by his Sermon in the mountain,
preaches; To wit, that either they were accepted by God, in that estate, or at
least, might stand with the state of his Grace. But this is not to say, that
our Lord, by those Precepts which he there delivers, introduces a New Law,
which obliged not under the Old Testament. For I have showed, that under it,
the Fathers were saved as Christians; that is, by worshipping God in Spirit and
truth. But, that there was a twofold sense in Moses Law: And that, by keeping
it according to the Letter, they held the Land of Promise; according to the
Spirit, though in a less measure then the Gospel requires, they attained the
world to come.

The Satisfaction and Merit of good works done by Christians Of the
Satisfaction and Merit of Christian works.
may be understood to be grounded, either upon their intrinsic value, or
upon that mark which the Gospel of Christ stampes them with, in consideration
of Christ's merits and sufferings. But that intrinsic value, at which they are
valued, by those who make them worth life everlasting, upon terms of
commutative justice, rises upon the account of Gods Spirit, by the Grace
whereof they are done. And the Grace of Gods Spirit is not granted, but in
consideration of our Lord Christ, and his obedience. And therefore this
intrinsic value is merely imaginary, even in the opinion of them that advance
it; unless they will needs contradict themselves. For, the value of our Lords
obedience is necessarily extrinsick to us; to whose account it redoundeth, only
by imputation of Grace. And therefore, there is no intrinsic value of
Christian works; supposing the Gospel to be that which I have said. For, being
performed by virtue of Gods Grace, they cannot be acceptable to the effect of
salvation, but by the same Grace. But the merit, or the satisfaction which is
ascribed unto them, being grounded upon that Grace, bringing salvation to all,
which has appeared by the Gospel; it is not possible to imagine, what it can
derogate from the merits and satisfaction of our Lord Christ. It is true, men
may forget their own grounds: as I have said that they do, who would have the
works of Christians to merit heaven upon terms of commutative justice. And
forgetting themselves, they may contradict themselves; ascribing that for debt,
to them that do them, which is not due, but upon the account of Christ's
obedience. But still, the worse Divines the better Christians. For, the truth
which they profess, if they profess it not in vain, shall be an Antidote
against that pride, destructive to the humility of a Christian, which the
opinion of a man's own merit produces. Whereas, they who exclude all
consideration of our works from the great trial of the Day of Judgment, do
thereby exclude Christianity out of the heart, as they do the Creed out of the
Church. Whereas, they who suppose gross and heinous sins to be pardoned,
before they see the fruits of Repentance in works of mortification, by
extraordinary exercises of devotion, with fasting and alms; do contribute as
much as their allowance signifies, to the murder of that soul, which might
have been cured, had not their authority made men believe that there needs no
such cure. There is an opinion crept into the Church of Rome on the other side;
that imperfect sorrow for that sin, which, by Confession, is submitted to the
Keys of the Church, serves to cure such sin, how great soever: And that Penance
is enjoined, to redeem the debt of temporal punishment, to be paid in
Purgatory, if not here; as remaining due when the guilt is done away. Whereas
the works of mortification are but the exercise, and the performance of that
contrition, which the Gospel requires, to qualify a man for pardon of his sin.
And therefore the authority of the Church cannot supply the want of that
condition, which the Gospel requires in him that seeks forgiveness: But only
procure it, by excluding him from the Communion, that shall refuse the cure
which the Church prescribes. Now, this is an opinion which that Church allows,
but enjoins not. And therefore, whether there be more danger there, by this
opinion; or by the other extreme, where all works of mortification are cried
down for superstitious; I leave to the conscience of discreet Christians. The
Catholic Church has used the terms of satisfaction and Merit in a true
sense, and to a good purpose: and it were easy to show, that the same sense is
allowed, though not enjoined, by the Church of Rome, even since the Council of
Trent; were this the place.

I have said, that the obedience of the second Adam is not immediately Original
Sin is not Adams sin imputed to his posterity.
imputed to any particular man's account; but, first to the common account of
mankind; and to the account of particular persons, as they are qualified for
it, by being good Christians. And now I must say accordingly; that the
disobedience of the first Adam is not imputed immediately to the damnation of
any particular; but, to the bondage of all ^is posterity. For, no man shall be
condemned at the last day, but for the works which he shall be found to have
done in the body. And, for what he shall then be condemned, for the same God
decreed that he should be condemned from everlasting. So, being become slaves
to sin we are ransomed by Christ. But, as this ransom intitleth us not to
life, till we embrace the terms of it: neither does this bondage damn us, till
we beome parties to it by our sins. If this be true, then does not Original
sin consist in the Imputation of Adams sin to his posterity; as Catharinus held
at the Council of Trent, with great applause. And indeed, I need not dispute;
that God cannot, in justice, punish one man for another man's sin; because you
see, the posterity of the first Adam, according to the flesh, is punished for
his sin, no otherwise, then it is rewarded for the second Adam, and for his
righteousness. The interest of our common Christianity is safe, so long as the
necessity of Christ's coming, and the reason of it, for the cure of the breach
which Adam made, remains evident and unmovable.

Nor is there any difficulty in resolving the nature of Original Wherein
Original Sin consists.
Sin; That should drive us to this novelty. All sin is an act, or an habit,
that fails of that measure which Gods Law requires. Original Sin has only
this peculiar; that, giving the like inclination as other habits do, it is not
contracted by custom, but by birth. Call this inclination to that which Gods
Law forbids Concupiscence, and you have expressed the whole nature of
Original Sin. For, calling it concupiscence; you make it to be the want of
Original Righteousness; But you express over and above, what it is that
succeeds, in mankind, born in Original Sin, instead of Original
Righteousness; to wit, that disorder in our inclinations, which concupiscence
signifies.

The Question only remains; whether Original uprightness What Original
Righteousness signifies.
shall signify only Innocence; or supernatural Grace over and above. For it
may be supposed, that man was created, at the first, only to the happiness of
this life, upon condition of living according to the Innocence in which he was
created. And there are that have maintained this; though not denying, that God
intended to reward this exercise of his innocence, with a call to an higher
estate. The Fathers indeed are of another mind; Moved, perhaps, by the mystery
of Christ and his Church, which he discovers in his marriage with his own
flesh, Genesis I. 24. Ephesians. V. 31. For this seems to make Adam a Prophet, endowed
with Gods Spirit. But, he that should not think it necessary, that Adam should
understand the mystical sense of his own words, would not be tied to that
consequence. In the mean time, the common Christianity, and the ground of
salvation, seems to remain unmovable, granting; That, by advancing the
Covenant of Grace; which was set on foot in Paradise, so soon as God promised
the seed of the woman, to dissolve the works of the Serpent; God calls
mankind to an estate of supernatural Grace. And though it may be disputed,
whether it could stand with the holiness of God, and the purity of his work, to
have made man in an estate of mere nature; that is, subject to concupiscence,
without supernatural Grace to restrain the effect of it; yet could it not stand
with his justice, creating man to supernatural happiness (and therefore liable
to Damnation, transgressing the supernatural Righteousness which it must
require) to create him without supernatural Grace, necessary to the performing
of the said righteousness.

To fortify that which has been said, I am not to omit that What good the
unregenerate are able to do by the Law of Nature.
which St. Paul seems expressly to teach, Romans II. 12-16. That they, who are
not under Gods positive Law, shall be judged, at the last day, by the Law of
Nature. Which if it be so, then shall they not be condemned for Original Sin.
It is not necessary, that Christianity should give account; why God thought
good to suffer Adam to be seduced by the Apostate Angels: and mankind to be
born in bondage to sin; why he suffered the greatest part of it to be
overcome with Idolatry, after he had set the Covenant of Grace on foot. It is
enough, that he found it for his glory, to give sin this entrance into the
World, which he meant to encounter with that Grace which his Gospel reveals;
Leaving that which it reveals not, to be unfolded at the Day of the
Judgment. In the mean time, if they who know not Gods Law are judged by the
Law of Nature; They are not judged by the Covenant of Grace, though given all
mankind in Paradise; because, by corruption of sin, they were grown strangers
to it. Much less, therefore, by the Original Righteousness of Paradise,
supplied by the Covenant of Grace. Now, the corrupt inclination of
concupiscence extinguisheth not the light of nature; which, by discovering the
difference between that which is good because it is honest, and that which is
only pleasant or profitable, condemns the neglect of that, for either of
these. Man is sensible of his own worth, and the wrong that he does it, when
he prefers profit or pleasure before the obligation which it infers. And
therefore, there can no question remain, that he is able, notwithstanding
Original Sin, to do that which is good for a right reason, and a good intent.
For, the reason of profit or pleasure does not always drown, and swallow up the
reason of that which is just and honorable. Therefore, he who makes not the
world to come his end, may do that which is truly good for honesties sake, and
the satisfaction of loving it as it deserves. But because concupiscence, which
the world is infected with, procures daily occasions of opposition between
right and interest; and those such as call in question the worldly estate of
him, that should resolve to prefer the right in all things; therefore is not
the natural man able to resolve upon God, for the end of all his doings. His
corrupt inclinations betray the judgment, whereby he allows that which is
best, to the interest of his profit or pleasure. Now, whether those actions
which are done upon good grounds, and for a good purpose, but, by a man that
makes not God the end of all his doings, are to be counted sins or not; I
will not Dispute. Thus much appears, that they who are to be judged by the
Law of Nature do not always transgress the Law of Nature. For, how should they
be judged by that Law, which they cannot choose but transgress?

CHAP. XII.
Upon what terms, that which is possible may become futurG. The difference
between necessity antecedent and consequent. The difference between freedom
from necessity and from bondage. Freedom from necessity always requires
indetermination, not always indifference. The Object determines the Will,
saving the freedom of it. Whence, the certainty of future contingencies
arises. How this appears in the Scriptures. God no cause of sin, according to
the Scriptures. Concerning the middle knowledge of God.

THis being the estate in which the Gospel overtaketh mankind; Upon what terms,
that which is possible may become future.
the Question, concerning the concurrence of man's free will to the works of
Gods free Grace, is that which remains: And the resolving of it lies in
resolving, by what means, and upon what account, that which is of it self only
possible becomes future: How it becomes certain, that such a thing shall be,
which, of it self, only may be. For that which is possible and no more, is of
it self a mere nothing: That which only may be is not. Only it signifies
withal, that there is something, that is able to reduce it to effect, or
being. But, that which is future signifies here, not only (...) but (...): not
only that which as yet is not, but that which hereafter shall be: And that
imports a certain being for that time. Seeing then, that nothing cannot reduce
it self to being; The Question is, what it is that renders it certain to be,
for the time when it shall be. For, all that God can do is absolutely
possible. And God can do whatsoever can be done. God cannot deny himself: And
that he should do, if contradictories should be true; or things that destroy
one another subsist both at once. Accordingly, whatsoever God sees is certain,
and God sees whatsoever shall be; so, whatsoever shall be is certain, though
we know not what it is. Now I have said, that it becomes not certain, by any
decree or motion of God, whereby he determines the will of man, and moves it
to do whatsoever it does, before it move or determine it self; at least in
order of nature. Priority in order of nature signifies this; that the motion
of free will does necessarily depend, and shall necessarily follow, upon the
precedent determination and motion of God.

But, things are said to be necessary two ways; some are The difference
between necessity antecedent and consequent.
absolutely necessary; The necessity whereof lies in their cause, and the
efficacy of it, which cannot be defeated. And, in as much as every cause is
before the effect; Therefore this necessity is called Antecedent. Some are
necessary only upon supposition; not of that which goes before, (for the cause
which creates absolute necessity may be supposed) but of something that
follows upon the being of any thing. As, that which a man knows, or sees to
be, of necessity is; because he could not see it if it were not. And so,
whatsoever is in the world, of necessity is, because we suppose that it is.
But this necessity is not in the thing, (speaking of contingencies) but in that
consequence which the mind frames, upon supposing it. And therefore it is
called necessity Consequent, as the other Antecedent. It is not this consequent
necessity that destroys freedom in the will, or contingence in the effects of
it; but the antecedent. For nothing is absolutely necessary but God: and that
which God will have come to pass. And this necessity is the necessity of a
cause that cannot be defeated; not implying any supposition of the effect
which it produces, but inferring the consequence of it. Therefore natural, and
antecedent, and destructive to freedom in the will, and contingence in the
effects of it. And this is no more then I said before, why there can be no
absolute predestination to glory or to shame, according to the Gospel, and
Christianity; because it must come to effect by Gods determining and moving the
will, to every step that it makes toward life or death everlasting. And that
will not stand with that free will which the Gospel supposes.

For, you may have observed a twofold freedom, by the premises. The difference
between freedom from necessity and from bondage.
The Gospel supposes mankind born in bondage to sin; And therefore, supposes
not his will free from bondage. But supposing this, tenders him life
everlasting, upon condition that he accept of the ransom, which Christ has
paid for him: and, renouncing the bondage of sin, become free to God and his
service. And this is an act which his free will must do, because it is the
condition of that which God does in consideration of it. The consideration is
the freedom with which it is done; which if it were done of necessity, there
could be no reason why God should either require or reward it. So, there is a
freedom from necessity, whereby mankind, though slave to sin by birth,
embraces that freedom from sin to righteousness which the Gospel tendereth;
though not by the original motion of the will, (which is not in slavery unless
it love the slavery which it is in;) yet, by the free motion of it, being first
moved by the Gospel to make use of the ransom. For I have showed, that this
motion brings with it sufficient help of Gods Grace, to do that which it
requires.

This freedom then, from necessity, does not always require Freedom from
necessity always requires i^determination, not always indifference.
indifference in the will that uses it. For that is properly, only when the
will is balanced, not inclining any more to do then not to do, this rather then
that. But it requires, that, it be never determined till it determine it
self. For it avails not to say, that that freedom which God gave man when he
made him was, to do freely whatsoever God should determine him to do freely; as
other things necessarily do that which God determines them to do necessarily.
Freedom, and the use of freedom is Gods gift. But God cannot give freedom by
taking it away: Nor maintain freedom by destroying it. No more can he cause
the will to do that freely, which he determines it to do necessarily, before
it determine it self. Nor is there any fear of making the creature God, if we
make it able to do that which God enableth it to do, without other helps then
the ability which he gives it. For, what is that ability, that enableth not
to do that which it makes a man able to do? It is a riddle when it is not
understood. It is a contradiction when it is understood. The ability which God
gives issues from him, as from the Fountain of all ability, every moment of
time, which, one and the same standing moment of eternity answers. So, the
creature cannot act but by the ability which God issues; And therefore
continues Gods creature, as depending upon God, in that which it does, no less
then in that which it is. If therefore the will of man cannot act freely by
virtue of any motion of Gods, determining it to act, before it determine it
self; then must it act freely, by virtue of that power which God gives it
every moment to determine it self.

True it is, that, being the will of a reasonable creature, it The Object
determines the Will, saving the freedom of it.
cannot determine it self, till it be determined, in the nature of an object,
by a reason, carrying an appearance of that which is best for the present. But
because that appearance changes from moment to moment; therefore, the
determination of the object is never peremptory, till you suppose the will to
act according to it. And therefore, though it be necessary, that the will act
according to the last dictate of the understanding; yet is this necessity, but
upon supposition, that it is the last: And that, because you suppose that the
will proceeds to act, without employing further consideration upon the
object. So, the appearance of good in the object, and the ability of embracing
it in the will, serve to make good the freedom of choice in humane actions.
But, the certainty of it from everlasting must be ascribed to the
incomprehensible wisdom of God, comprehending all appearance of good, which all
men may be moved with, at all times; and the effect, which the present
disposition of every will shall allow every motion, at every moment. Now
providence must needs appoint, from everlasting, what appearance of good every
will shall be moved with every moment; by resolving, what occurrence of
objects every reason shall be presented with, in that estate, which it setleth
every man in, for every moment. And upon these terms, the foreknowledg of
humane actions in God must needs be infallibly certain; saving, as well the
freedom of the will, as the contingence of the things which it does. For
comprehending, first the present disposition of every will: and the effect of
every motion that is possible, upon it; then, not only how it shall be
actually moved, but also, that it shall not be moved otherwise; how should he
fail to comprehend what it will determine, while it might determine otherwise?

And, that this is the true and due way that we are to hold, Whence, the
certainty of future contingencies arises.
in reasoning of Gods Counsels, appears by the whole tenor of the Scriptures,
speaking of God in the language of the children of men; as the Jews Doctors
speak. It pleases God, not only to deal with man about his salvation, but to
treat with him in his own Language; because he is not able to understand God
otherwise. It is not possible for us to understand the wisdom of God otherwise,
then, according to the wisdom of man; as proceeding, by deliberation to
resolution; though we know very well all the while, that the simple and
indivisible essence of the Godhead is that, into which, all variety of his
Decrees, which the Scripture obliges men to order, must resolve. Now the
Scripture represents God to us, every where, as taking the rise and the
ground of his Counsels, and Proceedings, from that which he sees in the
thoughts and dispositions of the men, whom he orders. The instance is
remarkable, and unavoidable, which you have in the whole course of his bringing
the people of Israel out of Egypt, and the destroying of Pharaoh and his
people, for the hardness of their hearts, which he foresaw, would not let them
obey his message, and release his people. The like you have in the raising up
of enemies to Solomon, for his sin: and the dividing of the ten Tribes from his
posterity. So, in the destruction of Ahab, and the representation of Gods
Counsel, and Proceeding in it, which the Prophet Micaiah declares before hand
to his face. So in the Crucifying of our Lord, and the means whereby it was
brought to pass, according to the Counsel of God, which the Scripture declares.

True it is, there be diverse passages in Scripture, which seem How this
appears in the Scriptures.
to signify a will in God, that such men should sin, as he has determined to
destroy; the sons of Eli for example, neglecting their fathers advice, because
God had resolved their ruin. But, seeing it is so plentifully expressed, in
other Book cases of the Scriptures, that such men's resolutions came not from
the immediate motion of God, determining them to that which they do; but from
the considerations, which their own precedent wickedness was ensnared with; all
reason of Religion requires, that the like considerations be supposed, in
those cases wherein they are not expressed. As, that the sons of Eli were not
determined by God to sin, because he had resolved to destroy them; but that,
for their sins which went before, he tendered them the advice of their Father,
which he foresaw they would sin by neglecting; that is, he suffered them to
sin further, to their own ruin. A thing so manifest in the cases of Pharaoh,
and Judas, that, whosoever shall stumble at the hardening of Pharaohs heart, must
thank himself for the fall which he takes by that offense.

The Scripture expresses further, that, if Saul had come to God no cause of
sin, according to the Scriptures.
Keilah, the men of the City would have delivered David into his hands. And
that, if our Lord had done those miracles in Tire and Sidon, which he did in
Corazin and Bethsaida, they would have repented, in sackcloth and ashes. Not as
if the preaching of the Gospel, or the miracles which assure the truth of it,
were Grace sufficient. But because the Spirit by which our Lord spoke, and
wrought miracles, was present with the words and with the works, which he
used, as means and instruments, to convert his hearers. And therefore are to
be supposed, by virtue of Gods promise, when they are not expressed. The Book
of Wisdom affirms, in like manner, that God foresaw the impenitence of the
Egyptians, notwithstanding all Moses his miracles. These passages affirm
expressly, that God foreknows what man would do, if he were in any estate
possible; though indeed he never come into that estate. But this is to be
understood according to the incomprehensible wisdom of God; comprehending all
appearances which a man should be moved with, in that estate: Not according to
that which man can understand, or express, of any man's case, in any estate.
For, all that we can comprehend, is never able to render the event certain,
that is but contingent: and to translate the effect from possible to future;
which, the wisdom of God, comprehending all things, can do. And this is that
which some call the middle knowledge of God: to wit; between the knowledge of
all that is possible, and all that is future; whereby God, knowing what man
would do in this or that estate, resolves, in what estate his providence shall
set him, every moment of his life: And thereby foresees what he will do, in
every case. And between this opinion, and the other of predetermination, I have
always found this difference; that this, perhaps, is subject to more
difficulty, then the understanding of man can comprehend, or his words declare:
that, only subject to one inconvenience; that it rooteth up all Religion and
Civility both at once, by destroying freedom in man's will, and contingence in
the effects of it.

CHAP. XIII.
No absolute Predestination to Glory. Predestination to Grace, absolute. How
Glory is the end of Grace. In what terms the Faith of the Church stands, as
concerning this point.

THere remains no more but to conclude; that, though Gods No absolute
Predestination to Glory.
Predestination to Glory or to shame cannot be absolute, yet his Predestination
to effectual Grace, or to that which is only Sufficient, is and must be
absolute. If Gods predestination to Glory and to Shame were absolute, without
consideration of that for which it is executed in time; there could be no
ground for any exhortation, any advice, any persuasion, moving any man to
perform any part of that Christianity which he professes. There would be
always a peremptory bar to all such applications; That, what God has appointed
shall come to pass, whatsoever a man shall do or endeavor to do. For it would
not serve the turn to say; That, if God have appointed the end, he has
appointed the means to effect it: And that this means is man's endeavors.
Because, if God have appointed the end to come by the means of that which a man
is moved to do, then shall he do it, whether he endeavor to do it or not.
For, if it be said, that he has appointed it to come to pass by man's
endeavors; then is not Gods decree absolute: because it must suppose man's
endeavors. And indeed, an absolute decree of predestination cannot come to
effect, but by decrees, determining and moving man's will to that, which the
bringing of it to effect requires, before the will determine or move it self.
And that is destructive to freedom in the will, and contingence in the effects
of it.

On the other side, if the certainty of Gods foreknowledge, Predestination to
Grace, absolute.
and the Infallibility, or indefeasibleness of his providence stand upon a
decree, of placing every man, at every moment of his life, in such an
occurrence of objects, inward and outward, with his disposition, who is moved
by them, to do, or not to do this or that, as he sees will be effectual to
resolve him upon that which he does; then are the helps of Grace effectual,
and the effect of them certain, upon the like decree. Which there is nothing in
man to oblige God to make: And therefore, it is his absolute will that makes
it. For, the intent of sending Christ, for the redemption of mankind, infers
no declaration, that God will do all that is in his power to do, that it may
be to effect, if man refuse it not. It is enough, that he accompanies the
Gospel with his Spirit, when it comes; In the mean time, that he trusts his
Church with the bringing of it. This justifies his will, that all men should
be saved; though they who never hear of it, for reasons which the Gospel
declares not, have not the refusing of it. Whereby it appears, that the
Authors of divisions in the Church are to answer for the souls that perish, for
want of knowing the Gospel; which, the divisions of the Church are the greatest
means that hinders them to know. Now this decree proceeds upon a supposition
of freedom in the will, and the maintenance of it, by Gods continual Government
of all things; And therefore allows ground for all applications, moving to
perform the Christianity which we profess. For, though all that comes to pass
is certain by Gods decree, that cannot fail; yet that decree is not immediate,
but supposes man's will to move of it self; when his reason is moved by
appearance of good in the object. And therefore it cannot be alleged, in bar,
to any wholesome exhortation or advice. And although all that is thus decreed
must needs come to pass; yet the necessity thereof is only cons^quent, upon a
supposition, that the will determines it self freely; which being supposed, the
consequence is certain, that it shall come to pass. Whereas the necessity of
that which God determines the will to act; lying in the determination and
motion of the cause, which is God, that cannot fail; is antecedent to the
effect, and destroys the freedom of the will, and the contingence of that which
it does.

If it be said, that the end is intended before the means: and therefore, he
that is absolutely predestined to effectual Grace How Glory is the end of
Grace.
(which includes perseverance until death) must needs be absolutely
predestined to Glory, which is the end of Grace; the answer is. The Glory of
him that is saved is not the end of Gods Grace; that is, of his Gracious
purpose, to give those helps which shall bring a man to Glory. Gods Grace is
God, and Gods Glory is God; And God can have no end but God: and the glorifying
of him that is saved is not the means to glorify God, till you suppose him
qualified as the Gospel requires. And therefore it is not absolutely the end
of that Grace which effects it, till you suppose that it renders him so
qualified. The means by which a man comes to Glory, if you take them as granted
in such consideration, and rewarded in such measure as the Gospel allows, are
the means of Gods Glory; otherwise they make not his Glory to appear, and
therefore are not intended by him to that purpose. Indeed, God has made
salvation the end of mankind, by the work of Redemption, as well as of
Creation. But he has not made it his own end, nor the means to it, but upon
those terms which the Gospel declares. All this is manifest by the damnation
of those that are not saved. For, though it be their final estate, yet it is
not their end, because salvation is the end of all manking; Which were it Gods
end, as it is man's end by Gods appointment, then should they also be saved.
For God cannot fail of his end. Therefore is not the damnation of him that is
not saved the end why God appoints him those means, by which he shall come to
that final estate. For it is not the means to Gods end, that is his Glory, till
you suppose the man qualified as the Gospel allows: and so considered by God,
when he appoints him the means that bring him to his last estate. In fine,
man's Glory is not Gods end in giving Grace; Though it be the end of the Grace
which he gives. Gods Glory is the only end as well of the Grace as of the
Glory which God gives. Gods Glory is the end of effectual Grace. For God
intends the effect which his Grace attaineth. And effectual Grace is a fit
mean to glorify God; implying man's compliance with Gods help. As for the helps
of Grace in general, whether effectual or only sufficient; though man's glory
be the end of them, and that by Gods appointment, yet is it none of Gods and;
because it is not the mean to Gods Glory, till it be supposed, that they are
used as they should be. And therefore God does not appoint any man to Glory,
till he see that he has used his Grace as he should do. But he appoints
Grace without such respect; because there is no condition on man's part, to
render it due.

And herewith agrees the Faith of Gods Church. It is well In what terms the
Faith of the Church stands, as concerning this point.
known, that St. Austines writings against Pelagius were excepted against, (as
introducing fatal necessity, and excluding the Will of God for the salvation of
mankind,) in the parts of Gaul; namely, by the Monastery of Lerins, the Clergy
of Marseilles, and Genua, and div^rse notable persons in Provence. But not
generally. For St. Austine, being advertised hereof, by the Letters of Prosper
and Hillary yet extant, defended himself by his Books de Praedestinatione and
gratia, and, de Perseverantia sanctorum. The Book which Sirmondus the Jesuit
lately published, under the name of Praedestinatus, is of the same date;
premising a Catalogue of Haeresies unto Nestinus, and making the last to be
this of Predestination, which he^ refuteth. And indeed, in a Council or two
under Patiens Bishop of Lions, one Lucidus a Priest was forced to recant
certain Articles of that sense. But Faustus, Bishop of Reys in Provence, being
trusted by those Councils to draw up a defense of their decree; seemed to fall
within the consequence of some of Pelagius his Positions. And thereupon
followed a Rescript of Pope Caelestine, to the Bishops of Gaul, yet extant;
asserting the Doctrine of St. Austine in diverse Articles, though without
condemning any persons of the other side. The II. Council of Orange,
afterward, with the authority of the Sea of Rome, decreed against the said
Articles. But no less against Predestination to death, or to sin: And, without
condemning either Faustus, or Gennadius, or Vincentius, or their writings. And
therefore, they can no more be counted Semi-pelagians, for a Sect, then the
other side Praedestinarians. For this new decree, superseding the former,
united the parties, and has been ever since in force in the West, The stirs
that were afterward under Carolus Calvus, upon the same ground, in the cause
of the Monk Gadschalcus, cannot be thought to have made any alteration in it;
because there were Prelates against Prelates, Churches against Churches, and
Synods against Synods in the cause. Always, that Council decreed nothing for
St. Austine, against the redemption of all mankind, and the will of God that
all be saved. And Prosper his Apologist, (and the Author de Vocatione Gentium
much more) writing about the same time, have asserted both. Condemning thereby
the late zele of Jonseinus for St. Austine, (if not his hatred of the Jesuits)
who, thinking to overbear all Dispute in the point, by his authority and
reasons, has not been afraid to maintain him in those Articles. And therefore
has given the Dominicans, whom his opinion seems to comply so much with, just
occasion to join themselves against him, with the Jesuits. But his opinion
will prove a nihil dicit. That of Arminius, as it necessarily opposes absolute
Predestination to Glory, so it stands very well with absolute Predestination to
Grace; Because it derives the Efficacy of Grace from that Congruity, which, as
Gods foresight discovers, so his Providence uses. And therefore the discreetest
of his adversaries, at the Synod of Dort; the English, and those of Breme;
owned the redemption of mankind, and the will of God that all be saved. Those
that will not do the same must resolve upon Predetermination. And that, I
grant, is not destructive to Christianity in the Dominicans; though of it self
it be destructive: Because, holding free will, they contradict themselves in
it, and so have an Antidote against it. But in our Fanatickes, that take
justifying Faith to be the assurance of Predestination, and the Covenant of
Grace a mere Promise of God, to those that have that assurance; it is
downright Haerefie. And, though the Presbyterians do not profess to hold it,
yet, so long as they distinguish not themselves from the Fanatickes, but
Communieate with them, they will be Haeretickes themselves, by the perpetual
Rule of the Church; which makes them Haeretickes to the Church, that
Communicate with Haeretickes; and Schismatickes, that Communicate with
Schismatickes.

CHAP. XIV.
Duty of a Christian as a Christian, and as a Member of the Church. How
Anabaptists deny the Faith; how they are to be reconciled with the Church.
Their Error, in rebaptizing for want of dipping. What concerns Salvation, in
the Sacrament of the Eucharist. How the Elements are consecrated into the body
and blood of Christ, according to Gregory Nyssene. The consequence hereof, in
the Errors concerning the Eucharist. How the Eucharist a Sacrifice, and yet no
ground for private Masses. The Eucharist, not the Sermon, the Chief Office of
Gods service.

IF it be part of a man's Christianity to be a Member of Gods Duty of a
Christian as a Christian, and as a Member of the Church.
Church, then is a Christian sometimes concerned as a Christian, sometimes as a
Member of the Church. For, that which concerns him as a Member of the Church
arises from the Constitution of the Church; as the effect of that power, which
God has endowed his Church with. Whereas, that which concerns him as a
Christian concerns him before the being of the Church; Though the consent of
the Church in it be the means to bring it into evidence. Whatsoever is
necessary to be known for the salvation of all Christians is of this kind. And
whatsoever proceeds from the power of the Church, as the effect of it, is not
necessary to be known, for the salvation of all Christians. It is necessary
for all Christians to know, that they are to live and dye Members of Gods
Church; And therefore, to conform themselves to the order of it. But, that this
order is for the best, it neither concerns them to know, nor to enquire;
provided it be sufficient for the salvation of all, and enjoin nothing
destructive to the salvation of any. This is the next obligation to that which
concerns a Christian as a Christian.

The Sacraments of Baptism and of the Eucharist were instituted How
Anab^ptists deny the Faith* how they are to be reconciled with the Church.
by our Lord in person, before he left the World. So was also the Power of the
Keys, consisting in admitting to them, and excluding from them. Upon this Power
he founded his Church; leaving the forming of it to his Apostles, whom he
trusted it with, by virtue of the same. It seems therefore, that these
Sacraments concern Christians as Christians, and not only as Members of the
Church. I have showed how Baptism concerns the salvation of all Christians.
Whereby it appears, *what presumption of Haeresie there is, in the Sect of the
Anabaptists. For, did they think the profession of Christianity to be the
condition, in consideration whereof, all that are baptized are saved; they
could not take that Baptism of the Church for void, whereby, there can be no
doubt, that a Christian is obliged, to the profession of a Christian. Because
they believe not the condition of salvation to be the Covenant of Baptism,
therefore they make it void, being received before knowledge. Whereas the
greater question is, whether the Church be obliged to take their Baptism for
Baptism, or not. For, though the School make good all Baptism ministered in
due matter and form of words; yet the Church never declared this general reason,
why it allows the Baptism of those Haeretickes, whom it did not rebaptize;
Because they were baptized with the due form of words. But only appointed such
and such Haeretickes to be baptized, (as voiding the Baptism which they
received from Haeretickes) others to be received with imposition of hands.
Now, of those Haeresies, whose Baptism the Church allows to be valid,
though unlawful, none did ever question the Article of one Baptism for
remission of fin; which, they that own not Christianity for the condition of
salvation, do destroy. So did the Gnostickes; and their Baptism ought to be
void. They who agree in their opinion, (though not in the grounds of it) how is
the Church tied to allow their Baptism? But because the Church is not tied to
make it void, and to baptize them again, returning to the Profession of the
true Faith; Let it suffice, that it appears hereby, how necessary this found
profession is, for the restoring, not only of Anabaptists, but of all other
Sects, that distinguish not themselves from them, to the Church.

They have, indeed, another pretense for rebaptizing. For, Their Error, in
re-baptizing for ^a^^ of dipping.
that they may dip the whole body, they will leave the Church to Baptize in
Rivers. Would they do this, did they think the profession which is made with a
good Conscience, to be that which saves, in Baptism, as the Apostle teaches?
The order of this Church requires dipping, so it be warily done; And
certainly, if it be not the cleansing of the flesh, it is not the indangering
of life that saves. Now, when sprinkling is used instead of dipping, without
regard to the danger of the Child; in regard to a wrong opinion in the point,
or to the causeless tendernerness of Mothers and Friends, especially of the
womankind; though the Sacrament be not void, not being ministered as it ought
to be, the offense is given by him that so ministers it.

As the performance of Christianity is necessary for the Salvation What
c^n^^r^^ Salvation, in the Sacrament of the Eucharist.
of him, that first attained the state of Salvation, by undertaking
Christianity; So is the Sacrament of the Eucharist necessary for the Salvation
of him, that is come to the state of Salvation by the Sacrament of Baptism.
Which if it be true, then is it necessary for the Church to profess, and for
all Christians to know and believe; that the benefit of the Eucharist depends
upon the sincerity of that resolution, wherewith he that receives it stands
to his Christianity: And on the other side, that so doing, he fails not of the
Body and Blood of Christ in that Sacrament; and by consequence, of his Spirit
which it conveyeth. If therefore the Unity of the Church be a part of the
Common Christianity; Then is it necessary, to this effect, that it be
celebrated in the Unity of Gods Church. For otherwise, no man need to argue
that it is void; that it is celebrated and received to no effect; seeing it is
celebrated and received to so bad effect, as to make all that come to it guilty
of Christ's Body and Blood.

I claim further, that, seeing it can be no sound part of Gods How the
Elements are consecrated into the body and blood of Christ, according to
Gregory N^ssene.
Church, that observes not all the Laws of Gods Whole Church; If the
Eucharist be not consecrated by that means, by which the Church from the
beginning, has always consecrated the Eucharist, then it is not celebrated in
the Unity of Gods Church. Now I conceive, I have showed, that the Church, from
the beginning, did not pretend to consecrate by these bare words; This is my
Body, this is my Blood; as Operatory, in changing the Elements into the Body
and Blood of Christ; But by that Word of God, whereby he has declared the
Institution of this Sacrament, and commanded the use of it: And by the
execution of this command. Now it is executed, and has always been executed,
by the Act of the Church, upon Gods Word of Institution, praying, that the Holy
Ghost, coming down upon the present Elements, may make them the Body and Blood
of Christ. Not by changing them into the nature of flesh and blood; As the
bread and wine, that nourished our Lord Christ on earth, became the flesh and
blood of the Son of God, by becoming the flesh and blood of his Manhood,
hypostatically united to his Godhead; says S. Gregory Nyssene; But immediately
and ipso facto, by being united to the Spirit of Christ, that is, his Godhead.
For, the flesh and blood of Christ by Incarnation, the Elements by
Consecration, being united to the Spirit, that is, the Godhead of Christ,
become both one Sacramentally, by being both one with the Spirit, or Godhead of
Christ, to the conveying of Gods Spirit to a Christian.

This Doctrine of S. Gregory Nyssene, grounded upon the form The consequence
hereof, in the Errors concerning the Eucharist.
of Consecrating used by the Whole Church, seems to me, to make good all that
the Ancient Fathers have taught concerning this Sacrament; Whereas, no other
terms are able to do the same. And that, without entering into any dispute
concerning the substance of the Elements; But, securing first that which the
common Salvation requires in the Sacrament; to wit, the receiving of the flesh
and blood of Christ by it; by imputing the presence of them to the
Consecration, not to the Faith of him that receives; It condemns the Error of
Transubstantiation, making the change mystical, and immediate, upon the coming
of Gods Spirit to the Elements; the nature of them remaining: But it condemns
Consubstantiation for no less. For, what needs the flesh and blood of Christ
fill the same dimensions, which the substance of the Elements possesses, both
being united with his Spirit? And truly, they that invite the Lutherans to
their Communion, professing Consubstantiation, must not make Transubstantiation
an Error in the foundation of Faith, if they will weigh by their own Weights,
and mete by their own Measures. But, if the Error of the Fanatics, when they
make the assurance of a man's Praedestination to be justifying Faith, be an
Error in the Foundation of Faith; as I have showed that it is; Then it is an
Error in the Foundation of Faith, to take the Eucharist to be a mere sign to
confirm that Faith: And the flesh and blood of Christ to be present in the
Eucharist, not by the Faith of the Church, whereby the Consecration is made and
done, but by this Faith, in him that receives. And therefore, this Error being
enough to render the Sacraments no Sacraments, which are celebrated professing
it; the Word no Word of God, that teaches to celebrate such Sacraments; the
Churches no Churches that profess it, or communicate with them that profess it;
My Inference is unavoidable; That, to justify this Church a Member of Gods
only true Church, they ought not to be readmitted into it, without expressly
acknowledging; The Christianity which we undertake by the Sacrament of
Baptism, to be the condition of the Covenant of Grace.

If the consecrated Elements be the flesh and blood of Christ, How the
Eucharist a Sacrifice, and yet no ground for private Masses.
then are they the sacrifice of Christ crucified upon the Cross. For, they are
not the flesh and blood of Christ as in his body, while it was whole; but as
separated, by the passion of his Cross. Not that Christ can be sacrificed
again. For a Sacrifice, being an Action done in succession of time, cannot be
done the second time being once done; because then it should not have been done
before; But, because the Sacrifice of Christ crucified is represented,
commemorated, and applied, by celebrating and receiving the Sacrament, which is
that Sacrifice. They of the Church of Rome, that would make the breach wider
then it is, do but justify the Reformation, by forcing any other reason of a
Sacrifice out of the Scripture, expounded by the consent of Gods Church. And
they which stumble at the Altar, and the Priesthood, which this Sacrifice
infers, plainly they invite us to renounce the Whole Church of God, with the
Church of Rome, for their sakes. And how much Christianity they will leave us,
when that is done, who will undertake? Thus much for certain, upon these terms,
the virtue of this Sacrifice is not to be applied, by the secret and private
intent of the Priest, directing his action to the benefit of living or dead;
whether present or absent; whether concurring to the celebrating and receiving
of it, or not so much as thinking themselves concerned so to do. It is not
applied, but by the devotion of them, who, either receive it when they are
bound to receive, or concur to the celebrating of it when they are not;
whether Priests or People. And therefore, there is no ground for private
Masses, by granting the Eucharist to be in this nature a Sacrifice.

But can any man say, that it is not the principal Office of The Eucharist, not
the Sermon, the Chief Office of Gods Service.
Christian Assemblies? That it ought not to be frequented, upon all the chief
occasions for the Assemblies of Gods Church? That the ordinary work for which
we meet, all Lords days, and other days, (if on other days we ought
ordinarily and solemnly to meet) is a Sermon, with an arbitrary Prayer before
or after it? That they who take the pains to minister the same, are to be
excused of celebrating the Eucharist, or ministering the prayers of the Church,
which it is to be celebrated with: (unless it be three or four times a year)
and much more of reading the Scriptures, or praising God upon David's Psalter,
and the Hymns of the Church? I confess Calvin's Reformation is much after that
form. And, all the ar^ of the Blessed Reformation here pretended, has been, to
impose it for a Law upon this Kingdom, without once pleading that it is for the
best. But so grossly prejudicial to the Service of God, and the Common
Christianity, that it were injurious to fear, that a Christian Kingdom can
suffer such an Imposture; derogating far more from the perpetual Custom of
Gods Whole Church, then it can from the present Law of this Kingdom. That
therefore I may make way to the determining of that which remains most
questionable amongst us; What is the best form of Service, which the Church of
this Kingdom can worship God with; I must, in the first place, lay down that
Rule, by which all Reformation of Laws Ecclesiastical is to be directed;
together with the ground of it.

CHAP. XV.
The ground that determines the Form of our Service. The Offices, of which the
Service is to consist. Of the Use of the Psalms. Of reading the Scriptures
commonly called Apocrypha. What Preaching it is that the Scripture commends.
There may be Preaching without Sermons, and Sermons without Preaching. The
difference between the second Service in the Ancient Church, and our Communion
Service. The general Preface, and the Prayers of the Church at the Eucharist.
The Prayer of Oblation instituted by S. Paul, and the matter of it. The Lords
Prayer at the Eucharist. The Place for the Common Prayers.

THat ground, upon which the form of our Service is to be The ground that
determines the Form of ou^ Service.
determined, is to determine all that remains to be determined in matter of
Religion, by Law of this Kingdom. The true sense of the Scripture is not to be
had, but out of the Records of Antiquity; especially, of Gods ancient people
f^^st, and then, of the Christian Church. The obligation of that sense, upon
the Church at this time, is not to be measured against the primitive practice
of the Whole Church. The Reformation of the Church is nothing but the restoring
of that which may appear to have been in force, especially, since Christianity
has been protected by the Laws of the Empire; Because, the greatest
difference, between the primitive time of Christianity and this, is the
difference between the state of Persecution, and of Protection by the Law of
this Kingdom. It is therefore necessary that both sides, professing the
Reformation, should agree upon the true ground of Reformation; and so, upon the
Rule which that ground will maintain and evidence; that is, to submit all that
is in question, to the visible practice of the primitive times, before those
abuses were brought in, which the Reformation pretends to restore. For, if
God have founded a Visible Church; which all this supposes; then cannot the
Pope be Antichrist, nor the Church of Rome* Idolaters, for any thing which the
practice of the Primitive Church justifies. And, seeing the Church is Visible
by the Laws of it; there can no Church be visibly one with that which was
from the beginning, but by ruling it self by the same Laws, so far as the
state of the Bodies for which they are made is the same. That which shall be
said, concerning the form of our Service, is an instance hereof. The sense of
the Scriptures, which have been alleged, shall appear to agree with the
primitive order of Gods Church. The reviving of the order is the point of
Reformation in this particular; allowing, for avoiding just offense, in
altering the Law of the Kingdom, without necessary cause; as the wisdom of
Superiors shall find requisite.

I must now suppose, that the Offices of Gods Service, for The Offices, of
which the Service is to consist.
which the Church of God assembleth ordinarily, and solemnly, are the praises
of God, the instruction of the people in the duties of their Christianity,
(whether by reading the Scriptures, or by handling the same)* And lastly, the
Common Prayers of the Church; especially those which the Eucharist is to be
celebrated with. And this Order, which I put them in here, is that which the
Church, from the beginning, has always observed.

The Psalter of David, in the first place, has been so generally O^ the use of
the Psalms.
frequented, by the Whole Church, for the Instrument to make the Praises of God
sound forth, that it ought not now to be questioned, (as questioned it is
visibly enough) by any that would pretend to be of Gods Church. The order of
reading the Psalms, which the Law of this Kingdom requires, is admitted,
because they are part of the Scripture. But all endeavors used, that no
devotion of the people be exercised by it. The Psalms in Rhyme must engross
that. We have seen a Civil War, in the time whereof, these Psalms in Rhyme,
being crowded into the Church by mere sufferance, and so used without order of
Law; have been employed on both sides, to brand the adverse party, with the
marks, which the Psalms set upon the enemies of David, and of Gods People; that
is, of Christ and of Christians. More freely by them, who sang them at the head
of their Armies, to that purpose. I hope those ways do not please at present;
And therefore say freely, that the disorder ought not to continue. Some of our
Fanatics, I know, have torn them out of their Bibles. They thought themselves
not concerned in them, though David were. The Jews, though they allow many of
them to belong to the Messiah, would not have them belong to our Lord Christ.
But the Church uses them, supposing them all fulfilled in Christ and
Christians; whether particular souls, or the body of his Church. Upon this
Account they are the exercise of Christian Devotions. But not the Psalms in
Rhyme. The music of them has proved too hard for the people to learn, in an
hundred years. And yet, no way more commendable then the Rhimes themselves are:
And, repeating a little in much time. The tunes used in Cathedral and
Collegiate Churches are easy to learn, and serve that Order which Law setleth,
for Devotion, not for reading them as Scripture.

The order for reading the Scripture appears necessary, by the Of reading the
Scriptures commonly called Apocryph^.
jealousies of this time. For were it arbitrary, how obvious would it be, to
deprave public or private proceedings, by Lessons chosen on purpose? That the
Books called Apocrypha are not the Writings of Prophets inspired, is agreed.
Though those Writings are properly called Apocrypha, which the Church
authorizeth not to be read. Whereas these, being always read in the Church,
are therefore properly called Ecclesiastical by Rufinus. The chief objections
against them resolve into some passages, that seem not to agree with the
Doctrine of the New Testament. But so, that the like are found in the Old. The
Fact of Razias, the Proceeding of Judith, the Lie of Tobits Angel are the
greatest blocks of offense; Not considering the Fact of Jael, or that of
Sampson, or the Lies that seem to be rewarded under the Law. If offense be
taken at them, why not at these? But it is no offense to good Christians;
because good Christians do not presume the Law and the Gospel to be both one.
And therefore, are content to know their duty under the Gospel; letting that
which agrees not therewith, in the Old Testament, pass without offense. In the
mean time, it is evident, that the Doctrine of Christianity begins to be
discovered in them more clearly, then it stands discovered in the Law and the
Prophets. Hereupon the Wisdom of the Primitive Church employed them for the
instruction of the Cat^c^umeni, that were yet but learners of Christianiny. And
therefore, we are to insist upon the use of them, for edification of the
Church, in the better understanding of the manners and good works of
Christians; much abased by those, who would put these Books to silence. But,
the whole Church having always used them; to lay them aside now, were not to
restore the Church, but to build a new one.

As concerning the necessity of preaching, so effectually set What Preaching it
is that the Scripture c^mmendeth.
forth by the Scriptures; there is utterly a mistake in the meaning of them.
That preaching, which the Scripture makes absolutely necessary to salvation,
is the publishing of the Gospel, to those that know it not. The instruction of
Christians in their duty is called teaching in the Scripture. I have made
evidence of this difference. The Apostles Commission is to teach them whom they
have baptized, all that the Lord had commanded them. The Kingdom of God is not
in word, but in power. But if we call the teaching of Christians preaching,
then it must be such, for matter and for manner both, as may indeed convict
Christians, of the duty of Christians; and that, not in the opinion of him that
preaches, but according to the Doctrine of the Church. Whosoever thinks
himself t^ed to Preach that, which the Church ties him not to Preach; not tied
to Preach that which it tyeth him to preach; is in a fair way to edify the
people to ruin, by improving an undue zeal, to the dividing of the Church.

In the mean time, the Church preaches without Sermons, by There may be
Preaching without Sermons, and Sermons without Preaching.
the Psalms, and the Scriptures, and by that order, in which it provideth that
they be read; Besides all those Forms, in which it prescribes the Offices of
Gods Service to be performed. Which, if they contain all that is necessary,
generally, and probably, to the salvation of all Christians; supposing them
duly Catechized in those things which the salvation of all, and which their
particular estate requires; they that never heard many Sermons may have heard
more and better preaching, then hundreds and thousands of Sermons, dangerous,
if not destructive to salvation, (a thing which experience proves more then
possible) can furnish them, who shall do nothing but run from Sermons to
Sermons. I grant it was a just complaint, at the Reformation, that the people
were not taught their duty. But I do not grant, either that they cannot be
taught their duty, without two Sermons every Lords day: Or, that they are like
to be taught their duty, by two Sermons every Lords day. It is not possible to
have men for all Churches, fit to preach twice a day, to the edifying of the
people. It will not be possible to maintain their preaching such, as may be
accounted an Office of Gods service.

In the ancient Church, for diverse hundred years, all that The difference
between the second Service in the ancient Church, and our Communion Service.
were admitted to stay all this while; that is, till the Sermon were done; were
not to be present at the Eucharist, were not to communicate. As Converts not
baptized, as the relapsed, as the possessed by unclean spirits; in which rank
the Lunaticke, the Epilepticke, the Frantic were accounted. And reason good;
for they were not to communicate, at least till death. And yet they were not to
be dismissed without the prayers of the Church; Prayers fitting their several
estates, for their proficience, or for their recovery, that they might come to
communicate. I will not here undertake, that all which remained did always
communicate; though I doubt not, I may undertake, that the rule of the Church
required them always to communicate. For, when the world was come in to the
Church, the Rule that prevailed in time of persecution, there is no marvel,
that it could not then prevail. By St. Chrysostom alone it appears
sufficiently, that the Rule was well enough known; but not in force, even in
his time. So, when they that might not communicate were dismissed, they that
would not communicate remained nevertheless. For, the Eucharist was not to be
set aside for their negligence. This is the difference between the first and
second Service; which is not the same with our Communion Service. For, the
first Service ended when the prayers of the Church began. Our Communion Service
is that which is properly called the Liturgy in Greek: Namely, the Office which
the Eucharist is to be celebrated with. That which goes before the Offertory
belongs not properly to the second Service, according to the Primitive Form;
For, the presenting of the Elements was always, every where, the beginning of
it.

The prayers of the Church began with Thanksgiving to God, The General Preface,
and the Prayers of the Church at the Eucharist.
for making man, and setting him over the creatures; for taking care of him
after his Fall, teaching the Patriarchs, giving the Law, sending the Prophets;
and, when all this did not the effect required, for sending our Lord Christ.
From this Thanksgiving, both the Action of the Sacrament, and the consecrated
Elements are still called the Eucharist. And it is called a Preface, in a very
ancient African Canon; to wit, to the consecration of the Elements which
followed; Which, as I said before, is nothing else but a prayer, that God would
send the Holy Ghost upon the present Elements; and make them the Body and Blood
of Christ; that they who should receive them worthily might be filled with his
Grace. The common prayers of the Church; that is, of those who were admitted to
Communion with the Church; were always made at the Altar, or Communion Table,
in the action of the Sacrament* Reason good. How can Christians think their
prayers so effectual with God, as when they are presented at the Commemoration
of the Sacrifice of Christ crucified; the Representation whereof to God, in
heaven, makes his Intercession there so acceptable? Especially by those who
maintain the Covenant of their Christianity, contracted at their Baptism, by
communicating in the Eucharist.

Here then, that is, at the celebrating of the Eucharist, prayers, The prayer
of Oblation instituted by St. Paul, and the ^ater of it.
supplications, and intercessions, were made for all estates in the Church, and
for their respective necessities; For the averting of all Gods Judgments, for
the obtaining of all his blessings: For public Powers and their Ministers;
for the Governors and Ministers of the Church, high and low: for public Peace
and prosperity; for the Seasons and Fruits of the Year; for the Sick and
Distressed; for the helps of Gods Grace, in all parts of that Christianity
which we profess, passing by daily offense^: for particular occasions of
interceding with God, which each particular Congregation may have. And there
be good and sufficient witnesses; the Author of the Commentary upon St. Paul
to Timothy, under St. Ambrose his name, the Author de Vocatione G^ntium, St.
Augustine, and Pope Caelestine in his Epistle ad Gallos; that this was the
practice of the whole Church, and that, in obedience to St. Paul's instructions
to Timothy: 1 Timothy II. 1-6. And this confirms my opinion; that St. Paul,
ordering prayers, supplications, intercessions and thanksgi^ings for Kings, and
all in authority; means, that prayers, supplications and intercessions, be
made for Kings, and the rest, at Thanksgiving; that is, when the Eucharist is
celebrated. For, that the word (...), in the sense of ancient Christians,
signifies the celebrating of the Eucharist, I have produced plentiful evidence.
However, the ancient Chuch manifestly signifies, that they did offer their
Oblations, out of which the Eucharist was consecrated, with an* intent to
intercede with God, for public or private necessities; And that, out of an
opinion, that they would be effectual; alleging the Sacrifice of Christ
crucified then present, which renders Christ's intercession effectual for us.
And this is the true ground, why they attributed so much to this Commemoration
of the Sacrifice; which makes nothing for the effect of it in private Masses;
but more then will be valued, for the frequenting of the Holy Eucharist.

The Consecration ended always with the Lords Prayer. The Lords Prayer at the^
Eucharist.
Which confirms my opinion, that St. Paul, when he says, How shall the
unlearned say Amen to thy thanksgiving? 1 Cor. XIV. 16. means that Amen, which
came after the Lords Prayer; taking Thanksgiving there, for celebrating the
Eucharist. For there is nothing so generally evident in Antiquity, as the
beginning of the Consecration, at Sursum corda; or lift up your hearts; And the
ending of it with the Lords Prayer, and the Doxology; which, in my opinion,
being so frequented upon this occasion; by the licentiousness of Copyists, in
time, came to be crowded into the Text of the Scripture. For, it is manifest
enough, that the most considerable Copies do not own it.

But, the Common Prayers for all estates, as it seems, sometimes The Place for
the Common Prayers.
went before the Consecration, sometimes came after it. For, I am to seek for
evidence in the Records of the Latin Church, importing that they came after
the Consecration. And yet I have made it evident, that they were used of old by
the Latin Church, at celebrating of the Eucharist; though now not found in the
present Latin Mass. And the Liturgy of the Church of Alexandria, and the
Aethiopick, depending upon that Church, have them before the Consecration. But
the best and most Greekish Forms, and Authorities agreeing therewith, make them
come after it.

CHAP. XVI.
Difference in the state of Souls departed in Grace, before Judgment. The
ancient Church never prayed to remove them out of Purgatory. To what purpose
they were remembered at the Eucharist. The Saints departed pray for the Militant
Church. Of Prayers to the Saints departed. No Common Prayer in the Pulpit by
Gift, but in a set form, at the Communion Table. Apostolical Graces subject to
Order. Of the Graces of the Spirit in St. Paul, and the Original of Letanies.
The Prayers of the Eucharist how prescribed by the Apostles. Prayers of the
Reformed Churches in the Pulpit; but by a form. The effect of the Long
Parliament Prayers by the Spirit.

ONe point of these prayers I must speak to here in particular. Difference in
the state of Souls departed in Grace, before Judgment.
To wit, the Commemoration of the dead, for which the Mass is now pretended, by
the Church of Rome, a Sacrifice for quick and dead, to what effect the
Scripture, expounded by the practice of the whole Church, may be thought to
allow it. I have showed out of the Revelation, that the souls of M^rtyrs,
appearing before the Throne of God, in the Court of the Tab^rnacle; (to wit; in
the Jerusalem which is above) The Throne appears to St. John indeed; but is to
be understood, in the Holy of Holies; and therefore is not seen in the Count
of the Tabernacle. But those 144000 that were sealed, and preserved from the
destruction of Jerusalem, appear not in the Court of the Tabernacle, but on
Mount Sion, a place of inferior holiness: And sing not the Martyrs song, but
are only able to learn it, which no body else could do. Sufficient Arguments of
difference, in the State of blessed souls; though all beneath that which the
Resurrection promises; which all of them earnestly desire. Suppose the place
be the third Heavens; suppose that it is called Paradise; (because, of
necessity, it answers the Figure of the earthly Paradise,) suppose that in
respect of the Saints that dyed under the Law, it is called Abraham's bosom;
There may be inferior Mansions, in the mean time before the Rusurrection, for
souls of inferior holiness; though they depart in the State of Grace. For how
often do the Apostles signify a sollicitous expectation of the Day of Judgment,
in those whom they suppose to dye Christians? A thing which can by no means
stand with the estate of those that are before the Throne of God, praising him
day and night, in the Court of the Tabernacle. And therefore St. Ambrose and
St. Augustine had great reason to follow the fourth Book of Esdras, (written,
without doubt, by a very ancient Christian, though not authorized by the
Church) placing the generality of souls departed in the state of Grace in
certain secret receptacles; signifying no more, then the unknown Condition of
their estate. For, the practice of the Church, in interceding for them at the
Celebration of the Eucharist, is so general, and so ancient, that it cannot be
thought to have come in upon imposture, but that the same aspersion will seem
to take hold of the Common Christianity.

But, to what effect this Intercession was made; that is, indeed, The ancient
Church never Prayed to remove them out of Purgatory.
the due point of difference. For, they who think that the ancient Church
prayed, and do themselves pray for the removing of them from a place of
Purgatory pains, into perfect happiness, by the clear sight of God, offend
against the Ancient Church, as well as against the Scripture, both ways. For
Justine Martyr makes it a part of the Gnostics Haeresie, that the soul without
the body is in perfect happiness. They indeed held it, because they denied the
Resurrection. But the Church therefore, believing the Resurrection, believes no
perfect happiness of the Soul before it. And the great consent of the Ancient
Church in this point, is acknowledged by diverse learned Writers in the Church
of Rome. Neither is the consent of it less evident in this; That there is no
translating of Souls into a new estate, before the great Trial of the general
Judgment.

In the mean time then, what hinders them to receive comfort To what purpose
they were remembered at the Eucharist.
and refreshment, rest, and peace, and light, (by the visitation of God, by the
consolation of his Spirit, by his good Angels) to sustain them in the
expectation of their trial, and the anxieties they are to pass through, during
the time of it? And though there be hope, for those that are most sollicitous
to live and dye good Christians, that they are in no such suspense, but within
the bounds of the heavenly Jerusalem; yet, because their Condition is
uncertain; and, where there is hope of the better, there is fear of the worse;
therefore the Church has always assisted them with the prayers of the living,
both for their speedy trial, (which all blessed souls desire) and for their
easy absolution, and discharge with glory before God, together with the
accomplishment of their happiness in the receiving of their bodies.

Now, all Members of the Church Triumphant in Heaven, The Saints departed pray
for the Militant Church.
according to the degree of their favor with God, abound also with love to his
Church Militant on earth. And, though they know not the necessities of
particular persons, without particular Revelation from God; yet they know there
are such necessities, so long as the Church is Militant on earth. Therefore it
is certain, both that they offer continual prayers to God for those
necessities; and, that their prayers must needs be of great force and effect
with God, for the assistance of the Church Militant in this warfare. Which if
it be true, the Communion of Saints will necessarily require, that all, who
remain sollicitous of their trial, be assisted by the prayers of the living,
for present comfort, and future rest. That the living beg of God, a part and
Interest, in the benefit of those Prayers, which, they who are so near to God
in his Kingdom, tender him without ceasing, for the Church upon earth. As for
prayers for the translating of Souls out of Purgatory; the beginning of their
coming into the Church is visible.

And so is the coming in of those prayers, which call upon the Of Prayers to
the Saints departed.
Saints departed by name, in any public Office of Devotion in the Church. The
voluntary devotions of private persons, most of them ignorant and carnal, are
no Argument of the Original and general practice of the Church. And there is no
mark of these invocations, till Processions were frequented with Litanies,
which consisted most an end of them: and, could not be in use before the time
of Constantine, but were not in use till a good while after it. The abuse has
increased so far, (especially in addresses to the blessed Virgin) that the same
things are desired of them, and in the same terms, in which they are desired of
God, even in the holy Scripture. That the appearance of Devotion, to the
Mother, is visibly, and outwardly, no less then to the Son. So that, were there
not a profession of that Church extant, contradicting the proper sense of such
prayers, and forcing them that address them, unless they will contradict
themselves, to abate their own meaning, and to expound them to signify no
more, then obtaining that of God which they are desired to grant of themselves;
they could not be excused of Idolatry. But can by no means be excused, for
leading simple Christians upon a Praecipice of such horrible danger; by
encouraging both them, and those that teach them such devotions. For, did not
carnal Superstition hope for temporal blessings, from such voluntary
applications, without that promise of God, which the condition of our
Christianity engages; how should a Christian be induced to go about by a
Saint, that has immediate access to God, to the same effect?

That which has been said of the Primitive Liturgy, barreth No Common Prayer
in the Pulpit by Gift; but in a set form, at the Communion Table.
the pretense of this time, requiring the Liturgy settled by Law of this Kingdom
to be changed, upon a ground never heard of in the Church, for 1600 years.
That every Minister (whether meaning Bishop; Priest and Deacon or Priest only)
is to have a gift in praying: and that his people ought to pray that which his
gift furnishes, and not that which the Church prescribes. And, to the end
that such gifts may be used; that no Minister be tied to celebrate the
Eucharist above thrice a year: and that, in case he have convenient company.
But, that they, whose age and infirmity enables them not to preach and pray
thus in the Pulpit, reading the Service over and above, be not tied to
minister the Service prescribed. Now would I have those that demand this to
show me, that ever the prayers, for which the Church meets, were made in the
Pulpit, for 1500 years after Christ. I know I have alleged a prayer of St.
Ambrose before his Sermon; I know there is a passage of St. Augustine alleged
to the same purpose. But neither of them signifies any more, then a prayer to
God, to bless them in their preaching. The Common Prayers of the Church are
another thing; even that which I have said. The common prayers of the Church,
on all ordinary and solemn Assemblies, were made at the Altar; because the
Eucharist was held always, and ought to be held always, the principal Office
of Gods service, for which Christians ought to assemble, more frequently, then
there can be either ability, or opportunity for preaching. And that which I
have said of the Primitive Liturgy is full evidence hereof. For I have showed a
set form of it; (which these men return a non inventus of to his Majesty's
Commission) but, that ever there was any Prayer of the people used in the
Pulpit, will never appear.

I grant that there were miraculous Graces under the Apostles, Apostolical
Graces subject to Order.
which St. Paul directs the use of, in ministering the prayers of the Church.
But, that all Ministers had them, they who require an ordinary Gift, in all
Ministers, to that purpose, cannot prove. Much less, that this ordinary Gift is
to succeed those miraculous graces, in all Ministers. For even then, St. Paul
says, that the Spirits of the Prophets were to be subject to the Prephets;
because God is not the God of confusion, but of order. And therefore charges
all that pretended to such graces, to acknowledge the Grace of an Apostle in
him: and to be subject to the Orders which there he gives out. If the
immediate inspirations of Gods Spirit were so dispensed, that inferiors could
presume nothing to the prejudice of Order, against Superiors, upon that
pretense; Much more, now that Christianity is settled, and the Unity of the
Church a part of it, are the Gifts of inferiors to be ruled by the gifts of
Superiors; that Order, in which Unity consists, may be preserved. Of the
Graces of the Spirit in St. Paul, and the Original of Litanies.


St. Paul says, that the Spirit makes intercession for the Saints with groans
unutterable. And St. Chrysostom says thereupon, that they who had these
Miraculous Graces, being employed to minister the prayers of the Church, did
offer them to God with those deep sighs, and groans, which could hardly express
what the Spirit suggested. But adds, that the Deacon did the same in his
time. And this is visibly true, by all that remains of the Liturgy, in the
Records of the Church. It is evident, that though the Bishop or Priest,
celebrating the Eucharist, did offer the Common Prayers which I have described;
yet the Deacon also indicted the same to the people, from point to point, as you
have it to this day in our English Litanies; the people answering from point to
point; Lord have mercy; or some such acclamation as our Litanies do direct. So
far is the Catholic Church from the Maxim now pretended; that the Priest
alone is the mouth of the people in their prayers. And the sighs and groans of
that deep devotion, which St. Paul says the Spirit then moved, and St.
Chrysostom, that the people, answering the Deacon, then expressed, the form of
our Litanies now contains and expresses. And indeed, those prayers which the
Deacon indicted, are called Litanies, in diverse of the ancient Liturgies;
Showing that our Litanies are but a Transcript of them, for the use of other
occasions, besides the Celebration of the Eucharist. And Smectymnuus may
remember how much they mistook Justine Martyr; thinking he had said, that the
Minister prayed thus according to his Gift; Who says indeed, that he prayed
with all his might; to wit, with all the Devotion he could use. Which devotion,
as it is not to be found in their Pulpit Prayers, pretending to apply the Gift
to the present occasion; so it visibly breathes in the Litanies, through all
occasions of Gods Church.

When miraculous Graces failed, the prayers of the Church The Prayers of the
Eucharist how prescribed by the Apostles.
were not to fail. And, the Apostles having delivered that which I have said to
the Church; whosoever was authorized to celebrate the Eucharist, both must be,
and easily might be instructed, how he should discharge that Office. There is
so much agreement, both for matter, and manner, in that which remains of it, in
the Records of the Church, as to justify those, that affirm it to be received
by Tradition from the Apopostles. Thus was the Form prescribed from the
beginning. In time abuses might come. For what Rule can there be in humane
business, that shall not be subject to abuse? Therefore the African Canon,
which I spoke of, Orders, that Bishops should confer the Forms which they used
(to wit, through their Dioceses) with their fellow Bishops. Other Canons
succeeding; that the same Form should be used throughout every Province. In
time the Church of Rome obtained, that the Form thereof should be received all
over the West.

We see in the mean time, what this pretense of Gifts tends Prayers of the
Reformed Churches in the Pulpit, but by a form.
to. Even to shut the Eucharist out of doors, or to confine it to thrice a
year, in case there be company; which case may be so managed, that a man need
not be tied to celebrate the Eucharist all his life time. This is the
satisfaction the Church has, for their withholding the Eucharist so many
years, from those that could not endure the ignorance, malice, and insolence of
their Buckram Triers. I grant that Calvin's Reformation brings the Common
Prayers from the Altar into the Pulpit; And, by that means, confines the
Communion to four times a year. But are we to follow Calvin, in that, wherein
the whole Church of God is against Calvin? Wherein, the Rule of this Church,
and the Law of the Kingdom, agrees with the whole Church against Calvin? Was it
the way to reform the abuse of private Masses, to shut out the Communion
excepting four times a year? It must be said, that it was not the Reforming,
but the Deforming of the Church: And the reforming thereof consists in
restoring the Eucharist, into the place that it ought to hold among the Offices
of the Church; So that the Communion thereof may be* most generally, and*
continually frequented, by Christians most prepared. But Calvin dreamed of no
Gifts all the while. The Form of Common Prayer is as much prescribed, according
to Calvin, as according to the Church of England; though it be read in the
Pulpit.

It is the new Gospel of the Long Parliament, that setup the The effect of the
Long Parliament Prayers by the Spirit.
pretense of praying by the Spirit; the Gift whereof is now claimed for every
Ministers privilege, in bar to Gods Church. Though it be manifest, that the
greatest part have no such gift, so to minister the Offices of the Church, as
may be to the discharge of the people, the honor of God, and of Christianity;
yet the Law of the Land must be changed, as supposing that which we see is
not. The weaknesses and Imperfections, the Falsehoods, the Blasphemies, the
Slanders, the Sedition, the Schism that we have known vented in such prayers,
oblige us to conclude, that there is no such Gift in all Ministers; At least
not of Gods Spirit. And therefore, that we must not forsake Gods Church;
changing the Form that is ruled by the Pattern thereof, and the Eucharist to
boot, for the Arbitrary prayers, that every Ministers Gift shall vent in the
Pulpit.

CHAP. XVII.
The Lords Day observed by the Authority of the Church. Therefore other
Festivals, and times of Fasting, are to be observed. How places and persons
become qualified for Gods Service; Preaching not convertible with Ministering
the Sacraments. Times, places, persons, and things, consecrated to Gods
Service, under the Gospel. Ceremonies signifying by institution necessary in
Gods Service. What kind of signification requisite. Not enough for the
Presbyterians to allow Ceremonies.

THe determining of times, and places, and persons, by The Lords Day observed
by the authority of the Church.
which, and at which, of the Circumstances and Ceremonies, of the Form, and
order, according to which, the service of God is to be celebrated, is the
Office, and therefore is within the power of the Church. The substance of
Christianity, wherein salvation consists, was determined by our Lord in
person, to his Apostles. That which he trusted them with, was the regulating
of his Church, supposing the same Christianity; that God might be served by
the Assemblies of such, as might appear to profess it. That which he trusted
the Apostles with, the Church remains, of necessity, trusted with by the
Apostles; saving the personal Gift of the Holy Ghost in the Apostles, rendering
their Acts blameless, in that estate for which they were made; though not
sufficient for all estates of the Church. Otherwise, the power of the whole
Church is the power of the Apostles: and obliges the parts of the Church, not
to transgress the Acts of it. Because the Unity of the Church is equally
concerned in them; and the substance of Christianity in neither of both. This
discovers the Superstition of that Imposture which is pretended, by deriving
the Obligation of the Lords Day from the Jewish. Sabbath. For what reason can
endure, that the Church should be bound to keep the first day of the week, by
that Precept, which tied the Synagogue to keep the last day of the week? Seeing
then, the Obligation of it is to be derived from the Act of the Apostles;
(that is, from the power of the Church; For, being once received by the whole
Church, it is for ever received to the same effect; if the premises be true)
it is the same Obligation that ties all, to observe the times appointed, for
the service of God, by the Church; whether Fasting days or Festivals. The
Example of the Primitive Christians at Jerusalem justifies St. Hierome, and
others of the Fathers, affirming; that the Church should, and would serve God
continually, in public, could the business of the world stand with it. And
therefore, that order is to be accounted most Christian, that provides most
opportunity, for frequenting the public service of God.

If this were considered, it would appear a mere Imposture, Therefore other
Festivals, and times of Fasting, are to be observed.
to demand, that the Lords day be celebrated with Sermons morning and evening,
and arbitrary prayers to usher them in and out; treading underfeet all other
times, set apart by the whole Church, for the service of God, by such Offices
as it enjoyneth. If we weigh by our own Weights, and mete by our own Measures;
not only the mysteries of our Lords dispensati^n in the Flesh, but the memories
of his Apostles and Saints; not only the time of Len^, and the Wednesdays* and
Fridays; But the time of Advent, the Evens of Festivals, the Ember and R^gation
days, once appointed to that purpose, must still be solemnized, for the
Festivals and Fasts of Gods Church. To set a peculiar mark upon the Lords Day,
as if the time of it were more obliging, then other time that is appointed to
the same purpose, is to change the day, but to retain the Jews Superstition; as
Calvin most truly has told them, who in other things commit Idolatry to his
Opinion; But, wherein he follows the whole Church, (in this point, and in the
state of souls before the Resurrection) bid him farewell.

The Case is the same in the qualities of places, as well as of How places and
persons become qualified for Gods Service. Preaching not convertible with
ministering the Sacraments.
persons. For the exercise of Christianity by the Law of this Kingdom, there
must be places where all must meet; they must be limited by the authority of
the Church; they must not be balked, for other places of men's private choice,
but by those that are willing to be charged with Schism for doing it. They
that quarrel the Bishops power in all other things, must call this also in
question, when they mean to weigh by their own Weights, and mete by their own
Measures. They are very studious to confound the difference between Priests and
Deacons, by having all called Ministers; being a Term that may serve all
Orders, ministering those Offices which the Church enableth them to minister.
But they who would impose this sense upon the style of Ministers of Gods Word
and Sacraments; that all, and no other but they who are ordained to Preach, are
ordained also to Baptize and celebrate the Eucharist; must be told that this
is an Imposture, till they show better reason for it, then hitherto has been
showed. For I conceive, I have showed sufficient reason, that the power of
celebrating the Eucharist is convertible with the power of the Keys, qualifying
all Christians for the Eucharist; which, in the Bishop only, extends to
public causes, concerning his whole Church or Diocese; But in all Presbyters,
to private Causes, wherein it may be questionable, between God and the
Conscience, whether a Christian be qualified for the Eucharist, or not. As for
the Sacrament of Baptism; that, as the Bishop only allows it, in any case that
may be questionable; so, the ministering of it may come to a Deacon, in the
Priests absence, nay to a Layman, rather then that any Child should dye
unbaptized. Neither is the Office of preaching restrained, either to Priests or
Deacons alone, by any other authority, then that of Gods whole Church; Which
being once passed in the Case, by the general Custom and Practice of it, it
must be the greatest Sacrilege in the World; that is, the Sacrilege of
Schism; to transgress it.

The respect due to the memories of the Apostles, and other Times, places,
persons, and things consecrated to Gods Service, under the Gospel.
Saints and Martyrs of Christ, is a reason sufficient to determine the time and
place for the service* of God. To question, that they are not just occasions
for the consecrating of Festivals and of Churches, to the service of God, in
honor of their memories; is a just presumption, that men seek to be saved by
some other Christianity, then that which their Doctrine and their Blood
planted. But their names, and the Festivals and the Churches that bear their
names, are but circumstances, determining that service to be acceptable to
God, which is performed in the Unity of his Church; the authority whereof
assigns them to that purpose. No more are the Utensils and Ornaments of
Churches, the Vessels in which the Sacraments are celebrated. But they who
think it Superstition that these things should be set apart from Vulgar use,
and reserved only for Gods service, plainly commit Idolatry to their own
Imaginations in it. For it is manifest, that Consecration was in force, not
only by the Law of Moses, but before it, under the Law of nature, as the
Fathers call it; under those precepts which God gave Noah after the Flood, as
the Jews will have it. And therefore, it tended, not only to figure Christ to
come, but to maintain the service of God, and that reverence which it ought to
be performed with. What color can there be, that the Consecrations that were
in force by the Law were figurative of Christ to come? And the Sacrilege of
Judas, as well as of Ananias and Sapphira, remain unquestionable; because the
subsistence of the Church, upon Oblations consecrated to that purpose, from the
beginning, is as visible as the Church. As for the sense of the Catholic
Church from the beginning, he that believes the Unity thereof cannot question
it. They therefore that have the Impudence to make that Superstition, which the
people of God, both before and since Christ, have always used for the service
of God, do they not commit Idolatry to their own Imaginations; which they
prefer so far before all the world besides? Indeed the solemnity of
Consecration requires a further question, of Ceremonies in the service of God;
whether or no they be for the advantage of Gods service: whether or no it be
in the power of the Church, to determine them for that purpose. For the
solemnity of Consecrations passes not without Ceremonies.

We have this character of the Presbyterians published for Ceremonies
fignisying by institution necessary in Gods service.
their advantage; That they allow the natural expressions of Reverence and
devotion, as kneeling, and lifting up of the hands and eyes in prayer: as also,
those mere circumstances of decency and order, the omission whereof would make
the service of God, either not decent, or less decent; but Ceremonies of
instituted mystical signification they allow not. But are not the mysteries of
Christianity, the Incarnation, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ,
things instituted by God, not determined by nature? Is not the signifying of
them, whereby they come to Remembrance, the means to procure and to increase
that Reverence and Devotion, which we are to attend the service of God with,
and the inward affection which it expresses? And why not then Ceremonies,
instituted to signify things, which Gods Grace, not nature determines? Shall
it be Christianity to believe the Institution of things above nature, for our
salvation by Gods Grace; and shall it be prejudicial to Christianity, to
institute the means of procuring that Reverence and Devotion, which the
Remembrance of them, in the public service of God requires? shall the worship
of God by Christians be tied to signify no more, then nature directs Jews,
Mahometans, and Pagans to signify by it? Compare this new Gospel with the
perpetual practice of Gods people, whether before or after the Law, whether
before or after Christ; And you shall easily see, that it cannot be accounted
Superstition, but by those that commit Idolatry to their own Imaginations.

Let the signification be that which natural reason is able to What kind of
signification requisite.
interpret, in all sorts of Christians; and, whether they allow it to be
called Mystical or not, they must allow it, as properly Religious; that is, as
tending to advance that Devotion, which the Religion of a Christian signifies,
in the point of Gods service. And truly I do not, nor does this Church, to my
knowledge, allow the Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, the si^nification whereof
is not to be understood, by all sorts of Christians; but require books of
learning to interpret their significations. They that serve God in a Language
unknown to the people, do accordingly, when they serve him with Ceremonies
which they cannot understand. Allowing it Reformation to serve God in English,
I allow it Reformation, to cut off the Superfluity of such Ceremonies; as
stealing the nourishment of Devotion from the heart, wherein God has placed
his service. And therefore, I think it reason to submit to this Issue; whether
or no, the Ceremonies in question be according to the use of the Primitive
Church; which the Reformation pretends, or should pretend, to restore. For I
find, that, in the Primitive and Good Times of Christianity, the Church was far
enough from seeking such abstruse and far fetched significations. And that is a
visible Rule, which the common profession of Reformation determines. But I
allow no man to allege the use of the Primitive Church, grown out of use long
before the Reformation, in bar to any Ceremony now settled by Law; not weighing
by the same Weights, nor meting by the same Measures, in all other things. It
is neither good conscience in them, nor would be in the Public, to change a
Law of the Land upon a pretense, which they that allege will not stand to, in
another Case.

But is it enough for Presbyterians to allow Ceremonies which Not enough for
the Presbyterians to allow Ceremonies.
nature teaches, to allow order and decency in circumstances? Have they
debauched this wretched people to such horrible profaneness, and irreverence,
that they can think fit to pray sitting on their seats; to such barbarous
confusion, that they can think every man's own fancy the best order, to
exercise the Liberty of Christians in Gods service; and now think to satisfy
with allowing the contrary? What shall the Church gain by reconciling them, if,
having contributed so much to the destruction of order, they contribute not
more then so to the restoring of it? but that must be the care of Superiors. I
will only mention the sign of the Cross; a Ceremony of so much reverence, and
so general use in the whole Church of God, from the beginning; that nothing but
the difficulty of recalling it, preserving Unity among our selves, can excuse
this Church for not restoring it in many other Offices. But, to put it out of
the Office of Baptism would be to condemn the Whole Church of God, without
giving satisfaction to them, who, having obtained the silencing of it in
Consecrating the Eucharist, according to the Liturgy, under Edward VI. have
thereby been encouraged to demand so much more.

CHAP. XVIII.
Offices which the Fathers call Sacraments, for their Ceremonies. Why the
Bishop only Confirms. The effect of Ordination requires Ceremony in giving
it. Why the Ordinations of our Presbyters are void. The necessity of Penance.
The observation of Lent, and the Use of it. The necessity of private Penance,
for the cure of secret sin. Of anointing the sick, according to S. James.
Marriage of Christians not to be Ruled by Moses Law. Instituted Ceremonies are
Sacraments with the Fathers. The Ceremonies of these Offices justify
Instituted Ceremonies.

BUt, for the justifying of Ceremonies, why should I allege Offices which the
Fathers call Sacramen^s, for their Ceremonies.
any thing, but those Offices of the Church, which the Fathers have called
Sacraments, as well as Baptism and the Eucharist? I conceive, I have alleged so
sufficient a reason, for the difference between those two and the rest, that
slander it self cannot undertake to blast my meaning, in that point. For,
things necessary to the Salvation of Christians as Christians are, by that
mark, for ever distinguished from things necessary to the Salvation of
Christians, as Members of the Church. Because the Salvation of private
Christians is concerned, in not understanding the intent of the former sort;
But in the latter sort, cannot be concerned by not understanding the intent of
them; but by violating that Order and Unity of the Church, which the Regular
Use of them serves to maintain. That which I am to say of them here consists
of two points. That they are Of^^ces necessary to be ^inistred to all
Christians, concerned in them; And, that they are to be solemnized with those
Ceremonies, for which they are, without any cause of offense, called Sacraments
by the Fathers of the Church.

How necessary i^ it, that those that are baptized Infants, when Why the Bishop
only Confirms.
they come to discretion, and to receive the Eucharist, should give account of
the hope that is in them; and undertake their Christianity upon which it is
grounded? For, he has not this hope to God, he appears not to the Church
to have it, but upon these terms. And thus far the parties seem content. But
why should not Presbyters Confirm, as well as Bishops; that can baptize and
celebrate the Eucharist, which is more to the Salvation of Christians? By
Commission from Bishops, that they may do it, is a point very disputable. The
practice of the Greek Church, in the case, is not new; Besides some appearance
of the like under S. Gregory in the West. But that serves not the turn. They
must have the Catechizing of them after their mode; and make the grounds of
Salvation what they please, and not what the Church appoints. So the Answer
is easy. For neither is Baptism or the Eucharist ministered, but by authority
from the Bishop; And to Catechize, beside that Form which the Church allows,
is to sow the seed of everlasting dissension, in matter of Faith. He that
thinks there was a Reason, why S. Peter and S. John should come to Confirm
those, whom the Deacon S. Philip had baptized, can never want a reason, why the
Bishop alone should do it. For he cannot minister the means of Salvation
alone. But the Faith, and the Unity of his Church with the rest, is not to be
preserved without him. Therefore the Gift of the Holy Ghost, which Baptism
promises, depends upon the Bishops blessing; because it depends upon the
Unity of the Church. Therefore Haereticks and Schismatics; who, by departing
from the Unity of the Church, bar themselves of the effect of their Baptism;
being received with the Bishops blessing, in the Primitive Church, were justly
thought to recover their Title to it.

If Ordination were taken for the conveying of public Authority, The effect of
Ordination requires Ceremony in giving it.
to minister the Offices of Gods Church, by the act of those that have
received, by their Ordination, authority to propagate the same; there would be
no mervail, that S. Paul should suppose a Grace received by Timothy, through
the laying on of his hands, or the hands of the Presbytery. For, if the
profession of Christianity infer the Grace of Baptism; shall not the
profession of that Christianity, which the state of the Clergy in general, or
that particular degree to which every man is ordained, imports, infer the
Grace which the discharge of it requires? What is there to hinder it, but the
want of sincerity in undertaking that, which the Order that a man undertakes,
requires him to undertake? This is that which renders those Prayers of the
Church of no effect, as to God, whereby the power is effectually conveyed, as
to the Church.

In the mean time, shall not those Prayers be solemnized with Why the
Ordinations of our Presbyters are void.
due Ceremony, by which so great a Power in the Church is conveyed? Now, seeing
Presbyters never received, by their Ordination, authority to ordain others;
seeing no Word of God gives it them; seeing all the Rules of the Whole Church
take it from them; The Attempt of our Presbyters, in Ordaining without and
against their Bishops, must needs be void, and to no effect, but that of
Schism; in dividing of the Church upon so unjust a Cause. They could not
receive the Power of the Keys, from them that had nothing to do to give it.
And therefore, in celebrating the Eucharist, they do nothing but profane Gods
Ordinance. Therefore, the lawful Ordaining of them is not re-ordaining; but
Ordination indeed, instead of that which was only so called.

If a Christian, after Baptism, fall into any grievous sin, voiding The
necessity of Penance.
the effect of Baptism, can it fall within the sense of a Christian to imagine;
That he can be restored by a Lord have mercy upon me? No, it must cost him
hot tears, and sighs, and groans, and extraordinary prayers, with fasting and
alms; to take Revenge upon himself, to appease Gods Wrath, and to mortify his
Concupiscence; If he mean not to leave an entrance for the same sin again. If
his sin be notorious, so much the more; Because he must then satisfy the
Church, that he does what is requisite to satisfy God; that is, to appease
his wrath, and to recover his Grace. The Church may be many ways hindered, to
take account of notorious sin. But the power of the Keys, which God has
trusted it with, is exercised only in keeping such sinners from the Communion,
till the Church be so satisfied.

And for this Exercise, the time of Lent has always been deputed The
observation of Le^^, and the use of it.
by the Church. The Fast before the Feast of the Resurrection stands by the
same Law, by which that stands. For, the Feast was, from the beginning, the end
of the Fast. So, the Lent-Fast, and the keeping of the Lords day, stand both
upon the same authority. For, the Lords day is but the Remembrance of the
Resurrection once a week. It does not appear that the Fast was kept forty days,
from the beginning. That it was kept before Easter, whenever Easter was kept;
that is, from the time of the Apostles; it does appear. The baptizing of
Converts, the restoring of the Relapsed, and the preparing of all, by
extraordinary Devotion, to solemnize the Resurrection; was the work of it. Did
this Church desire the restoring of this Order, and yet disowne Lent? Daniel
abstained from pleasant meat when he fasted; The Jews forbad all that comes
of the Vine, on the day of Atonement; The Whole Church of God always forbore
Flesh and Wine when they fasted. And shall our Licentiousness make the
difference of meats superstitious? Then let the late Parliament Fasts be
Reformation, that provided a good breakfast to fast with, and heard a Sermon
as well after Dinner as before.

If Sin be not notorious, there is no cause why it should not The necessity of
private Penance, for the cure of secret sins.
be pardoned without help from the Church; supposing that the sinner exact of
himself that Penance, which the Church would or ought to impose. But, whether
all sinners can be brought to know what that is; or knowing, to impose it upon
themselves; let the common reason of Christians judge. They that assure them of
pardon, and the favor of God without it; whether it be themselves, or their
false teachers; plainly they murder their souls. The Church of Rome, in making
the Keys of the Church, the necessary means for pardon of all sin that voids
the Grace of Baptism, goes beyond the bounds of truth: In procuring a Law,
that all submit to it once a year, goes not beyond the bounds of Justice. It
were to be wished, that the abuses of that Law might be cured, without taking
it away. For, if it be the power of the Keys that makes the Church the Church;
It will be hard to show the face of a Church, where the blessing of the
Church, and the Communion of the Eucharist is granted, and yet no power of the
Keys at all exercised? Nay, it will appear a lamentable case, to consider, how
simple innocent Christians are led on till death, in an opinion, that they want
nothing requisite for the obtaining and assuring of the pardon of their sins;
when it is as manifest, that they want the Keys of the Church, as it is
manifest, that the Keys of the Church are not in use for that purpose.

St. James ordains, that the Presbyters of every Church Of anointing the
sick, according to S. James.
pray for the sick, with a promise of pardon for their sins. This supposes
them qualified, by submitting their sins to the Keys of the Church, which the
Presbyters do manage. The promise belongs not to the Office of Presbyters upon
other terms. He requires them also to anoint the sick with oil; promising
Recovery upon it. Not to all that should be anointed. For Christians then
should not dye, if true Christians. But, as the Disciples of our Lord had used
it; to evidence their Commission to the World: So was the manifestation of Gods
Spirit, residing in the Church, granted for the benefit of his Church. Neither
is there any cause, why the same benefit should not be expected; but the decay
of Christianity in the Church. In the mean time, the forgiveness of sin,
according to St. James, comes by the Keys of the Church; Recovery of health,
from the prayers of it. So, the Unction of the sick is to recover health, not
to prepare for death; as the Church of Rome now uses it. But, supposing the
health of the soul restored by the Keys of the Church.

All the pretenses for Divorce of lawful Marriages, all the incestuous Marriage
of Christia^^ not to be Ruled by Moses Law.
Contracts, all the unchristian solemnizing of Christian Wedlock, which the
blessed Reformation has authorized, are to be attributed to one mistake; that
the Marriage of Christians stands by the Law of Moses, not by the Gospel of
Christ. Our Presbyterians, in their Confession of Faith, duly prohibit Marriage
in those degrees of alliance, which are prohibited in blood. But out of
Leviticus, if they will prove it, their word must serve for our warrant, that
this is the sense. If Man and Wife be one flesh, then is a Man as near his
Wifes Kin as his own. But man and wife are not one flesh by Moses Law;
licensing plurality of wives, and divorce; though by the Law of Paradise. It
was dispensed with after the Flood, and not revived but by our Lord. That
Divorce, and plurality of wives, was not restrained, but by the Gospel; it is
impudence to Dispute, much more to deny. The Marriage of the Niece, with the
Uncle of the half blood, has puzzled all them that would make it unlawful by
Moses Law. The Marriage of a Christian with two Sisters successive, will be as
hard to condemn by the same. Granting the premises, all these Disputes cease.
Marriage is the Bond of one with one, not to be dissolved till death; by the
Law of Christ, not by the Law of Moses. Whether Adultery dissolve the Bond or
not, I leave it disputable for the present, as I find it. Marriage with a Pagan
was void by Moses Law. St. Paul enables Christians to hold to it. Therefore he
refers them not to the Law. Christianity improves Moses Law in all things.
Therefore Christians cannot be regulated by Moses Law, in Matrimonial causes.
Therefore, in the prohibiting of degrees, as well as of divorce. For Moses Law
prohibits more then that Law, which the Children of Noah received after Flood,
had done. It were better to restrain all that which the present Canon Law
restrains; then that the incests of the late licentious times should be
tolerated. For, the present Canon Law restrains* not much more, then the Greek
Church restrains. But, if the Authority thereof be not binding, by reason of
the Usurpations of the Church of Rome; yet, to depart from the Canons of the
Whole Church, and of those times which we acknowledge, would be a departure
from the whole Church.

He that would bar the Cross, in Baptism, for fear it should Instituted
Ceremonies are Sacraments with the Fathers.
be taken for a Sacrament; what would he say to St. Ambrose, that calls it
down right a Sacrament? I know not what he would say, I know what he should
do; He should understand St. Ambrose by St. Ambrose, when he makes a Kiss to
be a Sacrament; as a Religious sign of that Religious Affection, which
Kinsfolk professed to their near Kinsfolk; whom, in his time, they saluted with
a Kiss, to signify that; as St. Ambrose declares. At this rate St. Paul's holy
kiss must needs be a Sacrament. For it was a Religious sign of that charity,
which Christians professed to Christians, when they were to receive the
Communion with them. At this rate, it is no marvel that there are found seven
Sacraments in the Fathers; For there are more then seven to be found, if there
be as many Sacraments, as Ceremonies instituted by the Church.

If this be true; the discharging of instituted Ceremonies The Ceremonies of
these Offices justify instituted Ceremonies.
will be a Defection from Gods Church. If Confirmation, Ordination, and
Penance, be Offices, in which the Church is indebted to God, and to his
Church; If the effect of them be of such consequence, that they have been
always solemnized with the Imposition of hands; that Ceremony shall be enough
to make them Sacraments at this rate; and yet no nearer to Baptism, and to the
Eucharist, then that reason of the difference which I have settled will allow.
Nay, let the prayers of the Church, for the recovery of the sick, who submit to
the Keys of the Church, be solemnized with anointing; (a thing fit enou^h to
be done, may but the ground upon which, and the intent to which it is done,
appear) and that shall be a Sacrament; and yet the want of it no more
prejudice to salvation, then the disusing of the Kiss of peace, which comes
(without peradventure) from the Apostle^. As for Marriage, the solemnity of the
blessing, the Ring, the Sacrament of the Eucharist; which, according to the
custom of the whole Church, it ought to be ministered with; will easily make it
a Sacrament; though Imposition of hands, which is said still to be used in
some Eastern Churches, be not used at all in the West. So, the effect and
consequence of these Offices will oblige the Church, always to keep them in
use; though the Church of Rome makes them Sacraments. But that sense, in which
the ancient Church makes them Sacraments, serves only to justify the power of
instituting Ceremonies in the Church.

CHAP. XIX.
The worship of the Host, in the Papacy, is not Idolatry. Christianity would
sanctify kneeling at the Eucharist, though it were. What Images the second
Commandment forbids. Reverencing of Images in Churches is not Idolatry. Of
honoring Images, and of having them in Churches. Mutual forbearance, which St.
Paul enjoyneth the Romans, not enjoined elsewhere. Tender Consciences are to
submit to Superiors.

THey who give the honor proper to God to his creature are The worship of the
Host, in the Papacy, is not Idolatry.
Idolaters. They that worship the Host give the honor due to God to his
creature. This is taken for a Demonstration, that the worship of the Host is
Idolatry. But will any Papist acknowledge that he honors the Elements of the
Eucharist, or as he thinks, the Accidents of them, for God? Will common reason
charge him to honor that, which he believes not to be there? A Pagan, that
honors the Sun for God, believes him to be God. And therefore another Pagan
may as well believe another creature to be God. Both Idolaters, for thinking
the Godhead to be in one or more creatures. But those greater Idolaters, who
thought that the Godhead; to which, they took men, (whether living or dead) or
other creatures, to be advanced; was enclosed in their Images consecrated to
the worship of them. He that worships the Host believes our Lord Christ to be
the only true God, hypostatically united to our flesh and blood. Which being
present in the Eucharist, in such a manner, as it is not present every where;
there is due occasion to give it that Worship in the Eucharist, which the
Godhead, in our manhood, is to be worshipped with, upon all due occasions.
Thus, we say, he was worshipped in the Ancient Church, that believed the
Elements to be present. And they were no Idolaters. They that worship the Host
do not believe that they remain. Nay, they say, they must be flat Idolaters,
if they be there. Zeal to their opinion makes them say more then they should
say. But, if they were there, they would not take them for God; and therefore
they would not honor them for God: And that is it, (not saying that they
should be Idolaters if the Elements did remain) that must make them Idolaters.

They that believe not Transubstantiation have cause to forbear Christianity
would sanctify kneeling at the Euch^rist, though it were.
the Ceremony. But, forbear kneeling at receiving the Eucharist, in an Age that
is taught already to sit at their prayers; and who w^ll warrant, that all the
prayers of the Church shall not come, in a short time, to hearing the Minister
exercise his Gift, and censuring him for it? Were worshipping the Host
Idolatry; Christianity, using the gesture of kneeling, to signify the worship
of Christ, were enough to sanctify it to Gods service. And this they must
grant who serve God in Churches, which the Mass has been used in; taking the
Mass for Idolatry, as they do. In fine, Jews and Mahumetans are bound to take
the Worship o^ the Host for Idolatry. For they will needs take the worship of
the Holy Trinity for no less. But they who know, that the Godhead of Christ is
the reason, for which his flesh and blood is worshipped in the Eucharist,
cannot take that Worship for Idolatry, because his flesh and blood is not
present in the Eucharist as they who worship it there think it is. For they
know, that the flesh and blood of Christ is no Idol to Christians, wheresoever
it is worshipped.

Whether or no, having Images in Churches be a breach of What Images the
second Commandment forbids.
the second Commandment; can be no more question, then, whether or no, to have
any Images be a breach of it. For it must forbid Images in Churches, because
it forbids all Images* If it be interpreted to forbid only Idols; that is,
Images of false Gods; it must be proved, that all Images in Churches are
Idols, before it be proved, that they are forbidden by it. It is far more
reasonable to say; that the Cherubims, the Brazen Serpent, the Bulls, and other
Images in Solomon's Temple, were no breaches of it; Then to say, that God did
dispense with his own Precept in those cases; having no appearance of any
Dispensation in the Scripture, in which the Precept, and the seeming breach are
both recorded. But it is manifest, that the Jews allow some kind of Imagery;
and I doubt not, but the Mahumetans do the like. And it is manifest, that the
public authority of that Nation, or Religion, could never dispense in that
which Gods Law had prohibited. But it is manifest on the contrary, that it did
and might restrain that, which Gods Law had licensed; to set an hedge about the
Law, and keep the people further from breaking it. Now their restraints tie not
Christians, but Jews. And therefore it is manifest, that the Church is tied no
further, then there can appear danger of Idolatry; Which if it be so
heightened, beyond appearance, as to involve the Church in the crime of it,
charge the Schism that may come by that means, upon those that so inhanse it.

Now, granting that Epiphanius and the Council of Elvira did hold all Images in
Churches dangerous for Idolatry; (of Reverencing of Images in Churches is not*
Idolatry.
which there is appearance) it is manifest, that they were afterward admitted
all over. And there might be jealousy of offense, in having Images in
Churches, before Idolatry was quite rooted out; of which afterward, there
might be no appearance. But no manner of appearance, that Images in History
should occasion Idolatry to those Images, in them that hold them the Images of
Gods creatures; such as are those Images, which represent Histories of the
Saints, out of the Scriptures, or other relations of unquestionable credit. The
second Council of Nicaea seems to have brought in, or authorized addresses to
solitary Images of Saints, placed upon Pillars to that purpose; whereof there
is much mention in the Records of it. But, to the Images of Saints, there can
be no Idolatry, so long as men take them for Saints; that is, Gods creatures.
Much less to the Images of our Lord. For it is the honor of our Lord, and not
of his Image. Whereas they who thought their false Gods to dwell in their
Images, (which thought made them Idols) must needs honor them with the honor
proper to God; though, in so doing, they honored indeed the Devil, that
brought in Idols. Nay the Council it self, though it acknowledge, that the Image
it self is honored, by the honor given to that which it signifies, before
the Image; yet it distinguishes this honor from the honor of our Lord. And
therefore teaches not Idolatry, by teaching to honor Images; though it
acknowledge, that the Image it self is honored, when it need not.

For indeed, and in truth, it is not the Image, but the Principal, Of honoring
Images, and of having them in Churches.
that is honored, by the honor that is said to be done to the Image, because
it is done before the Image. The Furniture and Utensils of the Church were
honored, in the Spotless times of the Church, as consecrated to Gods service;
though the honor of them, being incapable of honor for themselves, was
manifestly, and without any scruple, the honor of God. But Images, so long as
they were used to no further intent, then the Ornament of Churches, the
remembrance of holy Histories, and the raising of devotion thereby; (as, at the
first, they were used by the Church) came in the number of things consecrated
to Gods service. And that Council was never of force in the West, till the
usurped power of the Pope brought it in by force. Nor did the Western Church,
when it refused the Council, discharge the having of Images in Churches, upon
those reasons, and to those purposes which I have declared. So far they remain
still justifiable. For, he that sees the Whole Church on the one side, and
only Calvin on the other side, has he not cause to fear, that they who make
them Idolaters without cause, will themselves appear Schismatics in the sight
of God for it? For, what are they else, who please themselves in a strange kind
of negative superstition, that they cannot serve God, if they serve him with
visible signs of reverence? who hate the Images, because they hate the Saints
themselves, and their Christianity? And therefore, that it be not thought,
that we are tied to those terms of distance, which ignorant Preachers drive
their Factions with; It is necessary to declare the grounds of truth, though it
displease.

St. Paul, writing to the Romans, that were partly Jews, Mutual forbearance
which S. Paul enjoyneth the Romans, not enjoined elsewhere.
partly Gentiles, converted to Christianity, (as appears by the whole Epistle)
forbids them to condemn or despise one another, for making conscience of things
( meats, and times he express^th) forbidden by the Law; or for using them
without difference. Hence it is now argued; that nothing can be imposed upon
any Christian, which, out of tenderness of conscience, he may think it against
Gods Law for him to do. The Answer is, by denying the consequence. And the
reason, because it is a particular order of St. Paul to that Church, for the
present estate of it at that time; And therefore it does not follow, that the
Church can make no Law. For it could make no Law, if it were enough to
discharge any man; that it is against his conscience to obey. The evidence for
this reason is this; because it appears, that the Apostles did order otherwise
in the same cause, when the case was not the same. For it is manifest, that the
Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem had made an Act in Council, commanding the
Gentiles that were converted to Christianity, to abstain from Fornication, and
things offered in sacrifice to Idols, from things strangled and from blood; In
fine, from those things, from which, strangers, that were licensed by the Law
to live in the Land of promise, were hound to abstain. And might not those
converted Gentiles have scrupled, whether or no it were lawful for them, to be
so far Jews; had not the authority of the Apostles been sufficient to put an
end to their scruples? But it is manifest likewise, that, when St. Paul
differed with St. Peter at Antiochia, about the necessity of compliance with
the Jews, for Gentiles turned Christians, he did forbid, and must needs forbid
his followers to show this compliance; lest by that means, he might hold them
in an opinion of the necessity of the Law, for the salvation of Christians.
Here were contrary Provisions, with force of Law, in that very case, wherein
St. Paul commands only mutual forbearance at Rome, in that estate wherein he
writ his Epistle. And if St. Paul were in the right; which, they who take his
writings for Scripture do not doubt; then were St. Peter's followers bound to
obey him, notwithstanding any tenderness in their consciences. And he commands
Tit. I. 10-15. to stop the mouths of those Deceivers of the Circumcision, that
would not have all things pure to the pure, because their own consciences were
defiled; Notwithstanding that they must needs have followers, that were touched
in conscience, to think those things unlawful, which the Law allowed not. And
their teachers mouths being stopped, were the hearers at their choice, whether
they would follow them or not?

Whereby it appears, that Inferiors are to follow the Judgment Tender
consciences are to submit to Superi^urs.
of Superiors, in matters subject to the power of Superiors; notwithstanding
the scruples of their own consciences to the contrary. And that the reason, why
the Romans are forbidden to condemn, commanded to forbear one another is;
because St. Paul thought it not meet to order any thing else in the business,
during that estate; Seeing that he orders otherwise in it, for other
estates. So that all that remains is, whether the matter in question ^ee within
the power of Superiors or not. In which there can be no doubt amongst us, the
matters in question being acknowledged indifferent in themselves; And
therefore, capable to signify that, which Christianity not only allows, but
requires. And certainly there is no Law, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, that
error may not scruple at, as inconsistent with a good conscience. Why should
not I believe, that a Quaker is really touched in conscience, that he ought
not to pay his Tithes, though in obedience to the Law of the Land; as well as a
Presbyterian, that he ought not to receive the Communion kneeling? For I see
many of the Church of Rome suffer, for denying the Right of a Prince
excommunicate by the Pope; though it be matter of Civil Law. Therefore, if he
that graspes too much is in the way to gripe nothing; then, an exception that
lies against all Law, will do no effect against a few Ceremonies of this Church.

CHAP. XX.
The Declaration of V. Eliz. enableth Recusants to take the Oath of Supremacy.
What further ambiguity that Oath involveth. What scandal, the taking of it in
the true sense ministers. That this Oath ought to be enlarged, to all
pretenses in Religion, that abridge Allegiance. The extent of secular Power in
Reforming the Church.

THe Usurpation of temporal power by the Pope, upon the The Declaration of V.
Eliz. enableth Recusants to take the Oath of Supremacy.
pretense of the pre-eminence of his Church in Ecclesiastical matters, has
given this Crown just occasion, to declare it self Supreme Head, or Supreme
Governor, (for, the kingdom of heaven is not in word but in power; as St. Paul
says) in all Causes, and over all Persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil.
But, the capacity of several senses, in words that signify humane matters,
(capable of so great a Latitude, by their nature) seems to have Produced out
of this Act, a Sect of Erastians, very dangerous to Christianity; As
immediately denying any Ordinance of God, for the Visible Unity of his Church,
which is an Article of our Creed; but by consequence, showing all, how they may
enjoy the benefit of Civil Law, in a State that professes Christianity, without
believing any more of Christianity then they please. This capacity was
restrained, in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, by her Injunctions; by
the Articles of Religion; by an Act of Parliament; not to signisie the
abolishing, or the disclaiming of Ecclesiastical power, in part or in whole.
And to such effect, that it is acknowledged now, in books written on purpose,
by one party of Recusants, that they may freely take the Oath of Supremacy;
saving the scruple that may remain, of offending those Recusants, who think
that they may not take it. And I can by no means marvel at it. For, they who do
openly profess that unlimited obedience to the Pope, in Ecclesiastical matters,
which he requires; how can they, swearing the Oath of Supremacy, be thought
to abj^^e his Ecclesiastical power in England; the words of the Oath being
restrained by Law, to disclaim only the Temporal effect of it?

But it is manifest, that not only the unlimited power of the Pope, What
further ambiguity that Oath involveth.
but all authority of a General Council of the Western Churches, (whereof the
Pope is and ought to be the chief member, according to the premises) may
justly seem to be disclaimed, by other words of the same Oath. And that;
Whereas the Pope usurped not only upon the Crown, but upon the Clergy of this
Kingdom; all those Usurpations are, by the Act of Resumption under H^nry the
VIII. invested in the Crown. So that, when the Oath declares, to maintain all
Rights and Pre-eminences annexed to the Crown; you may understand that
maintenance, which a Subject owes his Sovereign, against those that pretend to
force his claims from him. But you may also understand that maintenance, which
a Divine owes the Truth, in asserting the Title of the Crown, to all rights
vested in it. Which, he that believes, that some rights of the Church are
invested in the Crown, ought not to undertake; Though as a Subject, for
preserving the State of his King and Country, he be tied to maintain all the
claims of the Crown, against all the enemies of it.

Now, if an Oath required by the Sovereign Power bear two What scan^al, the
taki^g of it in the true sense ministers.
senses, in the proper signification of the Words; (which is more ordinary,
then it is believed) the Subject may undergo it in that sense, which truth and
right warranteth. And so, in regard the Pope, not content with his Regular
authority in the Church, pretends Temporal power in disposing of the Domini^n^
which he disclaims Communion with, besides absolute power in mater^ of
Religion; it is lawful to swear, that he ought to have no manner of power in
this Kingdom, as things stand, ti^l he depart from claims so unjust. But there
is appearance, that the misunderstanding of it has produced an Opinion
destructive to one Article of the Creed; to the being of any Visible Church, as
founded by God. And besides, it is not possible, that all they, who are called
to this Oath by Law, can ever be able to distinguish that sense, wherein they
ought, from that wherein they ought not to take it. And therefore, of
necessity, the Law gives great offense; and that offense is the sin of the
Kingdom, and calls for Gods vengeance upon it. Which though all are involved
in; yet, in the other world, the account will lie upon them that may change it
and do not.

Now it is manifest, that all Recusants believe not the Popes That this Oat^
ought to be enlarged, to all pretenses in Religi^n, that abridge Allegiance.
Temporal Power, nor think themselves bound to execute such Acts, as the Bull
of Pius quintus against Queen Elizabeth. Those that do not, how should they be
liable to capital punishment; which the Law, in some cases, inflicts? For, how
should they be taken for the enemies of their Country otherwise? On the
contrary, I have showed, by the Troubles of Franckford, in the beginning of the
Reformation, that there was then the same difference of opinion, amongst them
that held with the Reformation, about obedience to Sovereigns, obeying the
Church of Rome. And, that the same difference of opinion was the cause of the
late Troubles, appears by the aspersion of Popery upon his late Majesty,
alleged to justify the War against him. Whereby it appears, that they of
that opinion do undergo the Oaths of Supremacy, and Allegiance, as provided
only against the Sea of Rome, and the claims of it; Thinking themselves
enabled, notwithstanding the same, to limit their Allegiance, to that which
their Religion shall allow. And therefore there is great Reason, why the
Kingdom should enact a new Oath, extending the Original Allegiance of all
Subjects to all cases, in which, experience has showed, or reason may foresee,
that Religion may be pretended, to abridge the Obligation of Allegiance. This
I am encouraged here to declare, by the late Act of the Kingdom of Scotland,
establishing for the future the form of an Oath, whereby the obligation of
Allegiance i^ extended to the renouncing, not only of any claim for the Sea of
Rome; but of all pretenses whatsoever, (whether upon the account of Religion,
or of civil Right) of abridging the obligation of it. For, though I neither
maintain nor find fault with the terms which it uses; yet, the agreement and
the difference between the case of both Kingdoms, as it evidenceth to all the
necessity, so it determines to them that are to understand the State of both,
the agreement and the difference of that which ought to be provided. And
seeing it is the true consequence of the common Christianity, that enables the
Kingdom to do this; because supposing, as it does, the State of this World, it
cannot extend to the altering of it; there is great reason, why a Divine should
be allowed to say it, not entering upon other considerations, wherein Religion
is not concerned. For, in the next place to the bringing in of a new Provision,
the conscience of the Kingdom is best discharged, the Scandals that may be
occasioned removed, the wrath of God prevented or appeased, by the secular
Powers allowing these interpretations to pass without contradiction, that may
enable all estates to depose it with judgment, as well as with truth and
righteousness. We have this evidence for that which I say; that the
authorities of those Divines of this Church, that have declared the sense of
the Oath of Supremacy with public allowance, are now alleged by the Papists
themselves, to infer, that the matter of it is lawful, as capable of the sense
which they declare.

Now, the bounds of Reformation being visible, by the Faith The extent of
Secular Power in Reforming the Church.
and the Laws of the Catholic Church; the extent of Secular power in
Ecclesiastical matters, and over Ecclesiastical persons; (and therefore, in the
reforming of them) preserving Ecclesiastical power in persons that have it, by
the founding of the Church, from God; cannot remain invisible. For, in the
first place, there can be no question; That the Sovereign as a Sovereign, is
to maintain his own Rights, by such means as he finds meet, against all
Usurpations, under pretense of the Church, and the authority of it. For, the
common Christianity assures him, that all such Usurpations are contrary to it.
And besides, as a Christian Sovereign, it is his Inheritance to be a Member of
the Church, and a Protector of all his Subjects in the same right. Therefore
all Christian Sovereigns are born Advocates and Patrons of the Faith, and of
the Rights of the Whole Church. And if, by lapse of time, they be gone to
decay; if by any express Act they have been infringed; it lies in them, to
restore their Subjects, and themselves, to those Rights; being brought into
evidence by the authority and cr^dit of the whole Church. But, seeing the
determining of the matter of Ecclesiastical Law, as well as of Controversies of
Faith, belongs to those that have authority in the Church, by the foundation of
it; Of necessity, the fitting of the present Laws of every Church, to those
which the whole Church has been ruled by from the beginning; as the
difference, which may appear in the State of those bodies to which they were
given, shall require; will, by virtue of Gods Law, belong to those that have
such authority, by the Foundation of the Church. And upon these terms, the
right of Secular power in Church matters, is accumulative, and not destructive
to the Rights of the Church. And upon these terms only, the Sovereign is
justifiable at the great Day of Judgment, in things that may be done amiss, in
reforming the Church.

CHAP. XXI.
The pretense of Infallibility makes the breach unreconcileable. So does the
pretense of perspicuity in the Scripture. The Trial must suppose the Catholic
Church. The Fanatickes further from the truth of Christianity, then the Church
of Rome. The consequence of their principle worse then that of Infallibility.
The point of Truth in the middle between both. How salvation is concerned in
the matter of Free Will and Grace. Salvation concerned in the Sacraments upon
the same terms. The abuses of the Church of Rome in the five Sacraments. The
Grace of Ordination. The Reformation pretended, no less abuse, on the other
side. The point of Reformation in the mean between both. The Superstitions of
the Church of Rome. The Superstitions of the Puritans. Why the Pope cannot be
Antichrist. How it is just to Reform without the Sea of Rome.

ANd upon Supposition of the premises, for which, I conceive, The pretense of
Infallibility makes the breach unreconcileable.
I have produced competent evidence; I proceed to take the Balance in hand, and
to put the Extremes into the Scales, that I may put it to the conscience of
all, that are resolved to prefer truth before Faction or prejudice, where the
point of Reformation lies upon terms of right: And how near the public Powers
of this Kingdom are bound to come to it, in this Case; when an Uniformity in
Religion is to be settled by Law, for the Church of England. In the first place
then, the Infallibility of the present Church is to be held ^or an Error of
pernicious consequence, in the Church of Rome. For it submits all the parts of
Christianity, to the passion and interest of persons, that shall be for the
present, in power to sway those matters, wherein the whole Church is concerned.
It is a thing manifest in the world, that, though that which concerns all, in
point of Religion, is to be treated by all; yet, that which is treated by all,
is concluded always, by the authority of a few. So things passed, when Councils
were frequented. The Freedom of Councils being interrupted; and the present
Church accepted for Infallible; the Sea of Rome will of necessity be the
present Church: And the passions and interests thereof will have as much power,
in matters of Religion, as those passions and interests can allow, and stand
with. What the effect thereof may be, I need not argue to those that profess
the Reformation, upon that account. Only thus far they may seem excusable, that
there is no Act, with force of Law, tying all of that profession to maintain
it. Infallibility may be claimed for the whole Church; And that is true. And
it may be claimed for the present Church, which is false. They that pretend to
reduce us to the Church of Rome would spoil their own market, if they should
distinguish thus. Therefore they plead Infallibility, without distinguishing.

On the other side, there is as much difference, between the So does the
pretense of perspicuity in the Scripture.
sufficiency of the Scripture, for the salvation of all, and the clear evidence
of all that is necessary to be known, for the salvation of all, to all, in the
Scriptures. The one is as true, and the other as false, as the Infallibility of
the present Church is false, and the Infallibility of the whole Church is true.
And, to appeal to the Scriptures alone, when the sense of them only is
questionable, is to declare, that we will submit to no other trial but our own
sense: As they, who declare the present Church infallible, can never depart
from any thing which once it has declared.

For it is manifest, that they who appeal to the Scriptures The Trial must
suppose the Catholic Church.
alone, having before this appeal declared themselves in the points of
difference between the Reformation and the Church of Rome; do declare
themselves tied in conscience, to stand to that sense of the Scripture, upon
which they ground their opinion, in the matters of difference. What means then
can remain, to bring that to a Trial, which causes division upon these terms,
but to acknowledge one Catholic Church, which our Creed professes? And by
consequence, to submit our sense of all Scripture, that remains in question,
all difference in Doctrine, all Laws of the Church, to be determined according
to the sense and practice of the whole Church; that is, within the bounds of
it? For, to proceed to divide the Church still into more and more parties, and
Communions; till we have lost the sense of any obligation, to hold communion
with the whole Church; is more destructive to the substance of Christianity,
then all that corruption, which the Reformation pretends to cure. But, to
confining our sense of the Scripture, our opinions in matter of Doctrine, and
the Laws which we demand, within that which the Faith and the Laws of the
whole Church may appear to require; we are half the way onward to the point of
Reformation, having the ground and the reason, and therefore the measure and
the terms of it.

The mistake of the Schools, and of the Council of Trent after The Fanatics
further from the truth of Christianity* then the Church of Rome.
the Schools, in the nature of Justification, and the effect of infused
righteousness, to which they ascribe it, is no way destructive to Christianity.
No more is the opinion of satisfaction and merit, in the good works of
Christians, so long as it is grounded upon Gods promise; which, they that
inflame that opinion to the highest, in the Church of Rome, must acknowledge to
come into consideration, whether they will or not. As for the merit of Grace,
by the works which a natural man is able to do; commonly called meritum
congrui, as that which is fit for God to give, though not for the worth of the
works; It is indeed an Error of greater danger; but never was general in the
School, and now generally disallowed; so far it was always from being enjoined
by the Church. But what is this in comparison of that furious Doctrine, that
the assurance of a man's Predestination is justifying Faith? In which, the
opinion of absolute Predestination to Glory, and of Gods predetermining a man
to do all that he does, is twisted together with an Enthusiasme; that we are
justified, and made the children of God, by being assured hereof by his Spirit;
Not supposing any condition of Christianity, in consideration of which it is
had; and by the knowledge whereof it is assured us. For they that believe, that
Gods predetermination is the reason and the ground of freedom in man's Will, and
of contingence in the effects of it, supposing freedom and contingence, do
thereby bar the ill consequence of their own mistake. But he that can think
himself assured of that which the Gospel promises, not being assured that he
performs the Christianity, which by his Baptism he undertaketh; why should
he hold himself tied, why should he study and endeavor himself to perform it?

Nay, holding his Christianity, and the Scriptures which The consequence of
their principle worse then that of Infallibility.
teach it, by the same dictate of the Spirit, which assures his salvation upon
those terms; why should he not hold that which Christianity and the Scriptures
teach not, with the same devotion and assurance, which he accepts the
Scriptures and his Christianity with? Why should he not, with the Gnostickes,
and Mahomet, and the Mannichees, place his salvation in that which the Spirit
teaches him beside and above the Scriptures; allowing Christianity for
proficients? The same consequence takes hold, in some measure, of those who
believe the Infallibility of the present Church. For making the sentence
thereof the only reason of believing, they tie themselves to accept whatsoever
it shall decree, for matter of Faith; and therefore, concerning their salvation
as much, as it concerns their salvation to believe the holy Trinity. Indeed
there is not so much danger for them. For, the persons on whom they repose
themselves, for the Church, being persons of that interest in the World, which
cannot stand, with the open corrupting of Christianity; The fear is, that they
may authorize those corruptions, which the coming of the World into the Church
shall make popular; Not, that they shall think it for their interest, to change
that, which it is not popular to change.

In the mean time, having showed the point of Reformation, The point of Truth
in the middle between both.
by showing the point of truth; whereby, all that the Reformation disputes with
the Church of Rome is cleared; namely, that that Faith which moves to
undertake Baptism is the Faith which alone justifies; I have showed withal,
that the express profession hereof is that which must clear us from all
impu^ation of the Schism with the Church of Rome; and of compliance with any
Fanatics, that have taught the opposite Haeresie; being, by such profession,
excluded from all liberty of teaching it for the future. They who take
justifying Faith to be Confidence in God through our Lord Christ, do commit
the mistake which I have showed. And, if they go farther, to think, that, by
being assured of Gods Grace, they can never dye cut of that estate; they may
indeed think themselves tied to return to God by Repentance; But, may they not
easily be deluded to neglect it, thinking themselves certain before hand that
they shall do it? Which if it be considered, the danger of the mistake will
appear no less, then that which the Doctrine of the Council of Trent threatens.

As for the Question between man's free Will and Gods Praedestination How
Salvation is concerned in the matter of Free Will and Grace.
and Grace; taking it by it self, as not complicated and twisted with the
other, concerning justifying Faith; the difficulty of it being so great as it
is, the true resolution of it, which is the reconcilement of Grace with free
Will, can by no means seem to concern the substance of Faith, necessary to be
held for the Salvation of all Christians. But, the denying, either of man's free
Will, or Gods free Grace, may, and certainly does concern it. And therefore,
the second Council of Orange having determined; as well that no man is
appointed by God to death; (and therefore to sin) as, that whosoever perseveres
until Death is appointed by God unto effectual Grace; there appears no
necessity, why the Church should run any hazard of division, by decree^ng
farther in the Point; (which we see come to pass in the United Provinces)
having that decree, received of old by the Western Church, to settle the bounds
of necessary Truth.

Nor is there any other means of settle the necessity of Baptism, Salvation
concerned in the Sacrament^, upon the same terms.
and of the Holy Eucharist, but the profession of this truth, for the sense of
our Creed, in the Article of one Baptism for the remission of s^ns; the neglect
whereof has occasioned, not only the Sects of our Anabaptists, Q^akers, and
other Enthusiasts and Fanatics; but has given S^cinus ground enough to count
Baptism indifferent: And some of our Fanatics, to think it a mere mistake,
that any man was ever baptized with water to make him a Christian, since the
ceasing of Moses Law and John's Baptism. As for the Sacrament of the Eucharist;
that which concerns Salvation in it is manifest, admitting the Premises.
Namely, that they who make good, or revive the Covenant of their Baptism, in
receiving it, shall receive the body and blood of Christ; and by consequence
his Spirit, hypostatically united to the same; to enable them to perform it. To
which purpose, it must needs be requisite, that this tender be attributed,
not to the Faith of him that receives; (though the tender must needs become
frustrate without it) but to the Faith of the Church, and the act of that
Faith, in executing the order of our Lord, and deputing the Elements to be the
body and blood of Christ by Consecration, before the receiving of them. This,
who so holds, shall neither be engaged, either to Transubstantiation or
Consubstantiation; nor yet to hold either of both destructive to the Salvation
of them that are bred in them; holding that which is necessary to Salvation;
Namely, the renewing of the Covenant of Baptism, in and by Communion in the
holy Eucharist. As for them who, abhorring Transubstantiation, communicate with
Consubstantiation; It is enough that I say as before; that they weigh not by
their own weights, nor mete by their own measures. For how is it more
destructive to the Grace of the Sacrament, that the body and blood of Christ is
thought, from the Consecration, the subject of the accidents of those Elements
that once were; then, that they should possess the same dimensions, which the
substance of the Elements fills: And that, not by virtue of the Consecration,
but, of the Hypostatical Union of the flesh and blood of Christ with his
Godhead? But, the error of the Sacramentaries, taking this Sacrament for a
mee^ sign, to confirm a man's Faith; leaving it indifferent whether consecrated
or not, leaves it also indifferent whether used or not; though the Socinians
only own the consequence. But, if the Faith which it confirms be thought to
be the assurance of a man's Praedestination, then involveth in the Haeresie of
the Fanatics. The abuses of the Church of Rome in Confirmation.


As for the rest of those Ordinances, which the Church of Rome counts
Sacraments, as well as Baptism and the Eucharist, though not to the like
effect; It is manifest, that they tend all of them, to a wholesome Communion in
the Holy Eucharist. Confirmation was, for many hundred years, given after
Baptism, before receiving the Eucharist; which was to be received by those
that were baptized, upon their Baptism. If the Bishop himself baptized them,
(as usually he did baptize those that were baptized in the Mother Church, at
the usual times of Easter and Whitsontide) then did he Confirm them
immediately. If they were baptized in their Parishes; which fetched Chrisme
from the Mother Church, on Maundy Thursday, in token of the license to baptize,
which they had from the Bishop; they were brought to the Mother Church to be
Confirmed. A manifest sign of that which I said; That Confirmation is reserved
to the Bishop, because his authority it is, that must allow the baptized to be
of the number of the Church. For, whereas the Gift of the Holy Ghost, promised
in Baptism, depends, never the less, upon the continuing of the Baptized
Members of Gods Church: Is it strange, that the Holy Ghost, which Baptism
promises a Christian as a Christian, should be given him again by
Confirmation, as a Member of Gods Church; when, he that believes and lives as
a Christian otherwise, cannot have the Holy Ghost, unless he continue in the
Church, over and above? Now that all are baptized Infants, how necessary it is,
that Confirmation should pass upon them, before they come to receive the
Eucharist, I need not dispute; Both sides acknowledging, that, as well the
trial of their knowledge, as the exacting of their profession, in Christianity,
is a thing due unto them from the Church. And therefore, in the Church of Rome,
where this substance of the Office is not provided for, it is little more then
a shadow; Professing Unity with the Church, by seeking the Bishops blessing,
but neglecting the reason for which, the Unity of the Church is provided by
God, for the Salvation of a Christian; to wit, the exacting and allowing of his
Christianity.

All Ordination tends to the Celebration and Communion of In the other f^ur
Offices.
the Eucharist; As well that of Bishops, to the intent that they may Ordain the
other Orders; And that of Deacons, that they may wait upon the Celebration of
it: As that of Priests, that, receiving the Power of the Keys, to warrant the
effect of it, they may therefore have power to celebrate it. Whereby it may
appear, how great an abuse it is to this Ordinance, in the Church of Rome, that
a Priest is Ordained to sacrifice for quick and dead; Understanding, for the
dead; to deliver their Souls from Purgatory pains to the sight of Gods face;
But, for the l^ving; That all that assist, (or assist not, so the Priest intend
them) though they mind not what is done, much less understand or assist it with
their devotions, by virtue of the work done, have the Sacrifice of Christ's
Cross applied to them, to such effect as the Priest shall intend. Whereas, the
celebrating of Ordination with the Communion of the Eucharist signifies plain
enough; That the Grace of ministering aright the Office which they receive
depends upon the Christianity, which they profess to receive it with, by
communicating in the Eucharist; As well as the effect of it, upon the
Christianity of those to whom they shall minister the same. As for the
ministering of the Keys of the Church in Penance, whether public, in notorious
sins, or private, for the assuring of those which are not notorious, that they
have right to the Eucharist; you see it tends still to Communion in it. And you
may as easily see, how great is the abuse of this Ordinance in the Church of
Rome, when it is taught; That, submitting to the Keys of the Church by
Confession turns imperfect sorrow for sin, (or, as some say, sorrow for the
guilt of punishment, not for the offense of God, which they call attrition)
into contri^i^n; which is that sorrow which intitleth to forgiveness. Whereas
the power of the Keys is ordained to procure this sorrow, by barring a sinner
from the Communion, till it appears that he has it; not that, submitting to
the Keys, ipso facto he has it. And upon this abuse there hangs a second;
that when the sinner, undertaking the Penance enjoined to make his conversion
appear, is thereupon admitted to the Communion, before the performing of it;
(for which there may be many reasonable occasions, though not according to the
Primitive Rule) the performing of it is thought, and said, not to pretend the
qualifying of him for pardon, but the redeeming of temporal pains, remaining
due after ^in is pardoned; and therefore to be paid in Purgatory, if not
satisfied here. Things, whereof there is no mark in the Faith and Practice of
the Catholic Church. The Unction of the sick, I have showed, to be only an
appendage of the Ministry of the Keys, in that estate, tending to the recovery
of bodily health. And therefore called extreme Unction by abuse, in the Church
of Rome, as if the intent of it were to prepare against the conflict of Death,
with the spiritual enemies of the Soul. For, though the Church, ordaining
Prayer for bodily health, can by no means forget the health of the Soul, if it
mean to remember the Common Christianity; Yet appears it, nevertheless, what
ground and occasion the Institution of S. James pretends. And so it
appears, what dependence the Unction of the Sick, holds upon the Communion
of the Eucharist. As for the Marriage of Christians, if it be under a peculiar
rule, by virtue of the Common Christianity; and, that the interest of the
Church, in allowing of Marriages, is grounded upon the same; It is far from any
imputation of abuse, that the Church of Rome celebrateth the same at the
Eucharist. For seeing our Christianity is particularly concerned in the duties
of Marriage; How should the Grace of God, enabling to discharge the said
duties, be expected, but by reviving the obligation of our Common
Christianity; which the receiving of the Eucharist signifies? I will not
undertake to clear the Sea of Rome from all abuse of Ecclesiastical Power, in
multiplying the Impediments of Marriage, as beyond necessity, so beyond the
Interest of Christianity; and in dispensing in them again, for favor or for
reward; as having been prohibited for no better reason then this; That Power
appears most, in that which there is least reason for. On the other side,
dispensing in those degrees, which the Law of Moses prohibiteth; and therefore
Christianity ought to be farther from allowing; It seems to stretch the
Power of the Church beyond the bounds of it. And thus it appears, first, what
relation these Offices hold with the Eucharist, and the Communion of it; and
then, what is the point of Reformation, in which the voiding of those abuses
stands.

On the other side, they that now are content with Confirmation, The
Reformation pretended, no l^ss abuse, on the other side.
so they may have the giving of it themselves, and the Catechizing of them that
receive it, after their mode; not distinguishing themselves from the Fanatics,
cannot be presumed to Catechize according to the Christianity of Gods Church.
But, in as much as they Usurp unto themselves authority without their Bishops,
and against them; they cannot make Members of Gods Church, by the Confirmation
which so they may give. So, they bar the gift of Gods Spirit, which Baptism
promises a Christian as a Christian, by barring the Unity of Gods Church.
Again, Ordaining all whom they Ordain to one and the^ same Office, of Preaching
the Word and Ministering the Sacraments; First, they usurp the power of
Ordaining, which they never received any authority by their Ordination to
exercise; And that in despite of their Bishops, as seducing the people from the
way of salvation, which, by their Ordinations, they pretend to teach. So,
receiving no Power of the Keys, by their Usurpation, they receive no power to
celebrate the Eucharist; but only to commit sacrilege, by profaning so high an
Ordinance. And then, they tread under foot the Hierachy of Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons, in despite of the whole Church; dividing the authority of their
Bishops among themselves, but abolishing the Order of Deacons, by confounding
the title of Ministers; common to all three Orders, for ministering their
several Offices; with that sense in which the lowest Order are called Deacons,
for ministering to Bishops and Priests in their Offices. As for the power of the
Keys, which is not that which God left his Church, unless the effect of it be
the binding and loosing of sin; It is plain enough, that, under pretense of
taking away the scandal of notorious sin, they would have power to shame and
domineer over their neighbors, overtaken with sin; but without pretense of
curing their sin, for the condition upon which they are restored. Such
Discipline goes no further then the outward man, and the restraining of him
from sin for shame of the world. The presumption of a voluntary change in the
inward man, for hope of Gods Grace, by the Sacrament of the Eucharist, must be
the effect of the Keys of Gods Church. As for this power, in sin that is not
notorious, what do they pretend more then their Preaching? Which whether it be
such as shows the cure of sin; let their diligence in Preaching mortification
witness. And yet, whether every Christian can learn, or will be induced,
merely by Preaching, to use that mortification which is requisite; let them
that are able judge. But what visiting of the sick do they pretend, but to pray
by them, or comfort them; without ever entering into the ground of their
comfort, upon examination of the conscience? The blessing of Marriage they have
reserved to the Church; but upon an ungrounded presumption, that the Marriage of
Christians is to be ruled by the Law of Moses. The insufficience whereof being
discerned by the people, when they were loose from the Law of the Land, has
occasioned all the incests, and other disorders of the late times. In the mean
time, whereas all these Offices are either provided to bring Christians to the
Eucharist, or to be celebrated with the Eucharist: It is demanded, that godly
Ministers be not tied to celebrate the Eucharist above thrice a year. It
should rather be demanded, how they come to be counted godly Ministers that
demand this.

I shall not need to say, how the point of Reformation is The point of
Reformation in the mean between both.
found, through which the line of it is to pass, in these particulars.
Confirmation fitteth for the Eucharist, by the profession of Christianity, and
by being a Member of Gods Church. Ordination gives some degree in the Clergy,
above the people; and therefore supposes the profession of retiring from the
world, more then other Christians undertake to do. The Eucharist conveyeth Gods
Spirit, for the performing of this profession, sincerely and resolutely made.
Both requiring the Unity of the Church, both are to be ministered by that
authority, without which, nothing is to be done in each Church. The
reconciling of notorious sin is the Bishops peculiar. The Priest has authority
to cure that which is made known to him. But this authority is not arbitrary,
in either of both. The rigor of ancient Discipline, by the Canons of the
Church, is quite out of force. But in these lees and dregs of Christianity,
which now we draw, there is some reasonable ground to presume upon, that a
sinner is resolved to live a good Christian for the future. Let that be
limited, and the power of the Keys will have effect, in barring the sinner from
the Communion, till the presumption be visible in him. But to what shall the
Keys of the Church reconcile him, when the Eucharist is celebrated but thrice a
year? To what purpose is the visiting of the sick, but that, upon such
presumption, they may have the Eucharist, to maintain them in the great journey
which they are going? The duty of Marriage, among Christians, depends wholly
upon this supposition; that God gives the married an interest in one another
body, which cannot be dissolved but by death. Therefore it is celebrated with
the Eucharist, that they who mary with the resolution of Christians may be
enabled, by the Spirit of God, which the Sacrament promises, to perform the
same.

The charge of Superstition upon the Church of Rome is to The Superstitions of
the Church of Rome.
be justified, by many particulars, in tendering those things to God for his
service, wherein his service consists not. In the first place, the
multiplying of Masses for the quick and for the dead; without any pretense, of
the concurrence of a Congregation to the action, much less of any Communion. At
this rate, it matters not much in what language it is performed; seeing there
is no man's devotion required, to assist the Priest in it. The like is seen in
the Vows of Pilgrimages, and in the visiting of diverse Churches, for the
gaining of Indulgences. For, had men nothing else in mind then that Service,
which is acceptable to God in all places, why should they think themselves more
acceptable to God, for the travel which they undergo, that they may perform it
far from home? whereby they forgo that opportunity for it, which they know,
without bettering the mind; which, were it as it might be, would find means to
better it self every where. But there appears in it a carnal affection to the
Memories of Saints, out of a carnal affection to the things of thi^ world;
wherein carnal men hope to be assisted by the Saints, in recompense of their
voluntary devotions; though Christianity allows them not the confidence to seek
them at Gods hands. The same is to be said of an innumerable number of things,
that Monastical Orders observe; nay, of the overvaluing of the estate it self
of continence, or retirement from the world; Which, being no part of
Christianity, but a help, and an opportunity, for that wherein it consists,
satisfies outside Christians, with that which Pagans can do; the outward work;
without that inward disposition which only Christianity forms. All these, and
many more observations, which they set innocent Christians on work about, must
needs speak them superstitious; notwithstanding that there is always in them a
pretense of serving God, according to Christianity. For, the more straw and
chaff, the less grain; and, where the intention of the mind is spent upon the
shell of Christianity, there can it not have strength to bring the kernel of it
to ripeness. The Ceremonies wherewith they overcharge the public service of
the Church are of the same nature. For, they that understand not the meaning of
them; and therefore, distinguish them not from the Office which God accepts;
must needs put that to the account of his service, which is but the means to
procure it.

But what shall we say to them, who think they oblige us, The Superstitions of
the Puritans.
when they allow the people to kneel, to lift up their eyes, and to hold up
their hands at their Prayers? Do they not think they oblige Almighty God, in
serving him without any other sign of reverence? It is not possible, that they
should stand upon it to the disquiet of the Church, if they did not. Did they
not take it for the service of God, that the same Houses should be Common and
Holy, Stables and Churches, the same Vessels Chalices and drinking Cups, the
same Tables Altars and dining Bords, it is not possible that they should
trouble the Church about it as they do. But it is plain enough, that they serve
him without reverence or devotion, because they think so. To these men, all set
times of fasting, all the estate of continence, all obedience to Superiors, all
works of Mortification and Penance, stand suspected for Superstitious. They
would not think themselves far enough from the Papists, if they should do the
good works of Christians. For fear of private Masses, the Eucharist must be
celebrated thrice a year. And we must have the Opus operatum of a Sermon, in
exchange for the Opus operatum of a Mass. But this is not reforming of
Religion: It is stocking up the Vineyard of the Church, instead of Pruning it.
I need not say what is Reformation, and at what point it stands. The distance
from the extremes makes the mean visible. The truth is, there will be,
necessarily, superstition in all Religions, so long as the Church has chaff
and corn in it. For, they that are sensible of that obligation to God, which
they are not willing to discharge, will always discharge themselves to God,
upon that which they are content to do for his service; but which he is not
content with, because it signifies not the obedience of the inward man, which
he requires. Not that there must needs be Superstition in using things
indifferent of themselves; much less in using such, as in reason may serve to
advance attention and devotion in Gods Service. But because, as there may be
Superstition in using them; So there is Superstition in thinking, that by
forbearing them, a man does God service. But to think Schism acceptable to
God, rather then use them, is without doubt as great superstition, as any the
Church of Rome teaches.

Having showed, why the Church of Rome cannot be charged Why the Pope cannot
be Antichrist.
with Idolatry, I may from thence infer that the Pope cannot be Antichrist. I
do not grant, that either St. Paul, in the second Chapter of his second Epistle
to the Thessalonians, or St. John in the Apocalypse speaks any thing of
Antichrist. But he that exalts himself above all that is called God, as St.
Paul speaks there, must be one that should make himself God according to the
Idolatry of the Pagans. And the fornication which the Whore of Babylon, in the
Apocalypse, makes the Nations drunk with, is, necessarily, the same Idolatry.
Therefore, if the Pope teach no such Idolatry, he cannot prove Antichrist
either by St. John, or St. Paul. The Fathers have thought, that both of them
prophecy of such a one as shall indeed be a false Christ, if ever there shall
be such a one; Because he shall impose a new Religion, as from God, upon all
whom he shall seduce. But St. John's Catholic Epistles, where Antichrist is
mentioned, do not signify that any such is to come. And therefore, we are not
tied to their opinion in the interpretation of a Prophecy, which is no matter
of Faith.

But though the Pope be not Antichrist, nor the Papists Idolaters, How it is
just to Reform without the Sea of Rome.
yet I conceive, I have showed sufficient reason, why this Kingdom and Church
of England might and ought to Reform Religion, without and against the consent
of the Church of Rome; supposing that which seems to be manifest by all that
has followed; that the Church of Rome would never have condescended to any
such change. And, the Unity of the Church determining the measure and the
bounds of Reformation; they must needs be the same indeed, as they would be,
were the Pope Antichrist and the Papist^ Idolaters; Though, to those that
believe them so, because they believe them so, the measure and the bounds of
Reformation will never appear to stand where indeed they do. But let them look
to the consequence of their own imaginations. This one must needs render them
Schismatics to God; abhorring communion upon imaginary reasons. But will
render us with them Schismatics, both to God and to his Church, if we make
all that to be Reformation, which their imaginations, tainted with such a
prejudice, would have to be Law to this Church and Kingdom.

CHAP. XXII.
The present State of the Question concerning our Service. The Reformation
pretended, abominable. Such Preaching and Praying as is usual, a hindrance of
salvation, rather then the means to it. What Order of Service, the continual
Communion will require. What form of Instruction this Order will require. Of
that which goes before the Preface, in our Communion Service. Of the Prefaces,
and the Prayer of Consecration. Of the Prayer of Oblation, and the place of it.
Of the Commemoration of the dead, in particular. Why the Communion Service at
the Communion Table, when no Eucharist. A secondary Proposition, according to
present Law.

I conceive I have, by this time, showed a reason for that The present state of
the Question concerning our Service.
which I said in the beginning; that there is so much in question between us
and the Puritans, (comprising in that name all the parties, into which it
stands now divided) as, if it were decided for them, would give the Papists the
advantage against the Protestants. Now, as for the great question amongst us,
concerning our Service; if it were truly stated, it would soon be at an end. If
it may be once considered, that the question is, indeed and in truth, whether
Sermons shall drive the Communion out of the Church or not; whether or no,
arbitrary Prayers in the Pulpit, shall chase out of the Church, those which St.
Paul commanded to be made, and the Church by his command has frequented ever
since; I conceive, the Dispute would be easily decided. And that is the thing
in question indeed, and in effect, how little soever it appear. Certainly, if
there were never any common Prayers made in the Pulpit; if there were always
common Prayers made at the Altar; they who had no common Prayers but at the
Eucharist, had the Eucharist as often as they had common Prayers. Not as if the
Church did never assemble, but when the Eucharist was celebrated. But because
their desire and endeavor was, to celebrate the Eucharist once every day; and
that in the morning, unless it were a Fast; and always at dismissing the
Assembly, as the principal Office of it. For hence the Eucharist came, in time,
to be called the Mass (which had formerly been the name of the Assembly it
self) from the dismissing of it. And, they who endeavored to celebrate the
Eucharist every day, were not like to let Lords days and Festivals pass; or
think them solemnized, as they should be by Christians, without it.

Since therefore I claim, that this came by Tradition of the The Reformation
pretended* abominable.
Church, from St. Paul's order; I will infer no less then I have proved; That,
to change the Communion every Lords day and Festival, together with Morning and
Evening Prayer every day in the Church, and that with the Litanies upon
Wednesdays and Fridays; which the Law of the Land hitherto requires; for two
Sermons every Sabbath, with arbitrary Prayers before or after them, would not
be Reformation but Apostasy. For it is manifest, that at the Reformation, the
Eucharist was in possession in all Churches, though the Communion had been
surceased. Nor was it ever excepted, that the frequenting hereof had in it any
color of abuse; or abatement to that very Christiani^y, which we receive from
our Lord and his Apostles. The abuse was in private Masses. It was also a just
complaint, that the people were not taught their duty out of the Holy
Scriptures: and, that the instructing of them by preaching was neglected,
beyond all reason and conscience. But was it ever pretended, that the reforming
of the abuse in private Masses consists in two Sermons a Sabbath; (for we
must speak like Jews, if we will not offend tender consciences) with the
Prayers of the people, such as the Minister shall please, before or after it;
which is the Reformation now pretended? Had it been said that this is
Reformation, when abuses were so visible, that the name of Reformation was
popular; it had been easily answered, that this were to bring the chief Office
of Christianity to little or nothing. And therefore, if this be the form that
was called Reformation in some places, it must be said, that it was easie^ to
see what ought not to be, then to settle what should be. But for a Christian
Kingdom; having, upon deliberation, settled an order, whereby the Eucharist is
to be celebrated all Lords days and Festivals; for Reformations sake, to leave
Ministers of tender consciences free, not to celebrate it above thrice a year;
(and that, having a competent number to communicate; which may be not once in
seven years) as now is demanded; I hope it shall never be said in the streets
of Gath, that it past undetested.

It is necessary for him that is come to the state of salvation, Such Preaching
and Praying as is usual, a hindrance of salvation, rather then the means to it.
as a Christian, to learn how he is to live as a Christian; and to grow every
day in the knowledge of his duty, that he may discharge it. But shall he be
able to do this, by hearing two Sermons every Sabbath, and as many more, as if
he did nothing else? Or, may he not be able without it? Certainly, that
which their Preachers now do is so far from being necessary, that it is no fit
means to the salvation of the generality of Gods people. They may easily make
it a trade never to fail, to while out an hour or two in the Pulpit, in
discoursing the meaning of their text, in framing Doctrines out of it, and
proofs of those Doctrines, (more plentiful a great deal, when they are so
manifest, that they need not, then when they are so obscure that they cannot
be proved to the generality of Christians) and upon these Doctrines and
Proofs, Exhortations, Invectives, Instructions, Reproofs, such as the driving
of Faction shall require; and ye^, he that would learn his duty shall be as
far to seek, after many thousands of such Sermons, as before. And yet it shall
be an act of no less charity, to Preach a Sermon of Christian instruction, and
exhortation, in and to the known duties of all, or the generality of
Christians; then it has always been reputed by Gods Church. But let not a man
therefore think, if he have any doubt in some difficult point of Doctrine, in
some nice case of Conscience, in the meaning of some leading text of Scripture,
that he is to depend upon the Pulpit for resolution in it; where it is easy
(as St. Gregory Nazianzene answered St. Jerome, about the (...) in St. Luke) to
make you believe, by the pleasing delivery of Language, that you have
satisfaction; and yet, when you come to seek where it lies, remain in as much
doubt as before. And if you hackney out Ministers to two Sermons a Sabbath; the
people must not expect that from them in private, which they cannot expect from
the Pulpit. But if it be thought part of the instruction due to Gods people,
to make the Laws of the Church, and of the State, and the proceedings of
public Government, a subject for the Pulpit; In which, as I said, it is not
possible for particular Christians to be satisfied, by all the Inquiry they
can make in private; then, what may come to pass, I need say to no man, that
has seen what has come to pass amongst us. I let pass less abuses of
vainglory, priding it self in the volubility rather then Eloquence of
Language, and rendering more able Curates, not so ready speakers, contemptible
to their people; and the like. In which regard, it may many times be
questioned, whether the gifts of praying and preaching, which we hear so much
of, be Gifts of Gods Spirit, which ordinarily suppose Christianity; or of the
evil spirit, which always put it to flight. For, all that I have said, of the
bad effects of Preaching, is to be understood much more of those prayers,
whereby evil doctrine is repeated to God, for a blessing of his Spirit upon it.
For Christian people, being weakly superstitious; as the generality of all
people are; are apt to place the bond of that Religion, wherein they think
themselves tied to God, in that which they see and hear alleged to God in so
reverend postures.

That Form of Service which we hitherto use has well deserved What Order of
Service, the continual Communion will require.
all that has been said, in defense of it; being assaulted by violent hands,
even in those parts, in which it ought to be inviolable. Nevertheless,
professing, as I do, that the restoring of the continual Communion, is such a
point of Reformation, that the Church is not to be at rest, till it be
brought to effect; I must not stick to declare what will be requisite, to
render our Communion Service useful to that purpose. I have said, that the word
Litu^gy is proper to signify nothing else, but that form of Service, which the
Communion is celebrated with. But I have showed als^, that those prayers for
all states and conditions of men in Christ's Church, which are contained in our
Litanies, are to be offered up to God, at the celebrating of it. And seeing it
was at the Reformation, and is at present, a Law in the Church of Rome, that
all Christians should be present at Mass all Sundays and Festivals; And that
Reformation consists in restoring the Communion; It seems to me that the
pretense of Reformation is not made good, till the present provision be
brought to effect; that the Eucharist be celebrated, all Sundays and
Festivals, in all Churches and Chapels. And so, that all Christians may be
tied to be present; that they may be brought as near, as the Church ought to
bring them, to communicate. Supposing this the intent of the Church; How should
it be attained, without two Assemblies, every Sunday and Holy-day-morning, in
all Churches? For, let never Sabbatarians hope to make us so perfect Jews, as
to bring us to dress no meat on Sundays. If they could, a Parish can never be
all at Church at once. The order of the Church never becomes the Church, till
it demonstrate a care of all Christian souls a like. Between the hours of eight
and twelve, there is time enough for two Assemblies. For who would wish that
either of them should last above an hour? The Liturgy is an Office consisting
of Psalm^, and Lessons, intermixed with Hymns: and of the Eucharist; which, the
common Prayers for all states, conditions, and necessities in the Church, are
to be offered up to God with. Now, though that which we call the first
Service be complete for the intent of it, yet I must needs find it too long
for this purpose; to allow time, both for the Eucharist, and for the
i^struction of the people; which I do not intend to exclude out of those
Assemblies, which I confine to an hour. And how easy were it, to frame for
this purpose an Order of Psalms and Lessons, according to the order of the
whole Church; Which requires, that the Epistles be read after the Old
Testament, and the Gospels after them: as in our Communion Service, the Gospel
comes next before the Creed? For, there would be room for brief Lessons out of
the Law and Historical Books, out of the Sapiential Books and Prophets: And
after, for the Epistles and Gospels, (which not only we, but the Lutherans,
as well as the Church of Rome, do now use) with Hymns between each, according
to the Canon of Laodicea, received by the Whole Church.

This is the place for the instruction of the people, according What form of
Instruction this Order will require.
to the order of the whole Church. And truly the greater and more solemn
Assemblies may be capable of edifying, by learned and eloquent Sermons, which
the generality of Parish Churches (the edification whereof the Church i^ to
study) are very little the better for. And the endless number of strifes, that
arise about the Scripture, and variety of judgments, fancies, and interests, in
what is fit to be preached, make the design of Homilies necessary; rather to
restrain the abilities of Indiscreet Preachers, then to help the inabilities of
unlearned Preachers. Only that they be so framed, as to contain a course of
familiar instruction, in the whole body of Christian Doctrine; not concerning
Faith alone, but all the chief duties of Christians; which these that we have
do not satisfy, though not unfit for the time when they were set forth. And
being so framed; Though it be all one to the edification of the Church,
whether the matter of them be delivered by word of mouth, as every Minister can
best insinuate it into the minds of his hearers; or as it may be couched, word
for word, in writing; yet will it be absolutely necessary, for the instruction
of all, preserving the Unity of the Whole, that the Ordinary have account, not
only negatively, that nothing be taught the people contrary to the form; But
positively, that the whole matter of it be taught the people, in such time as
the Law shall determine; to be repeated again and again, for the certain
proficience of all. For it must not avail to say; that the people will not come
to Church, unless they may be entertained there with variety. Unless the
people be content to be conducted by that which is best to save their souls,
though it please not their fancies, it shall be but a Church in name, that
shall be Ruled by the fancies of those whom it is to Rule. And, when the
interest of public peace so visibly concurreth with the interest of saving
souls; it will hardly become the profession of a Christian Kingdom, not to
trust God, for the success of that which is designed upon so Christian
considerations.

This is the place where the first Service ended, and the second Of that which
goes before the Preface, in our Communion Service.
began, in the ancient Church. The Creed follows after the Sermon, in
Dionysius; who, writing a little before the Council at Chalcedon, is the first
that mentions it in the Service. He calls it an Hymn: and we may call it the
Catholic Hymn; glorifying God for the substance of Christianity, with his
whole Church. That which we call the second Service, following immediately
hereupon, was nothing but the Eucharist, and the prayers of the Church which it
is to be celebrated with. And that is the reason, why I do not think our
Communion Service sufficient for those Assemblies, in which the first is too
long to he used. For, the Office ought to consist of Psalms, and Lessons,
with Hymns interposed; of an instruction, and of the Eucharist; with the
prayers which it is celebrated with. Now it has been always the use of Christ's
Whole Church, even from the Apostles, to offer, at the Eucharist, both the
Bread and Wine which it is to be consecrated of: and also, what their hearts
moved them to contribute, for the maintenance of Gods Service. And therefore,
the Prayer for the whole state of Christ's Church is here proper, in regard of
those that offer to that purpose; the rest that offer not concurring with their
prayers, to that effect for which they offer. The confession of sins before the
Eucharist is seen in some of the ancient Liturgies; nor do I find it questioned
on any hand, as either unseasonable, or not requisite in this Action. The
Decalogue and Answers; which, since Q. Elizabeth's time, we begin the Communion
Service with; seem more proper to be placed here, to branch forth the
particulars of those sins which we confess. For the Commandments are certain
heads, to which men may refer the sins, for which they ask pardon, and grace to
avoid them. But there is great reason, why they are not found in the Service of
the ancient Church. The reason is, because the Decalogue is proper to the Law,
and unproper to Christianity; and it is a sad effect hereof which we see. For
it is certain, and manifest, that the Sabbatarian error has had the rise, or
increase, from the construction, which ignorant Preachers have made, of the
prayer for remission of sins against this fourth Commandment, which the Church
prescribes. Nor have I ever found any authority of the Church, for using the
Decalogue, for the Rule by which the sins of Christians are to be ranked; but
only in some late Offices, of those ages, which we, who profess the
Reformation, are not to own?

After the confession of sins, the General Preface, which follows Of the
Prefaces, and the Prayers of Consecration.
after Sursum corda, would be enlarged, with thanksgiving to God, for making
the World and man, for not forsaking man having forsaken him, when he was made
Lord of his Creatures; but first sending the Fathers, to reclaim their several
Ages, then giving the Law and the Prophets, to instruct his own people in his
service; And, when these means took not the effect which he sought, for
sending his Son to redeem and reconcile us to him, by the death of his Cross.
After this the Proper Prefaces, and the Seraphims Hymn, are of too ancient and
general use in the Catholic Church, to be omitted, without a mark of
Apostasy from the devotion of it, which they express. The Prayer which we
consecrate with seems agreeable to the intent of Gods Church; but more
agreeable, in that form which the first Book of Edward the VI. revived by the
Scottish Liturgy, prescribes. And that Memorial, or Prayer of Oblation, which
is there prescribled, to follow, immediately after the Consecration, is
certainly more proper there, then after the Communion, ending with the Lords
Prayer, and the Peace, after that. For, this is the form of the whole Church,
so constant, and so uniform, that I am thereby persuaded, that the close of it;
For thine is the Kingdom, the the Power and the Glory, for ever and ever; being
always frequented by the Church, either in terms, or in substance, in this
place; upon that occasion, afterward, came to be put into the Copies of St.
Matthews Gospel. For it is well enough known, how many ancient Copies, and
Commentaries, have it not. But there is not any of the ancient Liturgies, that
has not some form of Doxology in this place, either in the same terms, or to
the same purpose. And seeing it is manifest, that the Kiss of Peace is an
Apostolical custom; and used in the Western Church before the Communion;
(though before the Consecration, in other places) though the Ceremony be set
aside, in regard of the change of times and customs, it should not seem
burdensome, that the Christianity is remembered, which it expresses.

But if my Opinion might pass, I would not rest contented Of the Prayer of
Oblation, and the place of it.
herewith. I would enlarge this Memoral, with all the Principal heads of our
Litanies, which might seem to comprize the necessities of all estates, and
conditions in the Church; according to that measure which the Time would allow.
For this would be the offering of Christ's sacrifice upon the Cross, for the
necessities of all Christian people; which the whole Church of Christ has
always frequented, from the beginning, without any pretense of sacrificing him
again; no reason requiring any more, then to commemorate that sacrifice. And
here would there be room for all private and public necessities, as well of
the Church and Kingdom, of the Diocese, Province, and Country, and the
respective Governors thereof; as of the Congregration, and of any particular
member of it: and that according to such Order, as the Ordinary may find cause
to give, in cases that do indeed require a provision for the Time. The
ancients, celebrating the Eucharist every day, had, by that means, daily
opportunity of interceding for particular necessities, according to St. Paul's
order; for, such intercessions the word (...) signifies. They that consider
not the defect which follows upon the decay of this order, are ready to impute
the defect that is found, of forms of intercession for particular occurrences,
to the prescribing of set forms, by the Church; not allowing the arbitrary
fancies of Curates. But he that has known the manifold folly, and malice,
that our London Pulpits have vented; taking upon them to intercede for what
occasions they think fit, in what form they please; will find it absolutely
necessary, to redeem the scorn that our profession suffers from such
disorders, by banishing those Prayers out of the Pulpit. And because the
Communion will not be renewed so frequent, as to meet with all those
occasions, which, in the Ancient Church, it did serve for; It must needs be a
Christian design, to enlarge the first and daily Service with such forms, as
may serve for most of such occasions; preventing the offenses which have been.
For, the hope of prevailing with God, for that which presses particular
persons, is the charity of the Congregation, in equally desiring the
necessities of all Christians. When the Eucharist was celebrated upon some
particular occasion, according to the custom of the ancient Church; it appears,
that the general form was thoroughly observed, the particular occasion only
mentioned. The Eloquence, whereby the Church hoped to prevail which God, was
the devotion, and unity, which it celebrated the Sacrament with.

But, I must by no means leave this place, till I have paid Of the
Commemoration of the dead, in particular.
the debt which I owe to the opinion which I have premised; and openly profess,
again and again, that we weigh not by our own Weights, nor mete by our own
Measures, if, believing one Catholic Church, and enjoying Episcopacy and the
Church Lands, upon that account, we recall not the memorial of the Dead, as
well as of the living, into this Service. There is the same ground to believe
the communion of Saints, in the prayers, which, those that depart in the
highest favor with God make for us; in the prayers, which we make for those,
tha^ depart in the lowest degree of favor with God; that there i^ for the
common Christianity; namely, the Scriptures interpreted by the perpetual
practice of Gods Church. Therefore there is ground enough, for the faith of all
Christians, that those Prayers are accepted, which desire God to hear the
Saints for us; to send the deceased in Christ rest, and peace, and light, and
refreshment, and a good trial at the day of Judgment, and accomplishment of
happiness after the same. And, seeing the abating of the first form, under
Edward VI, has wrought no effect, but to give them that desired it an
appetite, to root up the Whole; what thanks can we render to God, for escaping
so great a danger, but by sticking firm to a Rule, that will stick firm to us,
and carry us through any dispute in Religion: and land us in the haven of a
quiet conscience; what troubles soever we may pass through, in maintaining,
that the Reformation of the Church will never be according to the Rule which
it ought to follow, till it cleave to the Catholic Church of Christ in this
particular. Why the Communion Service at the Communion Table, when no Eucharist.


I am not to expect, that this Proposition will take effect, because some
points of it will seem to be only one man's opinion; though it shall never be
that one man's opinion, further then it appears to be the visible Order of the
whole Church, from the beginning; or the necessary consequence thereof, in this
estate. For, the Church of Rome obliging all to hear Mass; all Sunday and
Holyday-mornings; and, the Reformation of the Abuses, which we protest against
in the Mass, consisting in restoring the Eucharist; the Reformation will not
be able to justify it self in this point, till there be a provision, that
all may communicate, as they ought to do. And, for the commemoration of the
dead, in the Oblation; though the Reformation under Queen Elizabeth do silence
it, yet under Edward the VI. it was retained. And they who were gratified
afterward by silencing it, do now demand, as for Reformation, that the
Eucharist be not imposed upon tender consciences, for fear they should not
have room enough, for their arbitary Sermons and Prayers; which, they can never
secure the Church, that they shall agree with the Profession of it. What they
will demand next, for Reformation, how shall it appear? For the standard of
tender consciences is as invisible, as that of Venners spirit, that made the
rising for King Jesus: And, having a visible Rule in the consent of the Whole
Church; it will be either want of skill, or want of charity, not to
distinguish the remembrance of the dead, which the Whole Church has always
frequented, from the opinion of Purgatory, and the custom of praying to the
Saints, which succeeding Ages have added. But, in the mean time, the reason is
visible why the Communion Service is to be said at the Communion Table,
notwithstanding tender consciences; which, perhaps, many that mean well do not
perceive. If Christian people, being seduced by perverse Teachers, cannot be
made sensible of their duty, in frequenting the Communion; the Church is not to
forbear calling them to it, and putting them in mind of it. Weesee there are
those, who will needs be Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, that have
ministered no Communion to their Churches, in so many years. Instead of taking
shame upon them, for such abominable contempt of Christianity; this mischief is
now imagined for a Law; when a Law is demanded, by which, tender consciences
may not be tied to celebrate the Eucharist once in many years. Take away the
Communion Service from the Communion Table, and what mark shall remain of the
duty that lies upon the public, to reduce the Law of the Catholic Church,
which is Gods Law, into force? What hope of reducing it, if the mark be once
blotted out? So much it concerns, to hold up a daily Protestation, of the Right
and Duty of the Church; and a Contestation, with all public persons in the
Church and State, to bend the utmost of their endeavors, to redeem such an
inconsequence and indecorum in Gods Service, as the silencing of the principal
Office in it. And we are alive, at this day, by Gods goodness, to call God and
man to witness; that, if Order be not taken in so great a concernment, the
fault will be chargeable on those that do not their parts toward it, at the
great day of Judgment.

But, if my Proposition may not hope for effect; in the next A secondary
Prop^sition. according to present Law.
place, I shall wish, that all Curates would agree, in that which by Law they
may do, so far as I know the Law; Or rather, that all Ordinaries would agree,
to impose it upon them. That is, to divide the Service of God, on Sunday and
Holiday Mornings, into two Assemblies, as it stands divided into two Services;
That all Householders may stand accountable for their whole Families, to see
that they serve God in the Church, all Sunday and Holiday Mornings; as before
the Reformation, all people were obliged to do. For though, by the present Law,
there is not provision for all Christians to communicate; Yet is there Order
for the Service of God, by Psalms, and Lessons, mixed with Hymns, and by the
Common Prayers of the Church, perfectly summed up in the Litanies. And they,
who shall have performed it, shall have celebrated the Lords day, or Festival,
with it; though not so like a Christian, as, had he been at the celebrating of
the Eucharist. The Communion Service might serve as it is, for the second
Assembly; provided that it be, for the reasons premised, at the Communion
Table. The Homily or Sermon after the Gospel; comprising that Instruction, or
Exhortation, which is necessary for all Christians; would easily come within
one quarter of an hour; were Curates, by the wisdom and diligence of their
Ordinaries, restrained from impertinencies, and held to their duties. The
Common Prayers of the Church; which are perfectly summed up in the Litanies; if
they were used at this Assembly also, they would make the Service of God as
complete, as the absence of the Eucharist would allow; being the principal
Office of it. And this is no more then is required by the eighteenth of Queen
Elizabeth's Injunctions. For as the Litanies, being used after the Consecration,
as that Injunction requires, would be the complete Prayer of Oblation,
according to that which has been said; So when the Eucharist is not
celebrated, the Common Prayers of the Church, for all necessities of all
estates of Christ's Church, would be as completely offered to God, by the
Litanies, as they ought to be offered when the Eucharist is not celebrated.
And this course would take away some appearances of inconvenience, arising from
the change of time, and the difference which it has produced, in the use of
those Services of which our Office consists; which, because common reason
understands not, therefore the people may check at; And yet Superiors may not,
perhaps, find sufficient cause to make any change, for the removing of them.
The extreme length of the Office, as now it is used, is to be counted in the
number of these. Besides, in that case, there would be no necessity of a
Prayer before the Sermon; which now brings this visible inconvenience; that
the Prayer for all states of Christ's Church, which is to follow next after the
Sermon, goes before the Sermon also. For that Prayer, which the LV. Canon
enjoyneth, is to the very same effect with that which is to follow after the
Sermon, for the whole state of Christ's Church. As for other arbitrary prayers,
before or after Sermons, we are all witnesses, what a Trumpet they were of the
late Civil War; what a means to prepare the minds of people to it. And
therefore if, after so fresh experience, the State shall suffer the Church to
leave any room for them, in the Order of Gods Service; the State as well as the
Church must be felo de se in doing it: And they that shall insist upon such
demands, do neither more nor less, then ask leave to do the same again.

Indeed it is easy to foresee an appearance of inconvenience, that An
Objection in it, answered.
might be objected, if this course should be put in practice. For, when the
Eucharist is not celebrated, the Litanies then must follow next after the
Prayer for the whole state of Christ's Church; The substance whereof is the same
that is repeated again in the Litanies, as containing more briefly the sum of
that, which, in them, is branched out into more particulars. The practice of
the ancient Church furnishes the answer. The XIX. Canon of Laodicea; ancienter,
without doubt, then any form of Liturgy extant; prescribes two Prayers to be
made just before the Consecration, (...); That is to say; The Deacon bidding
the people pray for the necessities of the Church, which he did name to them
from point to point. That this is the meaning of the Canon, we understand by
all the Eastern Liturgies. For there is none of them in which the same Prayer
is not repeated, again and again; the Deacon inditing to the people the
particulars which they are to pray for, sometimes more briefly, sometimes more
at large. And in one of them, namely, the Latin Copy of S. Basils Liturgy,
they are expressly called the first, the second, and the third Litanees. Thus
ancient is the Custom of bidding Prayer in the Church. For S. Austine also,
for the Latin Church, remembers it, when he says; Cum Communis Oration v^ce
Diaconi indicitur; When Common Prayer is bidden by the Deacons voice. Epist.
CVI. And hereby it appears, that it was then thought no inconvenience, that
those Common Prayers of the Church should be repeated more then once. For,
being the chief act of their Assemblies, and the end for which the Eucharist
was celebrated; To wit, that, by the memory of Christ's Sacrifice upon the
Cross, all the necessities of his Church might be rendered recommendable to God;
It is no marvel that they insisted upon them more then once. And therefore, if,
in this decay of Christianity, the continual Celebration of the Eucharist
cannot be revived; in the next place it remains, that these Common Prayers be
maintained and frequented with as much devotion, as, in so wretched times as
we see, can be obtained. I have said nothing of that which is commonly called
Preaching, or of any provision for it; Because I say nothing of the First
Service, and of the use of it at other times, besides Sunday and Holiday
Mornings. But it is easy for me to say, that there will be as much
opportunity for it in the afternoons, as the abilities of the generality of
Preachers can be thought competent to employ, with that which shall be fit to
entertain the people. I know the general opinion inclines, to employ that time
with the Exposition of the Catechism. But the Doctrine of the Catechism is
the work of that time, when men's wits are at the best. And, if the Exposition
be not prescribed, as well as the Catechism, more inconvenience may soon be
found in that course, then in the Pulpit.

CHAP. XXIII.
How the Law distinguishes Moral Precepts from Positive. How the spiritual
sense of the Decalogue concerns Christians. The meaning of the First
Commandment, in this sense. The extent of the Second Commandment. Of the Third
Commandment. What the sanctifying of the Sabbath signifies. The meaning of the
Fifth, as to Christians. The meaning of the five last, according to
Christianity.

NOw, since this secondary Proposition leaves the Decalogue, H^w the Law
distinguishes Moral Prec^pts from Positive.
and Prayers of it, in the place which now it holds in our Service; I will not
leave this point, without expounding the Decalogue, in that sense, which the
Principle, upon which I maintain the agreement of the Old Testament with the
New, requires. For, upon that Exposition depends the true meaning and intent of
that Prayer, whereby the Church enjoins the people, to ask pardon of God, for
their transgressing of the several Precepts; the misunderstanding whereof has
occasioned the Error of the Sabbath, which only England, of all ^^ristendome,
is disquieted with. Most Divines do so reason of the Decalogue, (because the
most of the Precepts thereof are Moral) as if the difference between
Ceremonial, Judicial, and Moral, (and much more, between Moral and Positive)
were expressly delivered by the letter of Moses Law. Whereas indeed, and in
truth, the Moral Precepts of Gods Natural Law, though of greatest consequence
to the everlasting estate of immortal Souls, (which the Law supposes, rather
then expresses) are only the matter of the Carnal Covenant, which contracteth
not for the doing of them, out of that reason, and with that intent, which God
requires: because it contracteth not for the world to come, wherewith that
intent is rewardable. For, as the keeping of the precepts materially, qualified
that people for the Land of Promise; so, the keeping of them in obedience to
God, and for his Service, qualified them then for Heaven, as Christians; always
supposing the expectation of Christ's coming, for the redemption of Gods people.
Therefore, though it be necessary for Divines, under Christianity, to
distinguish between moral and positive in Moses Law; yet they will confound the
ground of that distinction, as it took place under the Law, to Gods people, if
they expect, that the letter of the Law should express it.

The not considering of this is that, which suffers not men to How the
Spiritual sense of the Decalogue concerns Christians.
see that sense, which the plain letter of the Decalogue signifies; being
transported with a prejudice, that the Moral Law signified as much to the Jews,
and required as great duty of them, as the exposition of them preached by our
Lord Christ, requires of Christians. Whereas, by that which I have said, it
may appear, that the mistake which our Lord corrects, in the meaning of Moses
Law; is ^he Haeresie of the Scribes and Pharisees, promising everlasting life,
in recompense of the outward observing of it. Whereas the Law, indeed,
rewards it with the Land of Promise; intimating only the reward of the world
to come, to those that should serve the searcher of hearts from the heart, in
expectation of the Messiah his coming. So the Decalogue, being the brief of
those conditions, upon which God contracted with the Generality of that people,
for the Land of Promise; carries not with it the least presumption in reason,
that, whatsoever it contains is either moral, or perpetually positive: to
wit; according to the carnal sense, which the letter of the Law first
presents. Indeed, according to the spiritual intent of it; by which true
Israelites were conducted, even then, to the world to come; it signified and
required the same spiritual obedience, which the Gospel obliges us to, though
in a measure proportionable to those helps of grace, which God then gave;
compared with those, which the Coming of Christ has brought forth. So that, in
one word; admitting the literal sense ^f the Decalogue to be that which
obliged the Jews; the spiritual sense, which it is to carry with Christians, is
to be valued, by the correspondence of the New Testament with the Old, in the
matter of every particular precept.

What can be more manifest then this, in the Preface to it? The meaning of the
first Commandment, in this sense.
Can Christians say truly, that God ever delivered them out of the Land of
Egypt, and the bondage of it? must they not all say, that God has delivered
them from the bondage of sin and Satan, correspondent to it? might not all true
Israelites, in whom was no guile, say the same, in regard of that worship of
Idols, which all other Nations were enslaved with, and the sin to which it
engaged? therefore a Jew understands this first precept to be the chief point
of his Law; that he acknowledge but one God, but that one whom his Fathers
knew. And if the Matter be examined, it will appear, that both Jews and
Mahumetans stand at distance with Christians, upon this false pretense; that
the Faith of the holy Trinity agrees not herewith. For the Alcoran insinuates
this poison every where. But the Christian goes farther in the meaning of this
precept; And, believing the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, to be that one God
which gave them this precept; believes himself redeemed from the bondage of
sin, by the blood of the Son, and by the Grace of the Spirit: And therefore,
making the will of God the ground, and his glory and service the intent of all
his doings, renounces all respect to the pleasure, or profit, or honor and
greatness of this World, so far as it is not the means to serve God;
Acknowledging, that, when he declines from this resolution, he makes his
Belly his God, or his riches his Idol, as St. Paul says; or rather the Devil;
that offers him some little part of that, which our Lord refused in gross; the
God whom he worships.

The second Commandment, setting forth God for a God The extent of the s^coud
Commandment.
that is jealous of his people, whether they worship him or not; manifestly
supposes their Covenant, to forsake all other Gods beside him, a contract of
Marriage between him and his people. Which if it be so, it is no less manifest,
that the Images which the precept supposes, are the representations of other
Gods, which his people were went to commit adultery with, by worshipping them
for God. For, seeing it is manifest, how much Idolatry was advanced by Imagery,
(though it may be without it) there can be no marvel, that there should be a
peculiar precept against it. Wherefore, it is manifest, that Jews, by the
letter of this precept, are tied from all Images, which their Elders, who had
the power of limiting what is lawful, and what is not, by the Law, should
declare to be unlawful. But to think that their declarations ought to bind
Christians, were to imagine that Christians ought to be Jews. And, the letter
of the Law forbidding all Images, at all times and in all places, as well as
some; it is not possible to show, how Christians can be tied from any kind of
Image, at any time, or in any place, more then others, by the letter of this
precept. But, by the positive part of the precept, implied in the negative
which it expresses; thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them;
Christians must needs find themselves bound to that worship of God, in spirit
and truth, which, it is not possible for Jews to think themselves tied to, in
consideration of the Land of Promise. And therefore, having the Word of God for
the rule of their worship, must needs condemn the worshipping of God, by any
imagination of their own devising, for superstition and will worship; In
standing upon that, which God declares not that he regards, for the
discharge of their duty to him: and in tendering him things of their own
choosing, for the worship which they acknowledge to be due. For, as I said
before, it is not possible, that they who lay such a weight of their diligence,
upon things of their own choice, should discharge the duty of worshipping him
in spirit and truth, in that measure, which the comparison of Gods will with
our own choice requires. And by this rule we condemn all excesses of the
Church of Rome, in honoring the Saints, and their Relics, or Images; without
making our selves obnoxious to the Jews, for any reason to do it with. For,
Christianity having put Idolatry to flight, which the Law never pretended to
do; It is not to be imagined, that the having of Images can make a man take
those things for God, which they represent, so long as the belief of
Christianity is alive at the heart. For neither was it Idolatry, though it were
a breach of this Commandment, for a Jew to have such Images, as were forbidden
by their Elders; not taking that for God which they represented. But, what
honor of Saints departed, or what signs of that honor, Christianity may
require; what furniture or ceremonies the Churches of Christians, and the
public worship of God in them may require, now all the World professes
Christianity, and must honor the Religion which they profess; this the Church
is at freedom to determine, by the word of God, expounded according to the best
agreement of Christians. For neither is it obliged by the second Council of
Nicaea, or the violent proceedings of the Church of Rome, which have brought it
into force in these Western parts; nor to the excesses of the adverse parties
in the East, which made the setting up and reverencing of Images in Churches to
be Idolatry, without sufficient ground in the Scriptures for it.

Confining the literal intent of the Decalogue, to those gross Of the third
Commandment.
sins, by which, all Jews were to understand, that the interest of the Nation
in the Land of Promise must become forfeited, as all reason requires; the
taking of Gods name in vain, in the third Commandment, is, in plain terms, to
swear that which is false, as the Chaldee Paraphrase renders it. But a
Christian takes up Gods name in professing Christianity. And, when the World
sees him do any thing that agrees not with his profession, without doubt, he
takes it up in vain: For there never was any true Israelite, in whom was no
guile, that worshipped God in spirit and truth, but he might then understand
that he took Gods name in vain; if, professing the worship of the only true
God, he should live like those that worshipped Idols. Much more a Christian,
knowing that he is bound to direct all his actions to the end of Gods glory
and service, out of obedience to his declared will; must needs know, that he
shall not be guiltless to God, if they be not suitable to the profession
which he wears.

It is questioned, how God blessed and sanctified the seventh What the
sanctifying ^f the Sabbath signifies.
day, at the creation of all things; the keeping of the Sabbath being first
commanded, after the coming of the Israelites out of Egypt? For some would have
it understood by a Prolepsis, or figure of anticipation; that God, in
consideration of his resting from all his Works on the seventh day; when he
gave the Law, made that day the Sabbath. Others think, that he sanctified it
from the beginning, for a day of his Service; though the rest which the Jews
were commanded, sitting still all the Sabbath, came in force from the giving of
the Law. And truly, the memory of the seven days of the week, which has been
preserved among all nations; who cannot be thought to have learned any matter
of Religion from the Jews; seems to intimate a Tradition of the creation,
remaining among them. But it is to be considered* that, when Idolatry
prevailed, the worship of the seven Planets was a prime part of it: and
Astrology, which appropriates the seven days of the week to them, a* great
means of propagating the same. And therefore, the memory of the creation being
obliterated, by the superstition which the Devil had graffed upon it; the
observations of Heathen people are rather to be imputed to this, then to that.
And otherwise, there is nothing in the Scripture to answer Tertullian with;
demanding of the Jews, which of the Fathers, before the Law, kept the Sabbath.
But howsoever, if we be Christians, we must not question, that the blessing
which God hallowed the seventh day with, is the rest of Christ's body in the
grave on that day; by which, that rest from the travel of sin, and the
punishment of it, which Christianity professes and promises, was purchased
for Christians. For, upon this ground, all the time of the Gospel is that
Sabbath, which the Jewish Sabbath signified. And the fulfilling of the fourth
Commandment, is the rest of a Christian from all his own works, all the days of
his life. Not that I doubt, that, under the Law, the day was to be set apart
for the Offices of Gods Service; but because there are other precepts of the
Law, Number. XXVIII. Levit. XXIII. by which that is provided for. By virtue of
which precepts, according to the correspondence between the Law and Gospel, not
only the first day of the week is set aside by the Apostles, for the service of
God, instead of the seventh day, which the Jews observe; but also other days of
Assemblies, being appointed by the Church, are to be observed by Gods people,
for the same reason as the seventh. For even the seventh day it self was
observed, and was to be observed by Christians, for the same reason, so long
as the custom of the Church required them to observe it for that purpose.
Besides, the letter of the Law having forbidden any work upon the seventh day;
common reason would serve, without any precept of the Law, to infer, that they
ought to meet for the service of God, which his people had always professed,
when they had nothing else to do. Otherwise it is true, which Origin so often
charge, that they could not assemble, without some breach upon the strict
sense of that command; not to stir out of their place on that day. And this
sitting still is as properly sanctifying the day; as the blood of bulls and
goats, and the ashes of a h^ifer sprinkling the pollut^d sanctifies to the
purity of the flesh; according to the Epistle to the Hebrews, IX. 13. So, the
keeping of this Commandment, under the Gospel, is the serving of God all the
days of a man's life; as our Catechism expounds it.

When the fifth Commandment promises long life, to them The meaning of the
fifth, as to Christians.
that honor Father and Mother; will any man say, that this promise is made to
Christians; that profess to take up Christ's Cross, and to lay down their lives
for Christ? If he do, let him say, what Land it is which Christians are
promised; If it be not the Land of the living; which the Land of Canaan
figureth? Wherefore it is manifest, that the honors due to the King, and all
Civil Powers under him, are due by the letter of this precept, as properly
comprised in the name of Father, according to the use of that language. The
obedience also, due to the Elders of the Synagogue, is, by the Metaphorical
signification of the word Mother; standing for the Synagogue; derived from the
terms of this precept. But, according to the correspondence between
Christianity and Judaism; God is our Father, and our Mother is the Church. And
therefore, as in temporal and civil things, he is a rebel that honors not
the King; so, in matters of Religion, he is an Apostate from the Church, that
honors not the commands of it, within those bounds, which the command of God
limiteth. And thus, the sive first Commandments; according to the method of
Christianity, abridging an infinite number of Jewish Observations into one very
weighty precept; enjoin every one of them the whole duty of a Christian to God;
the acknowledging and worshipping of the only true God extending it self to
living as a Christian, to resting from the works of the old Adam, and to the
honor of God, by keeping his Commandments, as they are delivered to us by his
Church.

The four Precepts that follow are under one and the same consideration, The
meaning of the five last, according to Christianity.
in this place. Murder, Adultery, Theft, and false Witness, are things, that
either take away, or abridge the interest of particular Jews, in the Land of
Promise. And, if the public were accessory to the multiplying of them,
accordingly, the public interest thereof in Gods promises must needs become
questionable. Among Christians, seeing these are crimes which cannot consist
with any interest in the world to come; the very first motions of them are
commanded to be suppressed and mortified. And certainly, whosoever was
inwardly a Jew in spirit did understand himself bound to abstain from them, not
for fear of punishment, but for love of goodness; which love, the love which
Christ has prevented us with advances to that height, which Christianity
professes. But this obliges us to assign the last Commandment a meaning by it
self, distinct from all that which is prohibited by the former precepts. And
truly, he that finds not the peculiar Law of the Jews, in the prohibition of
coveting another man's wife, must be strangely transported with prejudice. For,
Adultery being prohibited before; coveting another man's wife cannot be
understood, but by sowing seeds of dissentions, and other ways of enticing,
whereby a man may seek to make another man's wife his own, by the Law of the
Jews; which allowed a man, to put away a wife that pleased him not. And
therefore, the rest of the precept must be weighed in the same Balance; to
forbid any way of fraud, or force, whereby a man may make his neighbors goods
his own. Therefore the matter of this precept is expressed by (...) Mark X. 13.
And the Jews reduce the precepts of not coveting, or lusting, under the title
of rapine and oppression, as you may see in Maimoni. And therefore, whether you
restrain St. Paul's thou shall not covet, Romans VII. 7. to that which this
precept forbids; or enlarge it to that which is forbidden by the other four;
Christians are, by this precept, forbidden to entertain any motion of lust
toward that which is another man's. And St. Austines observation; that the sum
of the Law is comprised in the first precept, commanding the love of God, and
the last, forbidding concupiscence; is fully verified, understanding the love
of God to be commanded by all the five precepts; comprising, all of them, the
whole duty of a Christian to God; But the Love of a man's Neighbor, by the
other five; forbidding any lust toward a man's own advantage, by another man's
disadvantage. And so you see, what a Christian prays for, in praying to God to
have mercy upon him, for any thing, wherein he has offended against any
precept of his Law, for the past: and to give him Grace to keep it for the
future. In particular, for the fourth Commandment; that, if he will pray as a
Christian should pray, he must pray to God to have mercy upon him, in
whatsoever he has not rested from the works of the first Adam; begging Grace
to do it for the future.

CHAP. XXIV.
That no Clergy man ought to be of more Dioceses then one. Of inferior Orders
in the Clergy, and their Offices. The conversation of the Clergy, and the use
of Church goods. The ground for promotions to higher degrees. The Universities
may be serviceable to some part of this Discipline. Reasons for it. Public
fame of sin to be purged by Ecclesiastical process. Sinners convict by Law not
to Communicate before Penance. The Cure of notorious sin the Bishops Office.
The Church not Reformed without restoring Penance, Public or Private. What
means there is left, for the restoring of it.

I Have yet two particulars to mention, both, much to be desired, That no
Clergy man ought to be of more D^o^eses then one.
for the justifying of that Reformation which we profess. The one is an*
express Canon of the Whole Church, concerning the discipline of the Clergy: The
other is an evident consequence of the like Canon; in this estate, when
Religion is settled by the Law of the Kingdom; concerning the discipline of the
People. The former is the Restoring of that Canon of the Whole Church, which
confineth all Orders of the Clergy to their respective Churches. In the
Language of this time, it signifies the voiding of all Privileges to hold
Church preferment in more Dioceses then one. It is the evident consequence of
that Order which the Whole Church has derived from the Act of the Apostles
themselves; constituting several Cities, and the Territories thereof, the seats
of several Churches and their Dioceses. It is manifest that this Order was in
force, (though in a diverse measure in diverse Countries) from the beginning,
all over Christendom: And that with the like respect to the Churches of Mother
Cities, in all Provinces. It is also manifest, that the Canon grounded upon
this Order was in force, till the Usurpation of the Sea of Rome, seeking
Benefices for their creatures all over Christendom, authorized the dissolving
of it, by privileges, the greatest benefit whereof themselves enjoyed. So that,
the surceasing of it being an abuse of the Papacy, our professing of
Reformation requires the restoring of it.

But, the restoring of it will signify more, then the terms of Of inferior
Orders in the Clergy, and their Offices.
it express. It will infer the restoring of some part of that ancient
Discipline of the Clergy, upon which, the credit and authority thereof, with
and over the People, from the beginning of Christianity, was grounded. It is
well enough known, how very anciently, how very generally, inferior Orders of
Clergy were instituted by the Church, under the Hierarchy founded by the
Apostles, for a sense to St. Paul's Rule; that no Novice should be Ordained.
For, when Christianity was propagated all over; then, those that had lived mere
Laymen all their lives might as well be counted Novices in Christianity,
compared with them that were grown up from their youth in these inferior
Orders, as those that were newly converted to Christianity in St. Paul's time.
The employment of these Order; in Reading the Lessons, in singing the Psalms,
in attending on the person of the Bishop, and the Orders of their Superior^, in
the ministry of Ecclesiastical Offices, was most commonly but an exercise for
the time. The exercise of their humility, their meekness and patience, their
sobriety, and content in a mean condition; living upon some small pittance,
which the stock of the Church was able to allow, without prejudice to the poor;
was that which made them fit to be advanced to higher degrees. The study of
the Scriptures was the employment of the time that remained to spare, from
their attendance upon these Ministeries. For, as for other studies, while
Idolatry continued in credit in the World, it was generally suspected for
scandalous, to study the learning which Idolaters had brought forth.

True it is, many of them, not being book-learned, or otherwise content with so
Religious a poverty: and living sometimes by The conversation of the Clergy,
and the use of Church goods.
their hand-work, (that they might charge the Church the less) as well as upon
their pittances, looked not after higher degrees. Others, embracing a Religious
life, and having means for their support, thought it a scandal to their
profession, to receive any thing from the Church; knowing that what they spared
must come to the poor. And generally, innumerable of all Orders, especially
Bishops and Priests, taking upon them their Orders, gave up their estates to
charitable uses. For it was scandalous for those that gave them not up, to live
otherwise, then those, that had nothing to maintain them but the allowance of
the Church, did live. But, to increase their estates out of Church goods was a
thing which the Canons not only prohibited, but made void. For all Canons, from
the Canon of the Apostles, to those at this day, in force in the Church of
Rome, disable the Clergy to dispose of Church goods by last Will and Testament.
The authorizing of the Clergy to Marry, brought in upon consideration of very
great necessity, must needs derogate from the obligation of this Rule, in point
of Conscience. For, it must needs infer a Right to provide for Wives and
Children, which the Church allows, out of Church goods. But it can by no
means abrogate the same, without altering the State of the Clergy; (professing
retirement from the World beyond other Christians,) without extinguishing the
Interest of the poor in the goods of the Church; both of them subsisting by
Gods Law, and therefore by no means to be extinguished. And therefore, it is
requisite that the Married Clergy content themselves, with a sober maintenance,
and provision, for themselves, and the disposing of their Children in the
World, without converting the goods of the Church to raise them estates. For it
is utterly a mistake to think, that Church goods were provided, to the end that
the Clergy might equal the port of their parallel Ranks in the Laity, in
expense. It is much against the intent of the Canons, that the Clergy should
maintain familiarity with the Laity, by correspondences in entertainments, or
other occasions of promiscuous conversation; such as their Office brings not
forth. For, that Hospitality which Parsonages, and other Benefices are
chargeable with, is not the entertainment of their equals among the Laity; but
the providing for the distressed wayfarers, or those that are from home upon
such occasions, as charity requires* to support: besides the casual
necessities of the poor, either at home; that would attend upon the service of
God, but that their honest labor will not bear them out in it; or abroad, that
appear to be in present distress, whatsoever the occasion may be, that puts
them to try the charity of Christians. In fine, there is nothing more contrary
to the profession of the Clergy, then too great indifference in conversing with
the Laity, of what rank soever. For, the authority which ought to be in them,
for the advising, exhorting, instructing, and reproving of all sorts of People;
whom their ranks may call them to converse with, upon occasions which their
Office either breeds, or allows; stands upon this ground; that voluntary
familiarity engages them not any way to approve those actions, which they
should rather discountenance.

And this was the* ground for the Rule of promoting the The ground for
promotions to higher degrees.
Clergy to higher degrees: and in fine, to the Bishoprics of their respective
Churches. For it is true, by the leave of the Bishop, being dismissed, they
might hold their degree in another Church. But the expectation of being
promoted lay in the trial that they gave of themselves; and in their merit from
their own Church. No man could pretend any thing to it, in any other Church,
Regularly. How much, the translating of Bishops is against the Rule of the
Primitive Church, appears by Constantines commending Eus^bius of Caesarea, for
refusing the Sea of Antiocbia; by the reproaches extant, of the other Eusebius,
the supporter of* Arius, for removing from Berytus to Nicomedia. True it is, it
was dispensed in upon great occasions. But every privilege is an exception to a
Law. Always, the service which every one did his Church was that which entitled
him to the nomination of the Clergy, to the suffrage or approbation of the
people, to the consent of the Suffragant Bishops; and especially of the
Metropolitan. This was, and will be always, the Catholic form of electing
Bishops. The interest of the Crown is well enough consistent with it; providing
a Negative for it; that any man may be refused, whom the Crown shall not
approve. The dependence of the People upon their Bishops, which the interest of
Christianity necessarily requires, cannot be maintained otherwise.

The means to bring this education of the Clergy, and by consequence, the
discipline grounded upon it, out of use, is The Universities may be serviceable
to some part of this Discipline.
said to be the erecting of Universities in these Western parts of
Christendom. For this was, without question, a far shorter way to the knowledge
of the Scriptures, the Canons, and the Rites and Customs of the Church. But it
was the way also to loose that gravity, that sobriety, that abstinence and
meekness, upon which the credit of the Clergy with the people had been raised.
And by that time, or rather long before, corruption in the chief Guides of the
Church must needs have rendered inferior degrees conformable. It is not my
meaning, to insist upon the restoring of the ancient Discipline; which nothing
but the wisdom of* Gods Spirit, and Tradition from the Apostles, could have
furnished the simplicity of the Primitive Christians with. The Discipline of
the Universities may be serviceable to the Church, may it be recovered from
that licentiousness, and disobedience, which Anarchy has privileged in youth.
I insist upon that which I have proposed already, though no heed is given to
it. The general Rule of the Church, to found Bishoprics in Cities, was not
every where observed in England. Some Dioceses are so large, that the Cathedral
Churches cannot be made serviceable, under the Bishop, to the Government of
the Whole Diocese. If Colleges of Presbyters were erected in all the Head Towns
of Counties, the youth of the Counties that pretend to the Clergy, restoring
this Canon, must be under the inspection of the same. If, before their going
to the University, they were listed under them, as expecting employment and
maintenance under them; that is, within the County; then must they make account
to approve their conversations and studies to them, as having no other way to
live, in that estate to which they addict themselves. As for the course of
finding employment and maintenance for them, I will go no further to
particulars, then I have done. It is enough, that the intention should be, the
restoring of the Primitive Canons, as the estate of this time will require, or
allow.

It would be no small gain, that, by restoring this Canon, Reasons for it.
the complaint of pluralities would be silenced. For, that persons, whose
abilities and trust are approved to the Bishop, by information of the said
Presbyters, should have the care of more then one Church; would be no more
inconvenience, then that those Presbyters have a care of the County, the Bishop
of the Diocese. Always supposing, that the incumbent upon the Cure, and the
rate of his maintenance, be allowed, or rather constituted by the Bishop, to
whom that right originally belongs. I will say no more to justify this
Proposition, but this; That he who is obnoxious to several Churches; that is,
to several Dioceses; either as to the duty of Governing, or of being Governed,
can by no means be accountable to both; according to that account, which the
constitution of the Catholic Church requires, of every Order and Degree of
the Clergy. And again, that, seeing all exemptions, privileging against the
Ordinary Rule and Government of the Church, are the effects and consequences of
the Papacy, and the Usurpations thereof; that the Reformation which we profess
cannot be justified in it self, (though, in comparison, it may abate of the
abuse which went before) without restoring a Rule of such consequence. Bu^ all
this while, it is no part of my intent, that those who are presently possessed,
by the Law of the Land, should be presently destituted. But that a course be
provided, for the future, to which the world may be disposed by degrees.

In the second place, for the justifying of our Reformation, Public fame of
sin to be purged by Ecclesiastical process.
and toward restoring the Discipline of Penance; it is requisite, that all
Malefactors, convicted by Law, of capital or infamous crimes; or others of as
great malice to God, though not so destructive to Civil Society; should stand
Excommunicate, when their lives and liberties are saved, till they satisfy the
Church, of their conversion to God. The Law of this Land, providing no other
trial for sins of uncleanness, but that of the Ecclesiastical Courts, has
hitherto enabled them to proceed to the trial of public scandals, by deposing
witnesses ex officio. Which, according to the rest of the ignorance and malice
of the blessed Reformation; has been construed for an Usurpation upon the
liberties of Christian people. For it is manifest, that, under the Old
Testament, the Rulers of Gods ancient people were able, every one within the
Sphere of his authority, to oblige all men to answer upon Oath, in any thing,
wherein, they should adjure them to answer. For upon this account, our Lord
himself, being subject to the Law, answered the adjuration of the High Priest.
And the Levitical Law prescribes a trespass Offering for him, who, being
adjured to speak his knowledge, in any business, should conceal it. This, the
Jews extend to the adjurations of private persons, if made in open Court. But
there is no question, that the Princes and Judges of that People, each in the
matter of his Office, obliged their Inferiors to answer their knowledge; So that
they were perjured ipso facto, concealing that which they knew of any man's
cause. Under the Gospel, it is evident, that the Bishop, in Consistory with his
Presbyters, did try all scandals in the Church, by summoning all persons within
the Diocese, to witness their knowledge. And that to this effect; That if any
man were detected to have concealed his knowledge, he became thereby liable to
Penance, as for a heinous sin. And Constantine the Great, authorizing by an Act
of the Empire, yet extant, the Sentences of Bishops, in all causes, that should
be brought to them by consent of parties; gives this reason for it; Because
their authority was able presently to discover that, which Civil Courts could
not bring to light by tedious suits. Whereby it appears, that all Christians
found themselves tied to answer the truth, which their Pastors summoned them to
declare, for discharge of their conscience. Christianity being corrupted, by
the coming of the World into the Church; it might become requisite, that the
generality of this authority should be restrained within such bounds, as
emergent abuses might oblige the Law to provide. But, when a Power so nearly
concerning Christianity, is cried down for an Usurpation upon the Church; it
appears that Christianity is at a low ebb, if they who understand so little
in the Scriptures, or in matters concerning the Church, dare undertake to Reform
it. Adultery is one of the sins, which the ancient Church, in some places,
durst not warrant forgiveness; And therefore, did not restore Aulterers to the
Communion, no not at the point of death. If the Law therefore provide no other
trial for it, but by the Christian Court; to take away that means of trial
which the Church inheriteth of Gods ancient people, is, in some measure, to
authorize adultery in a Christian Kingdom; That is, to call down Gods vengeance
upon it. Rather, it should be provided, that inquisition after all scandals,
upon public fame, might be authorized, upon terms fit to prevent abuses;
though not for civil punishment; which the Christian Court should have nothing
to do with; yet for the bringing of sin under Penance.

And therefore much more, that sinners which are become ^^torious Sinners
convict ^y ^^w n^^ ^^ Communicate before Penance.
by conviction in Court, according to the Civil Law of the Land, ought not to
be admitted to the Communion; wi^ho^^ satisfying the Church, by performing fit
Penance, that God is satisfied. And the Curate indeed seems to be enabled by
the present Law, to refuse all such the Communion, much more; If he be able
to refuse those that seem scandalous, till they be tried. And, if he do not
what he is able to do, must answer God for the soul which he poysoneth, by
giving him the Eucharist, who bars himself the effect of it; His Repentance
not being manifest, as his sin is. But if the Law will not leave out the
Curate, in refusing him till he have satisfied; The choice is hard for him
that has a family, to forfeit his Benefice, by doing that, which, the Law that
places him in it bears him not out in; though the power of the Keys, which he
has by Gods Law, oblige him to it. And therefore, there may be hope of mercy
for him that is seduced, in so hard a choice. But then the vengeance must
remain upon the Kingdom, and upon those that have Power to right our common
Christianity, and do not. The Reformation of Ecclesiastical Law, intended under
Henry the VIII, and Edward the VI, has provided in this case. And, he that
considers with conscience, shall have much ado to justify the Title of a
Christian Kingdom, where this right is not maintained.

I go no further at present, then this step to the restoring of The Cure of
notorio^^ sin the Bish^ps Office.
Penance, whether Public or Private. I see there is very good hope, that an
end will be put to all that abominable merchandise of Public Penance, which
has been so just a scandal in this Church. Such abuses must be taken, by
those that value their Superiors as they ought, for Reformed, so soon as they
are r^s^med into the Bishops own hands. For, no man ought to be scandalized,
that all such sins shall not be put to public Penance; seeing it will be in
the Bishop, either in his own person, or, by committing any difficult case to
the most skillful and most faithful of his Clergy; to attain satisfaction of a
man's conversion in private, before he restore him to the Communion, by loosing
him from his sin. And, the conscience of his Inferiors shall stand discharged,
ministering the same upon his Order. In the mean time, the Bishops conscience
stands answerable to God, both for the soul that shall perish, by being
reconciled, before qualified therefore; and for the infection of the Church, by
the sin which is readmitted before it be mortified. The case is the very same
in all sins, taking all for convict of them, which the Law convicteth. And
therefore, in all those which the Law convicteth not; whenever it shall
enable the Church, (as the Law of a Christian Kingdom should do) to convict
them by inquisition ex Off^cio, to the effect of curing them, by reduing them
under Penance. The Church not Reformed without restoring Penance, Public or
Priv^te.


Now it is true; Public Penance is, and was at the Reformation, utterly
surceased in the Church of Rome. But private Penance was in use, as still it
continues, (though under those great abuses which I have taxed) as the prime
institution of our Lord and his Apostles; though seldom mentioned in the
Records of the Church, in comparison of Public Penance, so famous in all the
primitive Fathers. For, the Christian Court being afterward divided, into the
outward Court of the Church, and the inward Court of the Conscience; (the one
concerning all Jurisdiction, to any effect of Excommunication; the other
concerning sin that is not Excommunicated, because not notorious, but
voluntarily made known) the sentence of Excommunication being released, a man
comes not to the Communion, in any case of sin, till he voluntarily undergo
the Keys of the Church, by opening that sin in this inward Court, which he
puts the outward Court to bring to light. And thus were the Keys of the Church
in force, before the Reformation, under the Sea of Rome. Now, were public
Penance restored, then might it clearly be said, that a Reformation were
effected in this point. For, Penance absolutely so called, in the ancient
Church, is Public Penance. Some sins of less consequence were referred to some
one of the Pre^byters, to be cured in private; by the antientest Customs and
Canons of the Church. But there is but little mention of them, in comparison of
the greater that were restored by public Penance. So, the restoring of public
Penance would be effectively Reformation; that is, the restoring of that which
was; though private Penance were not enjoined by Law. And of necessity, there
would be great hope, that Christians, understanding, by the use of Public
Penance, the need they have of the Keys of the Church, to assure them the cure
of their sins; would be moved in conscience, voluntarily to seek that help,
for the cure of their secret sins. For, by that means first came private
Penance into so general use, that it was possible for the Church of Rome, to
procure secret Confession once a year, to be settled for a Law of all Christian
States under it. And, did the Law here maintain public Penance, then were the
Haeresie of the Fanatics, and all imaginations tending to any degree of it,
quite put to flight; the people receiving this impression from the Law, that
their sins which no man knows, but only God, cannot be cured at an easier
rate, then those which the world knows. But as the matter is, so long as the
Keys of the Church are not in force, that is, in use, for the restoring of
sinners to the Communion, upon presumption that they are restored to Grace,
grounded upon the works of Repentance which they show; it is a hard task to
maintain the claim of Reformation, in the Church. For the Church is founded
upon the Power of the Keys. And therefore, where that Power is not in force;
as, during this time of our blessed Reformation; there it is a Church in hope,
and right, rather then in deed, and in being. We publicly profess to seek the
restoring of Penance. And, because we have not effectively sought that which
we profess to seek; God has brought upon us that heavy vengeance which we
have felt. The mavelous work that he has showed in restoring us, obliges
all to lay it to heart; and never to give over the thought of it, till, by
degrees, it be restored in some measure. Christian souls perish, because they
know not what help they want. The blessing of the Church, and the Communion of
the Eucharist, being ministered to all without difference; give no man any
ground of salvation, by being allowed it. And yet the Church is provided by
God, that all may have ground for that hope, by being of the Church. All that
Minister the Office, by Ministering the same, maintain simple souls in a
confidence, that they want nothing requisite. Whereas, it is not enough for our
discharge, that any man may, unless there be probable means, whereby all may
be saved. But that can by no means be maintained, where the Power of the Keys
is not in force. What means there is left, for the restoring of it.


The difficulty, indeed, of the business appears as much, by the scandals which
the Scottish Presbyteries, and our Triers here, for the very little time they
had, have given; as by those which served to bring Auricular Confession out of
date. And no marvel. For, all the cries for Discipline, which our Presbyterians
make, seem to demand; that their Power in it be as arbitrary as their Prayers.
No Rule, no bounds, no limits proposed, within which it shall be ministered;
which is the difficulty. Nor is it possible to reduce the severity of the
ancient Canons; which the Church of Rome it self has abated to secret Penance.
And yet, supposing the premises, it will be necessary to follow them, in such
a form, as the World at present may bear; Not referring the measure of trial,
to be required for the verifying of a man's conversion, to the discretion of a
Curate, or a Parish; but referring it to the Bishop, and to those whom he
shall discharge his burden upon, in the Cathedral Church, in those Colleges
which I have proposed, or in the Diocese. And yet, it seems necessary to refer
the witnessing of the effect to the Curate, and to the Parish. For, what can
be more reasonable, then to presume of a good effect, when they that see a
man's daily conversation attest it? As for the measure; it will be a great
work, for the Synods of the Provinces, to agree upon such a form, as the
Legislative Power of the Kingdom may find cause to authorize, and put in force.
Which were it effected, it would not seem unreasonable, to trust particular
Ministers with the cure of secret sins; having a Rule before their eyes, to
direct their proceeding. I say it would seem reasonable, supposing the
premises; supposing the Clergy lived in that respect to their Superiors, in
that exercise of their Deacons degree, in that sobriety, (furnishing discretion
in valuing men's actions,) which their people may have ground to trust their
souls with. For at the present, the blessed Reformation having so far persuaded
the People, that the Minister has nothing to do but to preach, till they be
sure of their salvation; who will marvel, that they regard not those who detest
such impostures? Nor would this be less benefit to the public Peace, and the
quiet of Superiors, even the Sovereign; Who must be content to have their
actions scanned in the Pulpit, till there be a course, whereby their people
may be conducted, in those things which the Pulpit cannot, nor ought to
decide. The Scottish Presbyters have made us understand, how well they
understand the bounds of Ecclesiastical Power; how much they desire to attempt
upon the Secular, as well in the Pulpit, as in the Consistory. And where this
great Ordinance, for the cure of sin, and the salvation of souls, is not duly
maintained, just is it with God, to make the neglect of it the seed of public
troubles; The maintenance whereof would contribute as much to the public
Peace, as to the salvation of souls.

CHAP. XXV.
Gods mercies and judgments require the perfecting of the Reformation which
we profess. The restoring of the Ecclesiastical Laws is not the restoring of
the Church. Yet are we not, therefore, chargeable with Schism, by the Church
of Rome. What Schism destroys the Salvation of what persons; by instances, in
the most notable Schisms. Difficulty of Salvation on both sides, the
Reformation remaining unperfect. An instance hereof, in the Cure of souls
departing, by the Order in force. A Supplication for a full Debate of all
matters in difference. The ground of Resolution, one Catholic Church, the first
and chief point of the Debate. The consequence of it, in Uniting the Reformed
Churches. An instance, in the having of Images in Churches. An Objection for
the Church of Rome answered. That which excuses the Reformed Churches excuses
not our Schismatics.

Gods mercies, and judgments, require the perfecting of the Reformation which
we profess.
IT will not become a good Christian to think much, that these things are
called upon at this time, before this Church be restored to the benefit of the
Laws, which the Order thereof is to be established and enforced. It will not
become any such to say; That the same complaint might have been made, while the
Church of England was the Church of England: and before the late breaches in
it; And therefore might be spared, when all ought to thank God, that we may
be as we were. For, the incomparable mercy that God has showed, in restoring
the Laws with the Crown, and the Church with both, would leave a mark of
ingratitude upon him, whosoever, having nothing to say against the truth,
nothing against the great weight and high consequence of the premises; should
not think it worth the pains, for all Estates of the Church and Kingdom, to
endeavor the redressing of them. Especially, the profession of Reformation
obliging all, that think Christians bound to stand to that which they profess,
not to rest in that which our predecessors had obtained, by the first attempt
of it. For, notwithstanding the great difficulties, which the extreme factions
of Papists and Puritans, in Church and State, had cast in the way of all right
endeavors, to perfect the Reformation begun, according to the true ground and
measure of it; We see what a severe account it has pleased God to take, of
all Estates in the Kingdom, for laying aside the thought of perfecting that,
which, in so high a point as that of Penance, they had acknowledged to be
defective. I do not intend to say, that the Sacrileges committed under Henry
VIII. had no hand in this account. For, there is no such mark to glorify Gods
providence with, as when it is visible, that the punishment springs out of the
sin. Nor is there any mean more visible toward the advancing of that confusion
which we have seen, then the applying of the endowment of Churches to common
uses; being found, at the dissolution, by the irregular Power of the Papacy, in
the hands of Monasteries. But of that guilt, the Crown and Kingdom seems to
stand in a good measure discharged, by restoring that part, which the Church
stood invested of, by the same title, (as we see they have done) to the due
property; in such a rate as the public peace might endure. As for private
persons, that stand invested of the like goods by the like Title, there is
reason to hope, that their account redoundeth not to the account of the
Kingdom, in the sight of God; notwithstanding that the Law allows them to use
their own conscience, in owning or disowning their Title. For, where the Unity
of the Church seems to be concerned, it has been always the practice of the
Church, to forbear the use of the Keys, and to admit those to the Communion,
whose actions it intends not to warrant; leaving them to answer God for the
same, knowing that the Church warranteth them not. The Church of Rome, in Q.
Mary's days, followed this pattern; reconciling this Kingdom to the Communion
thereof, without restitution of that wrong, which it claimed to be done under
Henry VIII. But, if the Kingdom be liable to an account, for the sin of
particular persons; in detaining Church goods, and* by that means, hindering the
salvation of Christian people; Shall we not think, that the neglect of
perfecting the Reformation begun, though obstructed by the difficulty which I
have alleged, is, and ought to be taken for the ground of that reckoning,
which God has made with us? And therefore, that we are not to lay aside the
thought of it, so long as there appears any means of proceeding to it. Now, it
seems manifest to common reason, that there can be no such opportunity, for
improving the Laws of the Kingdom, by which Religion is to be established; as
while the minds of men, after the breaches which we have seen, remain unsettled
to any Order in Church matters. For, before the breach, there is appearance
enough, that all means of doing this were studiously obstructed, by the Puritan
party in Parliament. And it will appear, if it be well considered, that this
is it that made it popular; having always just cause of complaint; (which can
never be wanting in any Civil Laws; And therefore, not in those Civil Laws,
whereby Religion is settled) but always pretending an unjust way of redressing
the same.

But there is a greater reason for us to think, that the Church The restoring
of the Ecclesiastical Laws of the Land is not the restoring of the Church.
of England will not be restored, by the restoring of those Civil Laws of the
Land, which gave force to the Order of it; After those manifest and notorious
breaches, which we have seen in it. For it is visible, that it is the Secular
power only that is acknowledged, by those that return from their Schism, and
conform themselves to the Ecclesiastical Laws which it inforceth, in
consideration of the temporal reward or punishment, which they are inacted
with. It is now found to be the sin of Superiors, when such things are imposed
upon tender consciences, as they are offended at; Not the sin of them who
conform themselves to that which is enjoined. And, all that has been
pretended, for a change in the Laws, seems now to be made a mere Office of
Charity to the Kingdom; That it might not sin, in imposing upon tender
consciences, that which they were offended at; who are safe enough from
sinning, all the while that they submit to it. In like manner, they who, to be
capable of Benefices, get to be Ordained anew; because the Ordination was
void, which they had from those who had nothing to do to give it; do profess
openly enough, that they do it, not, because they thought their void Orders
defective; but to obtain the privileges, which the Law of the Land annexeth to
that Ordination which it protecteth. At which rate, the Oath of Canonical
Obedience it self will tie them in conscience, only to themselves; That is, to
avoid those temporal penalties, which the Law punishes disobeying the Ordinary
with. In the mean time, the Fanatics are owned by them upon all occasions:
And, not only the Schism of the Congregations is passed over, for a weakness
of tender consciences; but, that damnable error, of assurance of salvation
without assurance of Christianity; the fry that has spawned all the
Congregations of Enthusiasts and Fanatics; must go for a frailty of the Godly,
in professing the true consequence of common Principles. And, seeing all
severity of Penalties, which may restrain the License of such Conventicles,
must needs insinuate an invitation, of returning to Communion with the Church,
for those who would avoid them; It is much to be considered, that they who
shall return, without disowning their Schism; which is of it self always
notorious; Or the perverse doctrines, which have been notoriously owned for the
ground of it; do manifestly bring with them their profession into the Church.
For, returning, only that they may avoid the temporal Penalties which it
infers, they are at liberty, in point of reputation, as well as of
conscience, to practice the Maxim which Michiavel teaches; to make themselves
of that party which they intend to overthrow; as not having engaged with the
Church, upon profession of conscience. It is not for nothing, that the Rules of
the Church, from the beginning, have made them Haereticks and Schismatics, as
to the Church, that communicate with Haereticks and Schismatics. It is not for
nothing, that they admit them not to return, without disowning their Schisms,
or their Haeresies. It is not for nothing, that they admit not the Clergy, that
have been involved in them, in their own Orders; But render them incapable of
that trust for the future. The reason for all is the same. The profession of
the mouth intitleth to the visible privilege of the Church, in communion with
it; the sincerity thereof in the heart, to the invisible privilege of
Christianity, with God. And, though there be great reason to hope; that
communion with the Church, and the daily use of it may be a mean to restore
the heart into a right relish of that, which, the distance that has been
causes men to distaste beyond measure; yet is there nothing but the solemnity
of profession, to render such a change visible. And therefore, it will not
serve to justify the common cause, till time render the effect notorious.

In the mean time, the reason of the distance, which we hold Yet are we not,
therefore, chargeable with Schism, by the Church of Rome.
with the Church of Rome, remains the same; and therefore the measure of it.
The abuses which created the necessity, for parts of the Church to Reform
themselves, without the Whole, remain the same. Only we are left without hope
of amendment; seeing the Council of Trent received without it. So, no terms of
reconcilement, but those of conquest; which, how should this Church and Kingdom
be obliged to accept of; to the betraying of all the souls, which must needs
perish by those abuses? And therefore, allowing the due value of that sin which
Schism signifies, in the party that causes it; we shall not need to fear
the charge of it, though both parties are visibly in the state of it. For, the
Unity of the Church being next, in consideration and weight, to the substance
of Christianity, which the being of the Church presupposes; The Faith which
only justifies, is seen, in making good that profession, which intitleth us to
be members of the Church. But that Charity, whereby that Faith is brought into
effect, is seen, in the first place, in maintaining the Unity thereof; Which, a
private Christian maintains, only by continuing a member of it. So, a
Christian, as a Christian, fails of his salvation, by failing of that which a
Christian professes as a Christian. But a Christian as a member of the Church,
fails of his salvation, by failing of that which a Christian professes, as a
member of the Church; namely, by forsaking the Unity of the Church. But, a man
cannot seem to forsake the Unity of the Church, by pursuing the integrity of
that Christianity, upon which it is founded. If the corruption thereof be so
great, as may seem to render the communion thereof ineffectual, to the
salvation of them that use it; it will be Charity to join for the restoring of
it, to so good an effect; though a breach succeed, by the misunderstanding of
those who refuse to join for that purpose. Though diverse mistakes be
committed, in a work of so great weight and consequence; the want of Charity
will lie on that side, which shall refuse that reason, which, had it
condescended to, those mistakes might have been redressed. How much more, when
there is no other choice left, but, either to continue at the distance under
which we were borne; or, to give our selves up to the will of those, who, not
having given sati^faction in the trust which they undertake, condescend to no
terms of better assurance for the future?

And truly, though the sin of Schism hinder salvation more What Schism
destroys the salvation of what persons, by instances, of the most notable
Schisms.
then any other sin; because it involveth the body of the Church, and so
hinders the salvation of more; yet is there no cause to think, that all who
are involved in the state of Schism, are involved in the sin of it. The less
cause there is for it, the greater breach of charity by it. Therefore, the
greater, the more visible the causes are, of that change which occasions it,
the less is to be imputed to them that follow such causes; Especially to
private Christians, when such causes are as visible on the one side, as the
interest of each man's salvation is visible to the contrary on the other side.
Besides, I said before, that Schism in the Church is the same which Civil War,
in the state of the World. Now, though War cannot be just on both sides, for
the heads and causes of it; yet, for those that follow their heads, in causes
too difficult for private persons to judge, it will be no guilt of blood, to
follow that authority which appears to them Visible. Which if it be true, as
it is evidently reasonable, there will no question remain, that there may be
salvation on both sides of a Schism. The Schisms of the Novatians,
Montanists, Donatists, Meletians, and perhaps diverse others, were grounded upon
such causes, as, the Unity of the Church did no less visibly outweigh, then the
consent thereof to the contrary was visible. Notwithstanding, so long as the
Faith remained entire: (as, it does not appear, that they disbelieved, from
their beginning, any thing necessary for the salvation of all, to be believed)
and the Offices of Gods Service were ministered by them, according to the Order
of the Church; as not differing about any of them; I should be as loath to
condemn all the partisans, as to excuse the causes of them, to or from eternal
death. How much more in the Schisms of the Luciferians, of that at Antiochia,
between Meletius and Paulinus, of that between Rome and Constantinople, in the
cause of Acacius, and* perhaps in others; in which there was only breach of
Communion, upon some discontent, in the governing of matters in the Church;
without either difference of Faith, or in the Offices of Gods service. I
confess, Pope Gelasius de vinculo an^thematis, in the cause of Acacius, takes
it for granted all along, that the want of Communion with the Church of Rome
rendered all liable to that curse, which Christians, by failing of the duty of
Christians; either as Christians, or as members of the Church; do incur, upon
the sentence of the Church. But, he who admits that constitution of the
Church which I maintain, will not easily admit the sentence of a part, (suppose
all the West engaged in the Act of the Church of Rome) able to damn all the
Christians of the East, that adhered only to the successors of Acacius; not
being able to redress his miscarriage, which his successors themselves owned
not. Rather is the Church of Rome to answer God, for the souls that miscarried,
by maintaining the breach open, beyond that which the good of Christendom
required. Nay, I cannot condemn the opinion of those, who allow a possibility
of salvation* in the Sects of the Nestorians in the East, and the Jacobites in
the South; notwithstanding that they stand divided from the Church, upon
occasion of the Councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon, which it imbraceth. For, it
is possible, that they may understand the terms of their distance in such a
sense, as may very well stand with the Decrees of those Councils: So that, the
difference being occasioned by personal discontents; though it were mortal to
those who brought it to pass, yet may it not be so to those that know not how
to help it; if it occasion not the want of means necessary* to salvation
otherwise. But this is not to say, that these parties are not bound to concur
to the visible Unity of Gods Church, by communion in the Offices of his
service. Should they profess themselves free from an obligation concerning all
Christians, as members of the Church; I would not excuse those that take upon
them to continue such breaches, because they know not that which they should
know. But those that are only sufferers in such breaches, I should not exclude
from the hope of salvation upon that account; not wanting otherwise, that which
is necessary to the salvation of all Christians; which, the divisions of the
Church must needs render very difficult for the greatest part to obtain. This I
would say much more, of the Schism between the Greek and Latin Church; being
well assured, that there is no such defect in the Faith of the Greek Church, as
may warrant the Latin Church to sentence them for Haereticks. And, as for
Schism, that the Latin Church; by undertaking more then one part of the
Church can undertake, without the consent of the other, in matters of common
concernment; has the greater hand in it; whatsoever the truth be, of the
Disputes that occasion it. And therefore, it is much to be lamented, that the Sea of Rome should pursue no other terms, of reuniting those distressed and
persecuted Churches unto it self, but those of absolute submission to the
dictates thereof, without why or wherefore: Not being afraid to raise them
persecution by unbelievers, that they may be necessitated to that submission,
which will increase their persecution from their Sovereigns. Seeing then, that
we have so many instances of Schisms, which exclude not the hope of salvation;
especially for those that are sufferers in them; that is, for private
Christians; How far ought we to be, from yielding to the unreasonable demands
of the Missionaries; charging the Schism upon the Reformation, whereof, the
abuses which they maintain are the only true cause? For, though it was always,
and still is a very difficult thing, to see the true point of Resormation, so
as to bring those, that feel the abuses, to consent in it; yet, the abuses
being both visible and palpable, the faults committed by the mistaking of it
will be imputable to those, that will condescend to no reason; as well as to
those, who proceed to a change, without due information in the ground and
measure of it. And therefore, upon that account, there can be no bar to the
salvation of private Christians, that are no actors, but sufferers in such
breaches; though, the misunderstanding of the due ground and measure of the
difference must needs occasion the Ioss of infinite souls, by hindering them of
the means that is truly necessary for the salvation of Christian.

This is that which I said before, that Schism, as War, may Difficulty of
salvation on both sides, the Reformation remaining unpersect.
be unjust on both sides; The charge of which injustice, as it will lie upon
those which are actors in it, and causes of it, having power to abate it, and
not employing the same to so good a purpose; so, it leaves a possibility of
salvation for both sides. And that is no more then has been said, from the
beginning of our Reformation, by all that allow the Church of Rome a true
Church. But that difficulty of attaining salvation on both sides, which the
Schism inflameth, will be imputable to those that maintain the extremes,
taking offense at the due ground and terms of composing it. And this, I
confess, c^eates a question upon that which remains, for our Ecclesiastical
Laws to redress. For, if they enforce not the due use of the Power of the Keys;
so great a part of the conduct of Christian souls to salvation; and that it is
not to be enforced, without restoring Discipline in the Clergy; How shall it
be visible, that a simple Papist sins in being a Recusant? How shall he, that
invites him to be no Recusant, assure him of means of salvation visibly
sufficient? How shall the State be enabled, to inflict upon him the legal
penalties of his Recusancy, upon other crimes? For it is manifest, that, from
those whom the Civil Law of the Land qualifies for the Cure of souls, without
any ground of pretense, that they do concur to the true intent of the Church,
in ministering the power of the Keys; there is not the least appearance, for any
hope of that help, which the Office professes. Indeed, alleging on the other
side, those abuses in private Penance, that neglect of public Penance, which
the Church of Rome allows, we allege a sufficient reason for a change,
without the authority of it: And a possibility of salvation, notwithstanding a
defect in redressing the same. But this possibility will consist in the more
then ordinary diligence of private Christians; considering the snares, which
division multiplieth: and laboring to supply themselves in that, wherein the
public Order of the Church, provided by God to supply them of it, saileth of
the effect which God intends. A consideration which, though the late
distraction made it more visible, yet will always remain in force, till the due
ground and measure of Reformation take effect.

It will be worth the while to instance this, in the Cure of An instance
her^of, in the Cure of s^ul^ departing according to the Order in force.
souls departing this life, according to the Order in force. In the beginning
of Christianity, some sins were questionable, in some parts of the Church,
whether curable by the Keys of the Church, or not. The Schism of Novatianus,
pretended, for the ground of it, the re-admitting of Apostates: As that of
Montanus, in part, the re-admitting of Adulterers. But, before all were come to
agreement in it, the same severity had been practiced in the Church, without
Schism. They lest such persons to Gods mercy: They engaged not the Church in
warranting them pardon. The Council of Nicaea seems to have put an end to all
difformity in the case. There is no mention of denying the Eucharist, upon the
bed of death, after that. But, supposing public sinners admitted to public
Penance; thereby to give proof of the sincerity of their repentance: And
binding them over to the remainder of their Penance, escaping death. Some
Canons go so low, as to release sin, without revealing it, upon condition of
undergoing the Penance it shall require, being revealed, in case he survive.
The Church of Rome charge all Priests of absolve all at the point of death,
which it allows not all to do otherwise. As for the Reservation of Penance;
they who require Penance, not to qualify for pardon, but to satisfy the debt
of temporal pain, that remains after pardon, I suppose do, upon that account,
turn it over to Purgatory. But they, from whom, as I said before, there is no
appearance for any hope of that help, which the Keys of the Church, ministered
according to the Order of the Church, do hold forth; what can we expect of
them, toward the preparing of him that lies on the bed of sickness, for his
passage? For, the comfort which all pretend to give in that estate, may be
imagined to consist in assuring salvation, to all that once were assured of it;
to all that think themselves sure of it, by believing it, not by their
Christianity; without which there is no assurance of it. If men be not ^o much
Fanatics; perhaps he assures them of pardon trusting in the merits of
Christ, for it. Let him see his sin, let him renounce his own merits, let him
trust in the m^rit^ of Christ; which, he is sure are of more virtue and value
then his sin; and the business is done. Not considering what the Gospel
requires, to give a man interest in the merits of Christ: What it requires of
him, who shall have forfeited that interest, by grievous sin: What he has
done; for the mortisying of that concupiscence, for the appeasing of that wrath
of God, for the preventing of that sin for the future, whereby he may formerly
have committed that forfeiture. Certainly, it is no good sign in this Case,
that our people are so willing to have the Minister pray by them; but so
unwilling to hear of the Communion, because they know it requires them to take
account of themselves. Nay it is odds, that it is condescended to, at the
warning of the Curate; who must needs let slip the anthority of his Office; in
requiring account of him that expects comfort from him; by offering all that
he is able to give, before the account is tendered. In the mean time, how
shall he, who prays only by the sick, and leaves him so, as prepared for his
passage; who absolves him of all sin, without being satisfied, that he has
mortified, that he will mortify any, in case he survive; rest satisfied, that
he has done his Office; and not dismissed his patient, insufficiently
prepared for so terrible a voyage? Especially, being satisfied; that there are
two Keys in the Church, as to Christians: That it is to loose no sin, but that
which it bound before; loosing him that appears to be alive, because it bound
him, when he appeared to be dead before: That the Blessing of the Church, the
Communion of the Eucharist, and the Burial of Christians, ought to si^nifie
some reasonable presumption in the Church, that they depart in Gods peace, to
whom it allows the same. But where is that presumption, when he that is
convicted of a capital crime, shall be able to demand the Communion of his
Curate, without further satisfaction; And perhaps have his action of the Case
against him, if he refuse it? The Curate, indeed, stands excused by the Law;
as to his Superiors, and to the Church. But what will the Law, what will the
Church, what will the Curate say for themselves, at the great judgment of God;
if it appear, that a soul perishes, by this defect in the Law, according to the
which he ministers his Office? And a Recusant, in this case, may say, with
truth; that those abuses, which I have taxed the Church of Rome for allowing,
it commands not: That he may possibly meet with one, that is not tainted
with those novelties of Doctrine; But will deal faithfully with his soul in
that exigent. And therefore may hope that he sins not, in continuing a
Recusant, out of hope for that help, in this point, which he cannot expect by
conforming. And therefore, that his sin not being visible to him, in this
point, the penalties of Recusancy, at least in this regard, are inflicted
without cause. A Supplication for a full debate of all matters in difference.


Had I not proceeded thus far, in setting forth, what the justifying of the
Reformation which we profess will require, I had not set forth the ground of
that most humble supplication, which I advance upon it; together with a most
earnest adjuration (if it be lawful for Inferiors, in any case possible, to
adjure their Superiors) to and of all Estates, whom the forming of the Laws of
Religion in this Kingdom may any way concern; by the bowels of Gods mercies in
Christ, by the bitter passion of his Cross, by the merit of his sufferings, by
that ^hope of salvation which they furnish all Christians with; And, if the
good of this World be of any consideration, after so high concernments; by the
hope of his Majesty's long and prosperous Reign over us, by the blessing of his
return, by the peace which we enjoy through the same; not to think the
restoring of Religion, by the Laws of this Kingdom, the work of one sitting of
Parliament or Synod: Not to think, that a work of that consequence, and
difficulty, can be concluded and made up, by any Laws, that may presently be
provided, by any humane wisdom: Not to think the Laws presently provided, so
fixed for eternity, that further endeavors, for the perfecting of so great a
work, should be thought derogatory to the authority of Law: In fine, according
to that which I said in the beginning; to think the Laws, that may presently
be provided, ambulatory, and provisional, till all possible means shall have
been tried, to put so great a work, beyond all imputation of any visible
offense; Not thinking any pains a burden, that may show reasonable hope of a
good issue, to so high a purpose. For, as there is just cause to think, that
there remains very much means to be employed, with such a hope; So the time
now seems proper; now that there is appearance of the restoring of the
Ecclesiastical Laws of this Land; for employing the same. For, the means to be
employed will consist in a just and full debate of reason, upon principles
agreed upon between the parties, tending to reduce them unto agreement, in such
things as remain in difference. This debate may well seem dangerous to peace,
not supposing any authority to govern it, within the due bounds, and to direct
it unto the due purpose. But supposing, as we must needs suppose, all parties
liable to that authority, which the Law of the Land authorizes; because that is
acknowledged, by all parties; neither can the Secular Power allow thsoe, whom
it owns for Governors of the Church, less, then to govern and direct all
dispute, tending to satisfy all that question the Ecclesiastical Law of the
Kingdom: Nor need they desire more, for a reasonable ground of hope for good
success. There can be no ground to expect, that they who openly profess, the
Laws of Religion to be the sins of them that make them, can think their duties
discharged to God, by being instrumental, in the executing of them, to the
intent to them that make them. They must needs think themselves bound in
conscience, to deprave, and to pervert the effect of them, to their own intent,
in an infinity of particulars, which no diligence of Government can prevent or
meet with. But when, upon full and just debate it shall appear, that a change
is refused them, merely because they can show no sufficient reason for it, upon
those grounds, which the common Christianity obliges the parties to
acknowledge; condescending to all that they can show such reason for; how can
it be imagined, that any prejudice or engagement, that may be so honorably
quitted, will prevail above God and their Country, to a defiance of them that
carry not the Sword in vain?

I consess, I can hope for no good end of any such Dispute, The ground of
resolution, the being of the Catholic Church, the first and chief point of the
debate.
without supposing that sense of the Article, concerning one Catholic Church,
which has carried me through this discourse, for the Principle, upon which,
all matter in debate is to be tried. Nor can I take it for a supposition, which
they do admit of themselves. But I suppose first, that, the misunderstanding of
that which it demands being once cleared, the truth of it will be so
evident; by that reason which must satisfy for the truth of the common
Christianity; that all shall be convinced of it, by that which they allege for
themselves; as being the consequence of their own allegations. Then I suppose
further, that it is the first point to be tried, as that which, in effect,
contains more then half the trial of all the rest; Which, had it been agreed
upon, might have prevented all breaches: And without agreeing upon it, leaves
all Dispute in Religion endless, and without hope of conviction, or
satisfaction, on this side or on that. It is not, indeed, to be expected, that
Recusants will ever become a party to such an action; though no way concerned
in conscience, not to own those whom their Sovereign appoints, for Governors
of such a debate. Not because there would be any appearance, that thereby they
should own them for their Superiors: But because we find them not disposed to
own the obligation of their Christianity; requiring them to concur to it, upon
those terms; to be more ancient, then any obligation of their spiritual
Superiors to the contrary. For, if the Unity of the Church take place before
the authority of any Superiors; provided for the maintenance of it; then is
every Christian obliged to the due ground and terms of it, before the authority
of Superiors. And therefore cannot refuse them, tendered by a part; though
refused by a greater part. And therefore cannot refuse that trial; which is the
due means to bring them to light; though his Superiors refuse it. And
therefore, their refusal can be no bar to the effect of the action, once
grounded upon a supposition, enforcing the trial, by the Scriptures, expounded
by the consent of the Church; That is, within those bounds, wherein, the
agreement thereof may appear. For, the settling of those terms, upon which, the
Fanatics are either to be disowned by the Presbyterians, or owned by this
Church; As it must proceed upon that supposition, so it will render their
Recusancy, as concerning all the consequence of that issue, visibly punishable,
in those that refuse to give or take satisfaction upon so just terms. And the
consequence of the same supposition, in bounding that which is questionable in
the Laws of this Church, to the justifying of the Reformation which it
pretends, will leave it without excuse in other matters. For, the bounds of
that distance which we are to hold with the Church of Rome being the subject
of distance among our selves; As it is not possible to determine them, but upon
that supposition: So, they will oblige all Christians to that penalty, which
the Laws of a Christian Kingdom are able to inflict upon those that disobey
them, being made by virtue of the common Christianity. As for my self, it shall
be a great pleasure to me, to compromise all that I have said, either of the
Faith or Laws of the Church, to the issue of such a trial. For, there is no
reason, why I should think it a disparagment to my age, not to have seen the
due consequence of such a principle, in so many matters of so doubtful dispute,
better then, such a number of Divines or either side, as must be employed in
such a debate, can make it to appear, to those, whose authority must conduct
and govern it. That one principle remaining firm; (which this Church can never
disown, if it weigh always by the same W^ights, and me^e by the same Measures)
it shall be much pleasure to me, to see any mistake of mine, in the
consequence of it, brought to light; having a good hope to God, that so
innocent an inquiry, upon so just a principle, in a cause so difficult, and so
concerning, will serve to excuse any such mistake in his presence. The same
will serve to difference the liberty which I use, in publishing this, from the
licentiousness of those who band themselves against the Laws of their Country;
they are sure; without those terms for submission to them, upon which,
themselves cannot deny, that they shall be the Laws of Gods Church in it.
Especially, seeing I compromise as many hours of study, as much follicitude of
thought, as due a course of inquiry, into the grounds of the matter in question,
as the most of my quality can have employed to the like purpose, since the
beginning of our troubles. And, seeing this liberty must be my plea at the
great judgment of God, for any thing, wherein I may have ministered mine Office,
according to that measure, which those Laws will enforce, in which, the best of
my own private judgment requires an amendment. The consequence of the same, in
Uniting the Reformed Churches.


And the acknowledgement of this Principle puts an end to another motion,
concerning the uniting of all Reformed Churches, of all that are called
Protestants, against the Church of Rome; whether this trial proposed come to an
issue or not. For it is manifest, that, before the issue of such a trial; with
them, as among our selves; all union with them, upon account of Religion, is
but mutual toleration, providing that no breach succeed; or, that none be made
wider then presently it is, by the disclaiming of Communion between the
parties. And that is to be referred to the wisdom of Superiors; the terms
which we our selves ought to insist upon being secured, by the express
profession of that Principle, whereof they are all but the consequences. We
are to stand to Luthers appeal to a Council, that should judge by the
Scriptures alone; limiting the interpretation of the Scriptures, as the Rule to
judge by, to the consent of the Church, as the evidence for the bounds of it.
Had this limitation been expressed in their proceedings at home; (as it cannot
be said, ever to have been disclaimed) in their proceedings abroad with
Calvinists; there had been sufficient ground for preventing, not only the
particular breach between them, but the general breach with the Church of Rome.
There had been no cause, why both parties, of Reformed and Catholic, might not
have continued one Church, both Reformed and Catholic. Since so great
distances are come to pass; As it is in vain to expect an union, without
agreeing first upon the Principle of it: So it will not be safe to maintain
Communion, upon toleration of differences on foot, without protestation for
that Principle, which must maintain our own Christianity; leaving them to
themselves and to God, in all matters of difference. If this Union be demanded,
upon the account of common defense, against the Powers which own the Church of
Rome; which seems to be the in^ent of those, that would try the cause of
Religion by the sword; The same protestation will bear out all Christian Powers
in point of conscience; The interest of their good, and the good of their
Subjects, being provided for by their wisdom. For, the matters in difference
being acknowledged, by securing the principle upon which they are to be
decided; It will always be in their power, to join for the maintenance of those
Laws, whereby the Reformation is settled in their respective Sovereignties;
Without undertaking for the justice of any Laws, but those, which each
Sovereignty is to answer for, because it makes them. And the effect of this
reservation will be of great consequence, to the retaining of that
Christianity which is left us. For this limitation will exclude all Power of
joining, for the maintenance of Subjects in attempting the Reformation of
Religion, or the maintenance of the same, by force, against the Will of their
Sovereigns. The oversight of which provision, in actions of State; imputed to
the supposition of Religion, when they might as well have been entitled to
causes of Civil Right; has had a very visible hand in the troubles which we
have seen: And is the more carefully to be avoided for the future, because the
pretense is, upon all occasions, so studiously advanced, by those that have
been active in the same.

I have maintained the lawfulness of having Images in An instance in the having
of Images in Churches.
Churches. Now, considering the distance between lawful and necessary; I find
it not amiss to declare, by this instance, upon what terms, the Rule which I
have proposed; of reducing all customs of this Church to that estate, in which
we find them practiced, during the primitive times of the Catholic Church;
may be serviceable to the purpose of Unity amongst our selves. For, there is
so little mention of Images in Churches, during near four hundred years after
Christ; for increase of devotion, for instruction of the unlearned, or for the
ornament of Churches; that it may well be demanded, as for the consequence of
that Rule, that the use of them, though lawful, may be surceased in Churches.
And accordingly, I do acknowledge, that, comparing the benefit reasonably to
be expected from the use of them, with the abuse, to which, experience has
discovered them to be subject; I see no cause why, the use of them might not
be forborne; upon such a reason, as might be effectual to unite us in a Rule
bounding the Reformation which we profess, upon the ground of the common
Christianity, in all particulars. The reason is, because the having of them is
not a necessary mean to that instruction or devotion, which is proposed for the
end of them; and on the other side, is acknowledged by all the Reformation, to
have been the occasion of abuse; the preventing whereof will require that care
and diligence, which the forbearing of them will spare. But, seeing it has
appeared no breach upon Christianity, to have them in Churches: and, that the
abuse which may reasonably be apprehended, by having them to the purposes
specified, is of no consequence, in comparison with that benefit, which the*
Unity of the Church procures; It will never be lawful to enjoin this
forbearance, without declaring, that it signifies not, that they are held
unlawful: Or, that we hold our selves bound to depart from Unity with the
Church, rather then endure them. For, seeing the Lutherans do use them in a
great measure, for the reasons specified; If the uniting of us with the rest of
the Reformation, upon the due ground and terms hitherto required, should depend
upon a reasonable compliance, in that particular; it is manifest, that it would
be a sufficient reason, to oblige us to the same. And therefore much more, if
a general reunion with the Church of Rome should come to depend upon such a
compliance. The consequence of this instance may be the means, to inform those
that are capable, what the reason of Unity may oblige us to abate, of that
which we take to be for the best, in matters of less consequence; that the
unvaluable benefit of it may be obtained, in this estate, when the protection
of Sovereign Powers renders the Unity of the Church so necessary, so effectual,
to the salvation of all. For, on the other side, the interruption of it is that
which renders that same salvation questionable; by the difficulty which it
creates, of observing the duty of a Christian as a Christian; by the
impossibility rather then the difficulty, which it procures of observing the
duty of a Christian as a Member of the Church, which, the breach of Unity
allows not due conduct to understand.

To fortify the necessity of the proposition that I An Objection* for the
Church of Rome answered.
make, I will here propose an objection, in behalf of the Church of Rome,
against the validity of our Ordinations; which I have always taken to have
weight and difficulty in it, though others do not seem to value it. For, the
answering of this Objection will help to justify the Offense to be taken, and
not given, that may come by the liberty which here I use. The succession of our
Bishops deriveth it self, by Ordination of three Bishops; which the Canon of
the Apostles authorizeth; but the Canon of Nic^a requires farther, the consent
of the Bishops of each Province. Whereby it appears, that Ordination by two
or three Bishops is allowed by the Canon of the Apostles, upon presumption,
that the Suffragants of each Province concur in allowing the Act of their
fellows. Which presumption cease in our case; Because it is manifest, that
the greatest part of the Suffragants did not consent to the Consecration of our
Bishops, but declared against it; being therefore displaced by the Power of the
Sword, deciding for the lesser part against the greater; which the Rule of the
Church inableth not to do. Whereupon it is argued, that the Secular Power was
not able to authorize our Reformation, as Patron of the Church, and the Canons
of it. To fortify the Objection, I allege the case of Novatianus, who was
consecrated Bishop of Rome by three Bishops; and yet his Consecration was
Schismatical, because against Cornelius, Consecrated by sixteen. So the
Ordination of Majorinus; that was first consecrated Bishop of Carthage against
Caecilianus, for a head to the Schism of the Donatists; was justly counted
Schismatical; though it was made by a number more then sufficient, of Bishops
duly Ordained. Which, I doubt not, may be found in other Schisms. I answer,
that the Novatians had nothing to charge the Church with, but the readmitting
of those that had fallen away in time of persecution; upon Penance. The
Donatists nothing, but, that they who had ordained Caecilianus were Apostates;
Though they were proved to be otherwise, by several trials, which they would
never rest satisfied with. As for all the rest; though both Sects followed the
Faith and the Orders of the Catholic Church, yet they both rebaptized all
those whom they reduced to themselves, from the Communion of it; as counting
all the Church Apostates, for communicating with those whom they counted
Apostates. Is this our case? do we find no fault with the Doctrine, or with
the Laws of the Church of Rome; wherein Sovereigns might find themselves bound
to right both themselves, and their Subjects, notwithstanding the dissent of
the Church of Rome? For, though the Rule of succession, by Ordination of
Bishops, bear them not out in it; though the Unity of the Church regularly
depend upon the force of that Rule; yet, seeing the Unity of the Church fails
of the end for which God ordains it, unless it preserve the Christianity
which it supposes, entire, as well in the public service of God, as in the
profession and conversation of Christians; it ought not to be taken for a
departure from that Unity, that it is restored without that authority, which
regularly is provided to preserve it. For, the consent of all other Estates of
the Kingdom, in that ground, and upon those terms, which are to take place,
before the authority of those that dissent, will abundantly justify the
validity of those Ordinations which declare an intent of ministering the Office,
according to the due ground and terms which they suppose. And therefore, it
will not be so visible, when that ground, and those terms are not so visible.
And upon these terms are the Christian people of this Kingdom bound to own and
to authorize them in their Orders; notwithstanding that the greater part of the
Suffragants refused them their concurrence to the same. And, if the change that
is made be such, in matters of greatest weight; the case will be the same,
though it fail of the Rule, in some matters of less consequence.

And upon these terms, I admit the plea of the Reformation; That which excuses
the Reformed Churches extends not to our Schism^tick^.
that succession of Doctrine is of more consequence, then succession of
persons. Not allowing their mistake; in thinking the Order of Bishops the
supporters of Antichrist. For it is evident, to him that will use his five
senses, that the greatness of the Pope; for which they will have him to be
Antichrist; stands as well by Usurping upon the Bishops, as upon the Crown. And
therefore, it was a spice of madness in our Puritans, to proceed, upon their
example, to Ordination, without and against their Bishops, either by
Presbyters, or by Congregations. Whereas, they who could not obtain Ordination
from Bishops, because they professed the Reformation, might more justly think
themselves tied to proceed; neglecting that which they could not have: But
trusting in the mercy of God, that, seeing the abuses of the Church were gross,
and visible, and palpable; the zeal of Gods House, which carried men to Reform
them, before they were agreed upon all that was to be restored instead of
them, renders the Reformation, imperfect as it is, effectual to salvation,
notwithstanding that they may have failed in matters of less consequence.
Especially, considering that particular Christians; who are not able to judge
of the public concernments of the Church; may be able to see the abuses
thereof, and to reform their own lives and conversations, by that conduct which
an imperfect Reformation may furnish. Not doubting in the mean time, that this
imperfection is the loss of an innumerable number of souls, as well as the
abuses of the Church of Rome are. And therefore, thinking my self tied to say
so, that all public persons, of what quality soever, in Church or
Commonwealth, in all the several quarters of Christendom, may be stirred up to
consider, how much it concerns their discharge at the day of judgment, that
the Reformation be reduced to that Rule, and that measure, in every point,
which the ground and reason of Reformation evidenceth. For then shall we not
need to apprehend any nullity, upon unavoidable neglect of Canonical
proceeding; when the restoring of Christianity; which all Canons presuppose,
and tend to maintain; justifies the defect of it in one, for obtaining the end
of it in all acts of the Church. And this would be the best ground for hope,
if ye^ there be any hope le^t, to propagate it through all Christendom, by
the consent of the Sea of Rome, to the reuniting of the Church, upon such terms
as that ground and reason requires.

The Printer to the Reader.
IT is thought fit to reprint herewith two short Discourses of the same Author,
to the same purpose. The one, concerning the Establishment pretended by the
late Usurpation; That he might not seem now to disown it; Though using it with
that liberty, which all men use in new Editions of their own Writings. The
other, because it touches more briefly some of those Heads, which are more
perfectly, though Summarily, comprised in the Premises; being published to that
purpose, upon His Majesty's happy return, in July 1660.

A Letter concerning the present State of Religion amongst us.
Under the Act of Establishment, prosecuted by the Ordinances constituting the
Triers, and Commissioners for ejecting of Scandalous Ministers.
Sir,
I Have perused the Ordinance for ejecting of Scandalous Ministers: and finding
it likely enough to send you a Pastor, that shall have no authority from the
Church; have thought it necessary for me, to give you the reasons of that
opinion which I declared unto you; that, in that case, you ought not, in
conscience, to acknowledge such a one for your Pastor, by going to hear him
preach, and seeming to join in his Prayers; much less to receive the Eucharist
at his hands, if such a one shall be so audacious as to celebrate it.

This that I may do, I must first propose the Case, as it is stated by those
Acts which pretend to settle Religion among us. For, first, the Act whereby the
present Government is established, declares, that the Christian Religion
contained in the Scriptures shall be held forth, as the public* profession of
these Nations; And that, such as profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ, though
di^fering from this profession, in doctrine, worship, or discipline, shall be
protected in the exercise of their Religion; excepting Popery and P^elacy, and
those, who, under the profession of Christ, hold forth, and practice
licentiousness. In prosecution hereof an Ordinance is issued forth, giving
commission to certain persons, named in it, to examine and try all that have
come into possession of Churches since April 13. 1653. all that have
augmentations from Parliament: all that shall pretend to come into Churches
that shall be void. But they are to try them by no other Rule, then the
Certificate of three godly Neighbors, (one at least a Minister) concerning
their conversation in godliness upon their own knowledge: and the judgment of
five Commissioners, that the Grace of God is in their hearts, and that they are
fit to preach. In further prosecution hereof, issues forth this Ordinance,
whereby, no man is made scandalous for his judgment, but he that is liable to
the Act against Blasphemy of August 9. 1653. And with him is ranked, he, who
shall frequently and publicly have used the Service since Christmas 1653.
Whereby it appears, that those who have declared their perseverance in the
Religion which they have hitherto professed, by reading the Service, are
therefore counted scandalous; But, those that can pass the trial proposed, are
thereby qualified in Law, to be Pastors of Parishes: And consequently, to
succeed those that adhere to the Christianity which hitherto they have
professed; being cast out, by the Commissioners for ejecting of scandalous
Ministers,

In the first place then, I say, that the effect of these Laws is, to nullify,
and make void one Article of the Creed, which hitherto we profess; To wit, the
belief of one holy Catholic and Apostolic Church. This word Church may
signify two things. First, only the whole number of Christians; Secondly, a
Communion and Corporation of those that profess true Christianity, founded by
the will of God, and the ministry of our Lord Christ and his Apostles. That
Christians, when they profess to believe the Catholic Church, do not mean the
first sense; that there is in the world a number of men that profess to be
Christians; it is manifest, because all Christians hope to be saved by their
Faith; but they cannot hope to be saved, by believing that which they see. Now
all men see, that there is such a company of men in the world. Therefore, when
they say, they believe the Catholic Church; as part of that Faith, whereby
they hope to be saved; they do not profess to believe that there is such a
company of men; but, that there is a Corporation of true Christians, excluding
Haereticks and Schismatics: and, that they hope to be saved by this Faith, as
being members of it. And this is that, which the style of the holy Cathelick
and Apostolic Church signifies; as distinguishing the Body of true Christians,
(to wit, so far as profession goes) from the Conventicles of Haereticks and
Schismatics. For, this title of Catholic would signify nothing, if
Haereticks and Schismatics were not barred the Communion of the Church. And
let no man imagine, that the Schism, which the Reformation has made between
us and the Church of Rome, has dissolved the obligation of being members of
the Church. If that change, which is called Reformation, preserve not such a
Church, as ought to be acknowledged for a true member of the whole (or
Catholic) Church, it is no Reformation, but the destruction of Christianity.
Now, when these Laws enable Soldiers, and Justices of the Peace, as well as
those that call themselves Ministers, to make public Preachers; as well such
as have received no Ordination from the Church, as those that have; It is
manifest, that all difference between Clergy and People, is by them dissolved,
and made void: And by consequence, the Corporation of the Church; which grounds
and creates all the difference, which hitherto by all Christians has been
received, between these two qualities. True it is, that, for the present, as
well those who have lawful authority to officiate the public Service of God,
by Ordination from the Church, are admitted to, or maintained in their
Benefices, by these Laws, as those that have none; Though it be well enough
known, that, those who have such authority, do pretend to act by virtue of it,
and not by this Law; further then, as, by submitting to it, they remove that
force, which hinders their right, otherwise gotten, to take effect. But it is
as true, that, supposing this Law to continue an age, none such can remain. And
when none such remains, then there shall be no Church in England, but by
equivocation of words; if the premises be true. And therefore, those that
acknowledge such as have no other authority but from this power, for their
Pastors, cannot consequently profess to believe one Catholic Church, nor hope
for salvation by being members of it. For, supposing for the present, though
not granting, that the power which makes these Laws is from God; yet can it not
be pretended to be from our Lord Christ and his Apostles. And therefore, this
authority derived from it, cannot be derived from any act of theirs,
constituting the Church, and enabling it to give this authority, by
acknowledging whereof, Christians presume that they are members of the Church.

Now, that you may see, why the belief of Christ's Church is an Article of our
Creed; I say further, that you cannot acknowledge such men for your Pastors,
because you are not secured by these Laws, that they are not Haereticks. For,
seeing the Act of Establishment pretends only to hold forth the Christian
Religion centained in the Scriptures; and, that all the Haerefies that are this
day in the world do maintain themselves to profess the Christian Religion
contained in the Scriptures; it is manifest, that these Laws provide not, that
they shall not be Haereticks, which are sent you for Pastors. Here, I must not
complain, that, whereas all that profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ, though
differing from the profession held forth, are protected in the exercise of
their Religion, Popery and Praelacy are excepted; though it cannot be denied,
that both profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ. Nor, that those, who hold the
profession established by the Laws under which we were born, are refused that
protection, which is tendered Socinians, enemies of the Trinity and Satisfaction
of Christ; who manifestly profess Christian Religion contained in the
Scriptures, and Faith in God by Jesus Christ. For, my business is not to say,
what they that made these Laws should have done, instead of making them; but,
what you are to do now they are made. But, if it be answered, that, those that
make these Laws, repose trust in them to whom they grant these Commissions,
that they will not take any to be godly men that are Haereticks; To this I
say, that will not serve your turn, for several reasons. For, those that
profess all that this law requires them to profess; that is, Faith in God
through Jesus Christ, and the Christian Religion contained in the Scriptures;
cannot be judged ungodly for whatsoever they profess besides, by any power
derived from this Law, but an arbitrary power, to be exercised at the will of
the Commissioners. And, how are you assured that no Haeretick shall obtain a
certificate of three Neighbors, and so answer their demands, that they shall
think him in Gods grace? However, you are not warranted to trust your
salvation, and the salvation of those that depend on you, either upon the
judgment of these Commissioners, or of them that make the Laws. If it be
demanded, why the Secular Power, and the Commissioners thereof are not as well
to be trusted with the salvation of the people, as those that may pretend
authority from the Church? the answer is ready: That, when you acknowledge a
Pastor sent by the Church, you neither trust his person, nor the person of him
that sends him; but the Laws which the Church has received from our Lord and
his Apostles. For, limiting his profession, and undertaking to exercise the
function which he receives according to them, he b^comes thereby qualified
for his charge. But he who acknowledges no such Laws, because he acknowledges
no Catholic Church, destroys the trust you are to have in those whom you
acknowledge your Pastors, that they are not Haereticks.

And here, I must not fail to give you notice, that those Presbyterians and
Independents, who, having departed from the Church of England, upon pretense of
erecting Presbyteries and Congregations, do now make themselves Commissioners
to execute these Laws, which destroy both Presbyteries and Congregations; have
thereby destroyed the ground of all trust which the Church might have had in
them, for conduct in Christianity. For, what profession can it be presumed
that they will stand to, when they stand not to that, for which they have
destroyed the Unity of this Church? which is the reason, why Haereticks and
Schismatics, though they may be readmitted to the Communion of the Church,
upon repentance; yet, by the Rules of the Catholic Church, cannot be
readmitted to be of the Clergy. For these Apostasies make them incapable of
that trust, which the Church must necessarily repose in the Clergy.

That you may see this is not for nothing; I say further, that that there is
among us a damnable Haeresie of Antinomians, or Enthusiasts; formerly, when
Puritans were not divided from the Church of England, known by the name of
Grindletons and Etonists. These do believe so to be saved by the free Grace of
God, by which Christ died for the Elect, that, true faith is nothing but the
revelation hereof: and by consequence, that all their sins, past, present, and
to come, being remitted by this Grace; to repent of sin, or to contend against
it, is the renouncing of Gods free grace, and saving faith.

Another opinion there is, which, I cannot say the Presbyteans hold, or require
to be held; but, in regard their Confession of Faith, and Catechism
disclaimes it not, and therefore allows them that hold it to be of their
Faction, may well be said to maintain it; That, for a man to believe that he
is predestinate to life, and that Christ died for him, is that faith, which
alone justifies a Christian. Whether of these opinions is the better, or the
worse; or, what is the difference between them, let the parties dispute. This I
say, that, allowing the merits and satisfaction of Christ to the Elect for
remission of sins, and a title to everlasting life, in no consideration, but of
their persons; it is more reasonable to say, that they can never become guilty
of sin, then, that the remission of their sins, and their right to life, should
depend upon the knowledge of their predestination revealed by Faith. For,
nothing is true because it is believed, but believed because it is true. And
therefore, I say, that both of these opinions are destructive to that
foundation of faith, which the Church of England teaches; when, in the Office
of Baptism, and the beginning of the Catechism, it requires all that are
baptized, not only to profess the Faith of Christ, but to renounce the flesh,
the world, and the devil, and to fight with them till death, for the keeping of
Gods Commandments; assuring them hereupon, that they are regenerate, and
adopted Gods children by his Grace in Christ. For, he that is saved by
undertaking and persevering in this, cannot be saved by believing, that he is
absolutely predestinate to life without it. For, I must say, that it is one
thing to be absolutely predestinate to life; another thing to be predestinate
to life, by being absolutely predestinate to persevere till death. For, he
that is predestinate to life, by being absolutely predestinate to persevere in
the Covenant of Grace till death, is predestinate to life in consideration of
the Covenant of Grace, in which he is predestinate to persevere. And, whether
a man can be absolutely predestinate to presevere in it, of his own free
choice, or not; is that which remains in dispute among Divines, which, I
suppose not here, to be either true or false. But to say, that a man is
absolutely predestinate to life; and to say, that he is predestinate to life,
in consideration of the Covenant of Grace; which must be the act of his own
free choice; is to say express contradictions: And to say, that a man is
predestinate to life without consideration of the Covenant of Grace, is to
destroy the Covenant of Grace, and the hope of salvation; which is merely
imaginary, if not grounded upon it. Seeing then, that the trial upon which
these Commissioners proceed, is, their marks of predestination, whether they
be true or false; not supposing the Covenant of Grace, the undertaking of it,
and persevering in it; I say, that you are no way secured by these Laws, that
the Triers themselves, much less those whom they shall send you, are not
accomplices of this damnable Haeresie.

I must not forget to advise you, that Dell; one so far of this Haeresie, that
he is thought to have written the Book called the Doctrine of Baptismes,
against Baptism it self: is now, and is acknowledged by these Commissioners,
Master of a College in the University; (whereof several fellows have been
notorious Preachers of this Haeresie) who cannot be acknowledged a member of
the Church by any good Christian.

The like I allege in regard of the Sect of the Anabaptists. In which point, I
must suppose two things. First, that the Christian Faith supposes Original
sin. Secondly, that, without Baptism, there is no cure for it. And this
depends upon the premises; that there is no absolute predestination, without
consideration of the Covenant of Grace; which Baptism executing, cures it.
For, whatsoever our Lord meant, when he said; unless ye be born again of
water -- it is manifest, that, though no man can become a true Christian,
without the operation of the Holy Ghost; yet, the habitual gift and indowment
of the Holy Ghost, dwelling in a man, is not granted, but in consideration of
his entering into the said Covenant; and that this gift is the only cure of
Original sin. There is then no necessity of showing an express precept in
Scripture, that all Infants be baptized: or, that the Church from the Apostles
time did Baptize all, while they were Infants. If the Christian Faith suppose
Original sin, if no cure for that, but by the Covenant of Grace, if no
execution of that Covenant, but the Baptism of the Church; (unless, where the
outward act is prevented by inevitable necessity, after the inward desire
thereof was sufficiently resolved and declared) then is this necessity a
constraining precept, and has been so reputed by the Church, ever since the
Apostles; Which always has taken order, not that all should be baptized
Infants, but that no Infant should die unbaptized. For, the diligent watch over
all occasions, that might carry Infants out of the world unbaptized, observed
by the Church from the beginning, though neglected since; demonstrateth, no
legal assurance of the salvation of such as should die unbaptized; Whatsoever
might be presumed of Gods goodness, over and above what he declares. But, as
for those that shall become obliged and engaged to the Covenant of Grace, by
being consecrated to God through the act of the Church, thereby obliging it
self to show them the truth of Christianity, which obliges all to whom it is
showed; the necessity aforesaid, together with the practice of the Church, is a
legal presumption, of the cure of Original sin, and the opening of Paradise,
which it only shuts. If therefore our Anabaptists do not believe Original
sin, they are Pelagian Haereticks. If, believing it, they believe
notwithstanding, that it is cured by Predestination, without the Covenant of
Grace, they fall into the Haeresie premised. And, voiding the Baptism which
they received of the Church, they seem to renounce the Christianity which it
inacteth; but manifestly they render their own Baptism void of effect toward
God. For, they who rebaptize upon a ground, that allows Salvation by Gods
Predestination revealed by Faith, without undertaking and persevering in the
Covenant of Grace, cannot pretend to baptize into the Covenant of Grace; that
is, into the profession of the true Faith, and, of fighting against sin until
death, under the same. Seeing then, that the necessity of Baptism cannot be
denied, but upon such a ground, as voideth the Covenant of Grace; and seeing
the Triers are either Anabaptists themselves, or accomplices in the same
Commission with Anabaptists; (whereof there are diverse in these Commissions) it
is evident, that, by these Laws, you are no ways secured of having Anabaptists
for your Pastors; who are expressly Schismatics, (forsaking the Church for
that which the Church always did,) and, by consequence of the premised reasons,
Haereticks.

As the Baptism of those men, whom they pretend to send you for Pastors, is,
by this reason, void of effect; So, the Eucharist which they may pretend to
celebrate, will be void of the effect of a Sacrament toward you, but not void
of the crime of Sacrilege toward God. The reasons are two. The first, because,
those who have not received the Order of Priesthood shall pretend to celebrate
it. For, the Scripture, interpreted by the un-interrupted practice of the
Church, allows no man, under the Order of a Priest, to celebrate the Eucharist.
Not, as if those who call themselves Ministers did commit this Sacrilege, in
consecrating the Eucharist. For, though the name of Ministers signifies no more
then Deacons; and, that it is truly Sacrilege for Deacons to celebrate the
Eucharist; Yet, they whom they call Ministers, if Ordained, were Ordained
Priests; with power to celebrate the Eucharist. For, they call them Ministers,
to impose upon the World an opinion, which they cannot prove by the Scripture;
That they are the only Ministers of the Word and Sacraments. The second,
because they know not, nor acknowledge, the Consecration, that is requisite to
the celebration and being of this Sacrament, by the same Scriptures, understood
according to the un-interrupted custom and practice of the Church. For, the
whole Church of God, allowing the elements consecrated to be the Body and
Blood of Christ mystically, or in the Sacrament; allows this change to be
made by the consecration, before which they were only Bread and Wine. Not as
if, after the Consecration, they were not so; but because they are then become
that which they were not before: to wit, the Sacrament of Christ's Body and
Blood; or, the Body and Blood of Christ spiritually, and mystically; that is,
in the Sacrament. This Consecration being exactly maintained by the Church of
England; they that presume to celebrate the Eucharist, without acknowledging
the same: and, pretending to destroy the Law by which it is exercised; must be
presumed, not to acknowledge the necessity thereof, to the being of this
Sacrament: And therefore, they, and their accomplices in the Communion thereof,
to be guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ; as not distinguishing a sign of
man's institution, from a Sacrament of Gods appointment and Ordinance.

As for the Office of Preaching and Praying, which they pretend to, in behalf
of the Church; I will mark you out two monstrous Impostures, in all the Sects
of this time. The first is this ground of the now pretended Reformation of
Religion in England; That the Church is not to assemble for the Service of God,
but when there is Preaching. This seems to stand upon a very gross mistake, of
those passages of the Apostles writings, which declare, the necessary means of
salvation to consist, in hearing the Gospel preached; As if they were meant of
Sermons in the Pulpit, which are only made to those that are already
Christians; not of publishing the Gospel to those that knew it not before,
convincing them that it is true, and instructing them wherein it consists. Or,
as if those that are already Christians wanted any thing necessary to
salvation; supposing them to persevere in the Christianity which they have
professed. Not as if their Christianity did not oblige them to hear Sermons,
when the authority of the Church assures them to be without offense; But
because, the Offices of public Prayers, and the Praises of God, especially in
celebrating the blessed Eucharist, are the end of all that instruction in
Christianity, which Christians receive from the Church; and therefore, all
Preaching subordinate to the same, as the means to the End. And because, they
may be daily so frequented, without offense, and to the increase of the
reverence due to Christianity; as, the experience of our time shows, that
Preaching cannot be.

The second is, that the first day of the week, called Sunday, is the Sabbath,
by force of the fourth Commandment. A mistake so gross, that it may well serve
for an instance, what Faction can do, with men that are sober otherwise. That
God, by commanding the Jews to keep the seventh day of the week; to wit, that
day on which he ended the Creation of the world; and, for that very reason
commanding it, should be thought to command Christians to keep the first day
of the week, on which he began the Creation, and our Lord Christ arose from
the dead; That is, that the same words of the same Commandment in writing,
should oblige Jews to rest on the Saturday, which oblige Christians to rest on
the Sunday; is a thing, which, when this fit of frenzy shall be past us, will
scarce be believed, that ever any man would believe. True it is, this first
day has been observed, in, and ever since the Apostles time; but, not by
virtue of that Law, which, their Office was to declare expired, and out of
date; but, by the Act of their own authority, whereby they gave Laws to Christ's
Church.

Let us now only compare the daily morning and evening Sacrifice of Prayer and
the Praises of God, established by the Order of the Church of England; together
with the more solemn service of Lords days and Festivals; with a bare Sermon
upon Sundays, ushered in and out with a Prayer of every man's own conceit;
(setting aside the Haeresie and false Doctrine, the Faction and Schism, the
Blasphemy and Slander, the ridiculous Follies which this Sermon and Prayer may,
and which we have known them contain) I say, comparing these together, the
Reformation pretended, is and ought to be accounted, the abomination of
desolation, in comparison of that Order which it destroys. And therefore,
upon this account alone, those who, not being invested with that ordinary Power
by which the Church is enabled to correct abuses in the Church, shall usurp the
Power of the Church to introduce this disorder; are thereby Schismatics
themselves, and those that acknowledge them for their Pastors, accomplices of
Schismatics.

It will be said, that these Laws will be amended; as it was many times said
awhile since, that the Parliament would settle a Ministry. To this I say, that
those who shall be sent you, by virtue of these Laws, have every way as good
authority, as any, the Power that made these Laws, joined with a Parliament,
can give to them, that are not otherwise qualified by the authority of the
Church. That is, that this Power, and the power of a Parliament together;
though, advising with Divines; can do no more, then this Power, with advise of
those Divines which it uses, has done. Because both are Secular, and able to
make men their Ministers, to maintain the Interest of that Government which
their Power constituteth; but not Ministers of the Church, to maintain the
Interest of that Faith, and Service of God, which it is trusted with. If it be
said, that, in most parts of the Reformation, those from whom the Ministry is
propagated, had not received, by their Ordination, Power to ordain others; For
answer, I suppose; That the abuses crept into the Church were so great, that
particular Churches; that is, part of the whole; might, and ought to reform
themselves, without consent or concurrence of the whole. I suppose that, though
there be in the Church a succession of persons, endued with authority in
behalf of it; as well as of Faith, and of Rules, or Laws; Yet, the succession
of persons is of less consideration; being subordinate to the succession of
Faith and Laws, as the means to the end. And then I say; that, supposing a
necessity of Ordaining, because they who refused the Reformation would not
Ordain to that purpose; And, supposing the Reformation to be that which God
requires; There is cause to presume, that the intent, which those that agree
in it declare, supplies, by Gods goodness, that nullitie, which the want of
Power to Ordain would otherwise infer. For, those mistakes of less consequence,
which humane weakness must needs commit, in a work of such weight; as it were
malice in man to justify, so, it may well be thought mercy in God to excuse.
This presumption there is, that the Churches thus constituted are true
Churches: And the Offices ministered by persons thus qualified, effectual to
convey the Grace of God to Christian people. But we suppose, in our case, that
Presbyterian Ordinations tend no more to the exercise of true Christianity,
then of that which the Church of England hitherto professes. And we see with
our eyes, that the authority that makes them destroys it self; by destroying
the authority of their Bishops, from whom it claims. And therefore, to
imagine, that an Assembly of Divines, by being lawfully Ordained to the office
of Priests or Deacons, according to the Laws of the Church of England, can, by
Commission from the Secular Power, make Ordinations, which, the Laws under
which they were Ordained forbid; is to imagine, that God can enable man to sin;
or, that a Sovereign Power can authorize the Subject to rebel against it self.
And therefore, though the qualities of persons, to be sent you for Pastors,
may be otherwise limited by Acts which Parliaments may make, yet these
qualities, (not being derived from the authority of the Apostles founding the
Church, by any act of the Church; but from Secular Power, and Commission issued
from it) make them no more Ministers of the Church, that are made by Assemblies
of Divines and Presbyteries; then those that are made by Commission of Triers,
and, for ejecting scandalous Ministers. That is, both of them being by their
creation Schismatics; and, their profession not clearing them of misprision of
Haeresie; they can no more be acknowledged by those that pretend to adhere to
the Church of England, then Belial by Christ, or darkness by light.

Hereby then you may conclude, how to receive those, whom the Presbyterians may
send you for Pastors, by any change in the Secular Power. For I charge not
them, that they do not believe the Church; which they would be themselves. I
acknowledge that they secure you from all Sects but themselves. But, in as much
as they maintain Predestination to life, only in consideration of what Christ
has already done or suffered for the Elect; in so much, I say, that they do
not, nor can Baptize into the Cross of Christ; that is to say, into the hope of
Salvation, in consideration of the Covenant of Baptism. For, that which is
absolutely due; as salvation is due to the elect by the gift of Gods
Predestination; cannot be burdened with any condition of Christianity
afterward. Nor can he, who is once sure to be saved, without that condition
which Baptism inacteth, be bound to fight against the flesh, the world and the
Devil, for the keeping of Gods Commandments, under the profession of the
Christian Faith; for the obtaining of that which he is sure of before. And
therefore their Baptism is no effectual Baptism before God, if Baptism
received in the Church of England be such; (that is to say, it is no Baptism,
but by Equivocation of words) in as much as, the obligation of a man's
Christianity is not declared, or understood, to take hold of him, by virtue of
it. For, seeing the hope of salvation which Christians have by their Baptism
is grounded upon the condition of their Christianity; that Baptism which
promises salvation, without providing for this condition, is no Baptism, but
by equivocation of words.

I say further, that the change, which they call Reformation, visibly tends, to
introduce that monstrous imposture of two Sermons every Sabbath, in stead of
the daily and ordinary service of God; together with the more solemn service of
God upon Festivals and Lords days, and other extraordinary occasions; which the
Church of England, (with the whole Church of God from the beginning.) has
maintained, so far as there was means to maintain it. I will not here insist
upon the order of Bishops, and their chief power in their Dioceses, as of
Divine Right; that is, instituted and introduced by the Apostles. Let the
Presbyterians think themselves privileged to erect Altar against Altar, upon so
desperate a Plea, as now they insist upon; that the Presbyteries are rather of
divine right., then the chief Power of Bishops, in their Dioceses; I insist now
only, that this Power of the Bishops, was not against Gods Law: which every man
must grant me, that acknowledges a Church in England from the Reformation till
now. In this case, they, who, to introduce this Christianity, and this public
exercise of it; transgressing that authority to which they were called by the
visible act of the Church of England; take upon them, to share that Power from
which they had their authority, among themselves, and, to execute it by consent
among themselves, in their several precincts; cannot be said to constitute a
Church, by virtue of any act of the Apostles, or any authority derived from
such act; but by virtue of their own act, as all Apostates and usurpers do.
That is to say, that, they do not constitute such a Church, by being a member
whereof, a man may reasonably assure himself of salvation, upon any principle
of Christianity; but such a Church, as is indeed no Church, unless it be by
equivocation of terms; but a conventicle of Schismatics, with the misprision
of the Haeresie aforesaid. And therefore their Priesthood is no Priesthood,
their Eucharist is no Eucharist; (unless it be by equivocation of words) but
Sacrilege against Gods Ordinance. Besides, that, what is requisite to the
consecration of the Eucharist, or, wherein it consists, they seem to be as
secure of, and as little to regard, as the most ignorant of those Sects, into
which, the once common name of Puritans stands divided at this time. Neither is
it in any Secular Power, though never so unquestionable, to cure these
nullities and incapacities, in the pretense, upon which they take upon them to
be a Church. Though for the present, they are not so much as authorized to the
world, by any privilege or penalty enacted by any Secular Power; but only
protected by that which now possesses. Whereby the world may see, that there
is nothing but their own usurpation, and the consent of those whom they have
debauched to their Schism, for them to subsist by, under the pretense of a
Church. And, that they will, by virtue of their Original, be as malignant to
any Secular Power, that shall not maintain and authorize them, as ever they
were to that which they have destroyed, to introduce this shadow of a Church.

If it be objected, that your Estates will be liable to penalties, that may
be enacted against those that withdraw from the exercise of the Religion
publicly held forth; To this I have no answer, but, that we are to obey God
rather then man; to prefer the next world before this; and to bear Christ's
Cross, if we expect his kingdom. Only thus much I must observe; that these
Laws proceed from a profession, that it is not lawful to force men's
Consciences, in matter of Religion, by penalties. And therefore, though the
Praelatical party are not protected in the exercise of their Religion; yet
cannot they be punished for it, but by denying that which is declared upon the
public Faith. Besides, acknowledging the Christian Religion contained in the
Scriptures, and professing-faith in God, by Jesus Christ, they are as much
qualified for protection, as those that are protected by the Act of
Establishment. And, not to allow the exercise of that Religion, the profession
whereof is not disallowed, seems to be, to forbid men to be Christians, who
are not forbidden to be such Christians; and to expose them to popular tumult,
(contrary to the public peace) whom no Law punishes. If the Papists continue
nevertheless liable to former penalties, perhaps it is because they are reputed
Idolaters. But because these, laws, and the profession from when^ they proceed,
may change; I must confess, you cannot follow my advise, but that your estate
may become questionable: Neither would I give it, could I assure you of the
kingdom of heaven otherwise.

If you demand, what means I can show you to exercise your Religion,
withdrawing from the means which these Acts provide: I answer, that there are
hitherto, every where, of the Clergy, that adhere to the Church; who will find
it their duty, to see your infants Christened, your children Catechized, the
Eucharist communicated to all, that shall withdraw from Churches forcibly
possessed by them whom you own not for Pastors. And if they cannot continually
minister to you, so dispersed, the ordinary Offices of Gods Service; you have
the Service of God according to the Order of the Church, you have the
Scriptures to read for part of it, you have store of Sermons manifestly allowed
by the Church to read, you have Prayers prescribed for all your own
necessities, and the necessities of the Church. To serve God with these in
private, with such as depend upon you, and are of the same judgment with you,
(leaving out what belongs to the Priests Office to say) I do, to the best of my
judgment, believe an acceptable sacrifice to God; which you cannot offer at
the Church, in such case. And though I censure not my brethren of the Clergy,
that think fit to complie with the power which we are under, in holding or
coming by their Benefices; (I suppose, in respect to their flocks, rather then
to their fruits) yet, if they believe themselves, and their flocks, to be
members of the Church of England, they must needs believe, those flocks that
acknowledge such Pastors, to be members of no Church; and therefore
acknowledge you, and own your departure, and declare themselves to their own
flocks, and instruct them to do the like, when the like case falls out: And so,
the refusing to hear the voice of strangers, will unite us to make a flock,
under those whom we acknowledge our lawful Pastors.

I have found my self pressed, to Print Copies hereof, for mine own use,
thereby to declare thus much of my judgment to you, and to the rest of my
friends; because the consequence of owning such men for your Pastors, will be,
to make us members of several Churches. Which must disable me, to do any office
of a Clergy man toward you; unless it be the prosecuting of this, by showing
you further reasons, to justify what I say here, and to reduce you to it.
Though it shall always be my study, faithfully to serve my friends, in all
Offices of civility. And I hope they will consider, what appearance there is,
that any thing should move me, to make my self liable to so much harm, as the
public declaring of this opinion will make me liable to, but the discharge of
my conscience to God and them, as the case shall require me to discharge it.

The due Way of composing the differences on Foot, preserving the Church;
According to the Opinion of HERBERT THORNDIKE.
I Have found my self obliged, by that horrible confusion in Religion, which
the late War had introduced, to declare the utmost of mine opinion, concerning
the whole point of Religion, upon which the Western Church stands divided into
so many parties. And now, finding no cause to repent me of doing it, can find
no cause why I should not declare the consequence of it, in settling of that
which remains of our differences. For, middle ways to so good an end, are now
acceptable, merely as middle ways, and tending to drive a bargain, without
pretending that they ought to be admitted. How much more an expedient
pretending necessity, from reasons extant in public, and not contradicted?

The chief ground that I suppose here, because I have proved it at large, is
the meaning of that Article of our Creed, which professes one Catholic
Church. For, either it signifies nothing, or it signifies, that God has
founded one Visible Church; that is, that he has obliged all Churches, (and
all Christians, of whom all Churches consist) to hold visible communion with
the Whole Church, in the visible offices of Gods public service. And therefore
I am satisfied, that the differences upon which we are divided, cannot be
justly settled upon any terms, which any part of the Whole Church shall have
just cause to refuse, as inconsistent with the unity of the Whole Church. For,
in that case, we must needs become Schismatics, by settling our selves upon
such Laws, under which any Church may refuse to communicate with us, because it
is bound to communicate with the Whole Church. True it is, that the foundation
of the Church, upon these terms, will presuppose the entire profession of
Christianity, whether concerning Faith or Manners. For otherwise, how should
those Offices, in which all the Church is to communicate, be counted the
service of God, according to Christianity? And this profession is the
condition, upon the undergoing whereof, all men, by being baptized and made
Christians, are also admitted to communion with the Church, as members of it.

But nothing can make it visible to the common reason of all men, what
communion they are to resort unto for their Salvation, but the visible
Communion of all parts of the Church; which, having been maintained for diverse
ages of the Church, is now visibly interrupted by the Reformation, and before,
by the breach between the Greek and Latin Church. And therefore, though it be
visible to reason rightly informed, what communion a man is to embrace for his
Salvation; yet it is not now visible to the common reason of all men that seek
it. If this be true, then, no power of the Church can extend so far, as to
make any thing a part of the common Christianity, which was not so from the
beginning; but it must needs extend so far, as to limit and determine all
matters in difference, so as the preservation of Unity may require. And
therefore, the Unity of all parts supposing the profession of Christianity
whole, and entire; we shall justly be chargeable with the crime of Haeresie,
if we admit them to our communion, who openly disclaim the Faith of the whole
Church, or any part of it. For, those are justly counted Haereticks, as to the
Church, by the Canons of the Church, that communicate with those who profess
Haeresie; though no Haereticks as to God, not believing it themselves. But the
Unity of all parts being subordinate, and of inferior consideration to the
Unity of the Whole; we shall justly be chargeable with the crime of Schism,
if we seek Unity within our selves, by abrogating the Laws of the Whole, as
not obliged to hold communion with it.

I confess I am convicted, that, as things stand, we are not to expect any
reason from the Church of Rome, and those who hold communion with it, in
restoring the unity of the Church, upon such Laws, as shall render the means of
Salvation visible to all that use them as they ought. And this, and only this,
I hold to be the due ground; upon which we are enabled to provide an
establishment of Unity in Religion among our selves, (as heretofore a
Reformation in Religion for our selves) without concurrence of the Whole. But
if we should think our selves at large, to conclude our selves without respect
to the Faith and Laws of the whole Church, we may easily bring upon our selves
a just imputation of Haereticks, for communicating with Haereticks; but a
juster of Schismatics, if we abrogate the Laws of the whole Church, to obtain
Unity among our selves; as declaring thereby, that we are not content to hold
Unity with the Whole, unless a part may give Law to the Whole. So far am I from
that madness, which has had a hand in all our miseries; of thinking the right
measure of Reformation to stand in going as far as it is possible from the
Church of Rome. For, were it evidenced, (as it neither is, nor ever will be
evidenced,) that the Pope is Antichrist, and all Papists, by their profession,
Idolaters; yet must we either raze the Article of one Catholic Church out of
our Creed, or confess, that the Pope can neither be Antichrist, nor the
Papists Idolaters, for, or by any thing which is common to them with the Whole
Church.

I know some will think it strange, that the Pope should excommunicate us on
Maundy-Thursdays; that we should swear in the Oath of Supremacy, that no
foreign Prelate has, or ought to have, any Jurisdiction, or Authority
Ecclesiastical in this Kingdom; and yet we be subject to do such Acts, for
which the Church of Rome may justly renounce communion with us. But the word
ought in that Oath is Indicative, and not Potential; not deberet, but debet.
For it were a contradiction for the Church of England, to pray for the
Catholic Church, and the unity thereof, and yet renounce the Jurisdiction of
the whole Church, and the General Council thereof, over it self. King James of
excellent memory, acknowledges the Pope to be Patriarch of the West; that is,
Head of the general Council of the Western Churches. And the right R. Father in
God, Thomas L. B. of Winchester under Q. Elizabeth, in his answer to the
Seminaries Apology, being demanded why we own him not so in effect, answers
bluntly, but truly, because he is not content with the right of a Patriarch.
For, should he disclaim the pretense of dissolving the bond of Allegiance,
should he retire to the privilege of a Patriarch, in seeing the Canons
executed, the Schism would lie at our door, if we should refuse it. Now, if
they curse us, while we pray for the Unity of the whole Church, is it not the
case of the Catholics with the Donatists? For, these rebaptized them whom
those had baptized, whited over the inside of their Churches, when they became
possessed of them, scraped over their Altars, (being Tables of wood) in
detestation of them, as Apostates and persecutors; while the Catholics called
them brethren, and acknowledged them rightly baptized, and received them that
were converted from that Schism in their respective Orders. The Unity of the
Church is of such consequence to the salvation of all Christians, that no
excess on one side can cause the other to increase the distance, but they shall
be answerable for the souls that perish by the means of it.

And therefore, not departing from the opinion which I have declared,
concerning the terms upon which all parties ought to reconcile themselves,
until I shall have reason showed me, why I should do it; I shall now go no
further, then the matters that are actually questioned among us; not extending
my discourse to points, that may perhaps more justly become questionable, then
some of those which have come into dispute. Professing in the beginning, that I
believe they may and ought to be settled by a Law of the Kingdom, obliging all
parties beside Recusant. But, that the matter of that Law ought to be limited
by the consent and Authority of the Church, respective to this Kingdom. And
withal, that I think it ought to be held, and shall for mine own part hold it
an act merely ambulatery, and provisional for the time. For, though there is no
hope of reconcilement with the Church of Rome, as things are; yet is there
infinite reason for all sides, to abate of their particular pretensions, for
the recovering of so incomparable a benefit as the Unity of the Whole; If ever
it shall please God to make the parties appear disposed to it.

Now, the errors which we are to shut out, if we will recover the Unity of a
Visible Church, (that is, of Gods Whole Church) are two, in my judgment.
First, though some things have been disputed in other parts, from whence the
same consequence may be inferred; yet England is the place, and ours the
times, which first openly and downright have maintained, that there is no such
thing as a Church, in the nature of one visible Communion, founded by God. But
it is maintained by several parties among us, upon several grounds. For, some
do not, or will not understand, that there can be any Ecclesiastical power
founded by that act of God which foundeth Christianity, where there is Secular
Power, founded also by those acts of God, whereby he authorizeth and inforceth
all just Sovereignties. Though all times, all parts, all Nations of Christendom
since Constantine, profess to maintain the Church in that power, in which they
found it acknowledged by Christians, when he first undertook to maintain that
Christianity which he professed; all this must be taken, either for mere
hypocrisy, or mere nonsense. Others there are, that do not think themselves
obliged to the unity of Gods Church, upon far different Principles. There are
of our Enthusiasts, such as are themselves every one a Church to themselves,
and by themselves; as being above Ordinances, and the Communion of the Church
provided only for proficients. But all Independent Congregations make the same
profession, and are manifestly grounded upon the same. For, how can they
imagine themselves members of one visible Church, who profess that they cannot
be obliged to hold communion with any Congregation but their own?

And yet, with favor, the same consequence ensuing upon so different
pretenses, there must be some supposition common to both, upon which both do
ground themselves. And it is easily visible what that is. Both opinions must
suppose, that a man may be heir to Christ's Kingdom, and endowed with Gods
Spirit, without being, or before he be a member of Gods Church. And the
Independents indeed do manifestly profess, that, knowing themselves and others
to be Gods children, and endowed with his Spirit, they are in a capacity to
join in Ecclesiastical Communion, with those whom they know to be such. So,
they become members of a Church, being Gods children before, without
considering how they shall be members of the Whole Church. The others are
satisfied, that, by being members of a State which professes Christianity,
they are also members of that one Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, which
by our Creed we profess to believe. A ground which holds accidentally, so
long as that State constituteth a visible member of the Whole, or the Catholic
Church. But not imaginable to serve the turn, when States differ in point of
Christianity, and may every day appeal to force, whether is the true Church and
whether the false.

For, is it not manifest, that the professions of the Lutherans, the
Calvinists, the Greeks, the Abyssines, are protected by Sovereign powers, as
well as the profession of the Church of Rome, or the Church of England? Is it
not manifest, that the Powers that profess them, maintain them respectively to
be Gods truth? Why then do we dispute any longer, which is the true Religion
and which is the false, if it be enough for Christians to resolve all the
doubt they can have concerning Religion, into the command of their Sovereigne,
only professing Christianity? Is it not manifest that Sovereigns do use to
punish their Subjects, that conform not to their Laws concerning Religion, but
follow that Religion which is in force under other Sovereignties? Is it
possible to imagine, that Subjects can be obliged, by one and the same will of
God, to follow contrary Religions under several Sovereigns? Or that Sovereigns
can be enabled, by one and the same Law of God, to punish their Subjects, for
serving God according to contrary professions? True it is, Subjects that
suffer in a good cause shall be gainers thereby; gaining Heaven by their
losses of this world. But what shall become of the Sovereigns that persecute
them, being in a good cause? Or how shall not some of them be persecuted in a
good cause, who are persecuted in contrary causes? I know not whether this
peremptory difficulty was the cause; But I am sure recourse has been had to a
more desperate answer; that every Subject is bound to profess the Religion of
his Sovereign; yea, though it in join him to renounce Christ with his mouth;
remaining bound all the while to believe in him with his heart: and that by
this belief, he shall be saved as a Christian. Neither is this position
tenable but upon this answer; nor does this answer import any less, then the
utter renouncing of Christianity. I know, that in the Records of the ancient
Church, those who only professed to believe Christianity, (who were called
Catecbumeni, or Scholars to the Church) are sometimes called by the name of
Christians. But I know withal, that they were never counted in the state of
Salvation, till they had taken upon them the profession of Christianity, by
being adimtted to the Sacrament of Baptism. I know also, that this Baptism,
though it was not counted void, when it was Ministered in due form; yet it was
never counted effectual to Salvation, but when a man is baptized into the true
Faith; and that, in the Unity of Gods Church. For, though the names of
Haereticks and Schismatics, have been made only Bug-bears to fright children
with, in this time of our troubles; yet, so long as Christianity continues,
those that separate themselves from the Church upon pretenses concerning the
substance of Faith, shall be properly counted Haereticks; But, if the cause
concern not the substance of Christianity, Schismatics. And therefore,
Christianity consisting not only in believing, or purposing with the heart, but
also in professing with the mouth; (first sincerely, then the true Faith, and
lastly, by being baptized) he that professes himself free to renounce his
Christianity, as far as the mouth, has effectively renounced it; because he
has effectively drawn back that promise, upon condition whereof he was
baptized; of professing Christianity to the death.

And truly, if every Christian State be the Church of God within the
territories thereof, then cannot all Churches concur to make up that one
Visible Church of God which our Creed professes. For, there is nothing more
evidently true then the saying of Plato; that all States are naturally enemies
one to another, especially those that are borderers. And this enmity, in our
days, consists visibly in those differences of Religion, upon which the
neighbor Sovereignties of Christendom are now at distance. It is therefore no
way imaginable, how all Christian States should concur to make up that one
visible Church, whereinto by being baptized, we obtain the spiritual and
eternal privileges of Christians. But, that it is the profession of the whole
Rule of Christianity, that makes any people or State a part of the Visible
Church; being governed by such rules, in the exercise of Gods service, as may
make it the same Society with that, which was once unquestionably Gods Church,
or part of it. For otherwise, how should the Visible Church continue one and
the same, from the first to the second coming of our Lord?

And here you have the second point of our differences. For, all our Sects,
under the title of Gods free grace, do maintain, that the promises of the
Gospel, and our right in them, depends not upon the truth of men's Christianity.
As if God were not free enough of his Grace, if he should reserve himself a
duty of being served, as by Christians, upon those whom he tenders life
everlasting to, upon such terms. It is no new thing in England, to hear of
those who profess, that God sees not, nor can see any sin in his elect. So
that, in their opinion, there is no mortal sin but repentance; because that
must suppose, that a man thought himself out of the state of grace, by the sin
whereof he repents? I think I am duly informed of a Malefactor dying upon the
Gallows, that professed, to the strengthening of his brethern, that he had
overcome all temptation to repentance; acknowledging that, since his being in
prison, he had been strongly moved to repent. And, that one of Hackets three
conspirators, when he was come to himself, continued to profess, that he
thought himself in the state of Gods Grace all the while. But I will go no
further, then the words which I have quoted in another place, out of a Pamphlet
written to satisfy the God lie. party in Wales, being offended at the late
Usurpers proceedings; which allegeth, that we are not to be judged at the
last day, either by our Works, or by our Faith; but by Gods everlasting purpose
concerning each of us; by virtue whereof Christ being alive at the heart, the
violation of all his engagements to them, by usurping ^over them as over
others, made no difference in his estate toward God. Whosoever writ this, I
think I am duly informed, that himself caused it to be published. But I am
certain, that, to the everlasting infamy of a Christian Nation, if reparation
be not made, it is supposed to be the sense of all the Godly in it. And to
the same effect, my memory assures me to have read in one of his speeches; That
there are at this day inspirations of Gods Spirit besides the Scriptures,
though not against the Scriptures. Now certainly, that which a man has by
virtue of the Scriptures; that is, of Christianity; can by no means be
understood to be besides the Scriptures. And certainly, he that presumes
upon any motion of Gods Spirit, not supposing Christianity; that is, not
supposing the Scriptures; may by the same reason presume of his own salvation,
not supposing that he believes and lives as a Christian.

The same is the consequence of a Position, I will not say injoined by any
party, but notoriously allowed among us; That justifying Faith consists in
believing that a man is one of them that are predestinate, whom God sent our
Lord Christ to redeem, and none else. For, how can he think himself obliged to
make good the profession of a Christian, who thinks himself assured of all that
he can attain to by so doing, not supposing it? Indeed it may be said, that
our Antinomians and Enthusiasts, and other Sects among us, (whom no conceit
without this could have seduced to their several frenzies,) do think themselves
justified from everlasting, by Gods decree to send Christ for that purpose;
whereas this opinion dateth Justification from the instant that God reveals
the said decree by his Spirit; in which revelation they think that justifying
Faith confisteth. And certainly, there can be no reason why God, receiving men
into Grace, only in consideration of Christ's obedience, should suspend their
reconcilement upon that knowledge of his purpose, which he gives them by
Faith. For what can be more unreasonable, than that God should justify a man,
by revealing to him that he is justified? But the opinion is not the less
destructive to Christianity, because it is the more unreasonable. Now it is
possible, that the effect of this position may be stifled, and become void in
some, by reason of other truths which contradict the same indeed, and yet are
believed by them, not seeing the consequence of their own persuasions. But
those who, besides this position, do pertinaciously hold absolute
predestination to Glory, those, I maintain, are in an error destructive to
Christianity, that is, in an Haeresi^. And therefore this Doctrine being such,
it is no way enough, that it is no way injoined to be taught; but it is
requisite that it be disclaimed, by those that pretend to recover the Unity of
a Visible Church. For there can be no Church, where any thing destructive to
Christianity, which the being of the Church supposes, is notoriously allowed
to be taught.

Now, between these two points of our differences, I am to observe a vast
difference. For, this latter is necessary for all Christians to know* as being
the principle of all those actions, which, being just for the matter of them,
must render the men acceptable to God in order to life everlasting. And
therefore, he that thinks he can be regenerate, or justified, or the child
of God, or endowed with Gods Spirit, not supposing that he undertakes and
performs the profession of a Christian, renounces the Article of his Creed,
concerning one baptism to remission of sins. But the being of Gods Visible
Church consists in that Unity, which arises upon the agreement of all
Christians, to hold Communion in the visible Offices of Gods service. And
therefore, though it be an Article of our Creed, to believe one Catholic
Church; yet can it not concern the salvation of every particular Christian, to
understand the nature of that Society or Corporation, which the bond of this
Unity creates. Nay, even they who are best seen in that Government, by which
this Unity is preserved, may well fail in comprehending the reason thereof, by
reflecting their discourse upon it. In the mean time, it is necessary for all
that believe their Creed, to think themselves tied by this Article, to maintain
the Unity of the Church, according to their estate; That is, for every ones
part, not to be accessory to any Schism that dissolveth it. And therefore, to
deny the crime of Schism is to deny this Article.

The consequence of this observation will be the difference which the Church
has reason to use, in reconciling parties at distance from it, to the Unity
thereof; according to the difference of those pretenses upon which they are at
distance. For, those who have only disputed against the being of the Church,
upon misunderstanding the right of Secular Power, which they think the being of
the Church inconsistent with, shall be sufficiently reunited to the Church, by
conforming to the Law by which the Church is, and was, and may be established.
For, that there ought to be provision against such disputes for the future, it
concerns not me to give warning. Only, where willfullness has proceeded so far
in maintaining a false position, as to make no bones of denying Christianity,
and teaching Atheism, (by obliging to renounce Christ, if the Sovereign command
it) it concerns the Christianity of the Nation to see reparation made.

But, where the Haeretical positions mentioned before have notoriously been
maintained; especially, where Congregations have been framed, and used, for the
exercise of Religion, upon pretense of them; there will it be absolutely
necessary, that they be expressly renounced and disclaimed, either by persons
in particular, or in Body by Congregations. To this head I reduce all
Anabaptists and Congregations of Anabaptists; Those of the fifth Monarchy, and
Congregations of the fifth Monarchy; Quakers, and Congregations of Quakers.
Nay, all Independent Congregations, in my opinion, ought to be reduced under
this measure. Not only because their profession is grounded upon the denial of
one visible Church; But, because they suppose themselves children of God, and
endowed with his Spirit, before they be members of Gods Church; That is,
setting aside their Baptism, and the Covenant which is solemnly inacted by it,
between God and each soul. And, though I do refer my self to the wisdom of
Superiors, in what form this reconciliation be solemnized; yet, I must express
my opinion thus far, that there can be none so fit, as that which the wisdom
of the Catholic Church, from the beginning, has always frequented: By
granting them the blessing of the Church, with Imposition of hands, renouncing
for their part their several Sects and Errors; That is, by the prayers of the
Church, for the Spirit of God, to rest upon them, who have barred their baptism
from giving it, by opposing the peace of the Church, which now they retire
unto. For how shall the Unity of the Church be secured, but by declaring them
who violate the same accursed of God?

Nor let it be thought, that, our Sectaries of their own accord retiring
themselves unto the Communion of this Church, it will be requisite for the
Church to admit them, without taking notice of any thing that has passed. For,
neither is it to be presumed, that they, who have made their own wills their
Law for so many years, will so much as profess conformity to the Rule of the
Church; And, if they did profess it, there is no reason to think that they
should stand to it; having a dispensation dormant, of the Spirit, to stand to
their profession, as the interest of their faction shall require. So, their
coming to Church would be only an advantage for them to infect others. And how
should that Communion be counted a Church, which intertains Haereticks as
Haereticks, and Schismatics as Schismatics; that is, without renouncing
positions destructive to the Faith; without obliging themselves for the future,
to hold Unity with the Church? Certainly there is no just answer for this, if
the Church of Rome should object it, for the reason why they refuse to hold
communion with us. Certainly St. Augustine, when he was charged by the
Donatists, that the Church received their Apostates without rebaptizing them,
and in their respective Orders, could have had no answer, if he had not had
this; That the Church received them not as Donatists, but as converted from
being Donatists; they not refusing to profess so much.

Certainly it may be, and perhaps is justifiable for the Secular Power, to
grant them the exercise of their Religion, in private places of their own
providing, under such moderate penalties, as the disobeying of the Laws of a
man's Country might require. For, persecution to death for that cause, the whole
Reformation condemns in the Church of Rome; And I conceive there is no reason
for that, which will not condemn persecution to banishment. But this would
require the like moderation to be extended to Recusants of the Church of Rome.
True it is, in mine opinion, those Papists that think themselves tied by the
Bull of Pius V. against Queen Elizabeth; or, that they may be tied by the like
Acts of his Successors against hers; are justly liable to the utmost of
penalties, as professed enemies to their Country. But, besides that it is
manifest, that all Papists are not of that opinion, which the said Bull
presupposes; The State may easier be secured of Papists, against all such
power in the Pope, then of our Sectaries, against that dispensation to their
Allegiance, which the pretense of Gods Spirit may import when they please.

And whereas it is manifest, that many Papists hold against those equivocations
and reservations, which destroy all confidence of the Sovereign in his Subjects
allegiance; How shall a State be secured against that infamous falsehood of
the late Usurper, in any man that pretends Gods Spirit upon his terms, which I
mentioned before? Besides, the Recusants, being for the most part, of the good
Families of the Nation, will take it for a part of their Nobility, freely to
profess themselves in their Religion, if they understand themselves; whereas
the Sectaries, being people of mean quality, for the most part, cannot be
presumed to stand upon their reputation so much. So, if they cannot be
tolerated in the exercise of their Religion, it must be provided, upon what
terms they may be received by the Church. And by that which has been said, it
may appear what my opinion will require of the Presbyterians, for the condition
of reconciling our selves into one Church again; Namely, in the first place,
their submission to the Act, or Decree, or Order, according to which the
Sectaries ought to be tied to renounce the damnable positions which they have
notoriously set on foot. For, if they should refuse this, what reason could be
alleged, why they should be counted Strangers to that infection, which they
will not exclude? As for the other Article of the Creed, concerning one Visible
Church, it is evident that they cannot belong to that Church, supposing the
Premises. For it is evident, that there was a time, when the whole Church was
governed by Bishops; and that not against Gods Law, for then there had remained
no Church. And therefore, for them to break the Unity of the Church, upon
pretense of governing this Church by Presbyters, is to break Unity, unless a
part may give Law to the whole; which who so do, are for so doing Schismatics.
And the Church of Rome would have due cause to cast us off for Schismatics, if
we should admit this pretense. But this is a point, the knowledge whereof
cannot belong to the substance of Christianity, for the reason alleged before.
And therefore, I do not think the Church tied to exact the express profession
of it, or the disclaiming of the error that is opposite to it. On the other
side, the Church, maintaining the Ordinations of Presbyters alone to be mere
nullities in themselves, can never own their Ordinations, without renouncing
the Catholic Church; yet may it consent in the persons, upon their consent to
the order, which shall be established for the future. And indeed, what can
they challenge by the mere consent of certain Presbyters, which the Ministers
of Congregations may not pretend to, by the consent of their respective
Congregations? And yet, I suppose, both parties are agreed, not to own them in
that Power which the celebration of the Eucharist imports? Let any man, that
is capable to judge of such matters, think upon the madness of the Lancashire
Presbyterians without prejudice; Of whom I am duly informed, that they caused
those, who were ordained only Deacons in the Church of England, to do the
office of Presbyters (which they had no title to) in celebrating the Eucharist;
And tell me what reason there can be, excluding the Ordinations of the
Congregations, to admit the usurpations of the Presbyterians. As for the form
and solemnity, in which the consent of the Church to their Ordinations shall
be celebrateed, therein I refer my self to the wisdom of Superiors; Thinking
it would be a great impertinence in the Presbyterians, if, finding a necessity
of submitting those whom they have already promoted, to the judgment of the
Church, for the condition upon which they are to Minister; (which, without
do^bt, is the principal) they should insist upon the accessorie, which is the
form, and solemnity, by which the power is visibly conveyed. And thus I think
the second great difficulty, concerning their Ordinations, may be composed.

Now, supposing these great difficulties set aside; the composing of our first
differences, about the Order of Bishops, and the Service, cannot seem
difficult, it the parties be content to give up their engagements, to the
advantage, which the Christianity of the Nation may have by it. For, what
reasonable Christian can think much to acknowledge, that, by reason of those
partialities, which at length have produced this Schism, the Ecclesiastical
Laws of the Land are capable of amendment in those two points? On the other
side, does not dear experience tell all parts, that the change of them by
force, though it must be called Reformation, if the Law of the Land call it
so, yet, is not likely to be that which it is called? Besides; consider the
kindness which his Majesty's return, and Gods goodness, that has overruled
men's hearts in it, has bred in all parties consenting to it. For, can we have
this before us, and not hope that it will be enough to subdue all prejudices
and animosities, to the interest of our common Christianity? Had the peace of
the Church never been questioned, it might be charity in a discreet Christian,
not to call it into question, by proposing what might be amended; because the
hope of amendment might not countervail the danger of that peace. But, now that
Unity is not to be had, without settling of agreement in matters of difference;
to propose what may seem best for the Community of Gods Church, in the cure of
our breaches, is not to give offense, but to take it away.

I will therefore premise here one consideration, which I mean to assume for a
supposition, to ground that which I shall propose to this purpose. It shall
contain that which I observe in the New Testament, and the primitive practice
Gods Church pointing out the meaning of it, concerning the difference between
the Clergy and People in all Churches, and the ground of it. For, though the
edict of our Lord in the Gospel be peremptory, that, who so forsakes not all
things, cannot be my Disciple; that is a Christian; (For, they who were other
whiles called Disciples, were called Christians at Antiochia, as we read in
the Acts,) yet common reason evinceth, that all Disciples professed not to
forsake the World, (which we all profess to forsake at our Baptism) according
to the same rate. For, we see by the Gospel, that the voluntary oblations of
those who followed our Lord, ministering to him, made a stock of money, which
Judas was trusted with, for charity to the poor, after that his followers were
provided for. But, it is against the evidence of common sense to imagine, that
all those who professed to follow Christ, and to be his Disciples, were
provided for out of this Stock. It is true, our Lord Promises in the Gospel,
that whosoever shall forsake kindred, or wife, or house, or goods, for the
Gospel, shall receive an hundred fold here, and in the World to come life
everlasting. A thing visibly fullfilled in the primitive state of the Church;
when, whosoever was persecuted for Christianity, all Christians acknowledged
themselves bound to provide for his support. Neither can it be said, how S.
Paul's saying; that godliness has the promises of this life and of that which
is to come; could be otherwise fullfilled; when those who had undertaken
Christ's Cross were subject to powers, that did, or might persecute Christianity
at their pleasure. But, though all Christians, in case of persecution, are
bound by their Baptism, to leave all they have, that they may carry Christ's
Cross him; Yet it was something more that S. Peter meant when he said; Lord
we have left all to follow thee; what shall we have? For, though a Net and a
Fisher-boat were no great thing to leave; yet, so firm a faith as to forsake a
man's whole course of living, casting himself upon the word of Christ for his
very being, whether here or in the World to come, is suitable to the promise
that follows, of sitting upon XII. Tbrones to judge the XII. Tribes of Israel.
The Christians of J^rusalem, who parted with their Estates, that the Disciples
might be maintained in their daily attendance upon Gods* service, cannot be
said to have obtained thereby any common rank in the Church. But it must be
said, that, quitting their former course and state of living, by quitting the
means of maintaining it, they became from thenceforth, either of the Clergy, or
of the poor which were always maintained out of the stock of the Church. For,
by S. Paul's instructions to Timothy, 1 Timothy V. it appears, that those Widows,
which were employed and maintained by the Church for the common necessities of
it, were to be taken out of such as were destitute of means to live otherwise.

Herewith agrees an infinite number of examples in the primitive Church, of
Godly Bishops, Priests, and others of the Clergy, who, taking upon them such
professions, divested themselves of their worldly goods; whether applying them
to the property, or only to the use of the Church; as reserving themselves
power to dispose of them, in favor of friends or kindred, at their death. And,
from the same reason and ground proceed all the Canons, whereby it was
provided, that they should not dispose of the Church goods to such uses, at
death; but of their own, well and good. For, whatsoever their estates were,
though they renounced them not, yet, it became necessary for them to live as
others of the Clergy lived; who were generally poor when they were promoted,
and therefore professed to content themselves with mere necessaries, because
the Church goods, of which they lived, were due to the maintenance of the poor,
as well as of the Clergy. From whence we may see, what truth there is in those
sayings of the Fathers, which make the precepts of our Lord, in his Sermon upon
the mount, matters of Counsel. For, if all Christians be to leave all things
that they may follow Christ, it is certain that they are commanded, and not
only advised, to turn the other cheek, to quit a man's Coat to him that takes
away his Cloak, to undergo the rest of those precepts, whereby our Lord
describes the duty of a Christian; provided they be so understood, as the
maintenance of a man's estate in the World, and the obligations which it
infers, even by virtue of that Christianity which allows the same, will
require. But, if there be another estate in the Church, of Disciples which
profess of follow Christ, leaving the employment of the world for that purpose;
and therefore, to forbear the pleasures and profits thereof accordingly; That
strict Rate and that high degree, in which they profess to leave the world to
follow Christ, must needs be mere matter of Counsel; because no man is
commanded to undertake that estate, but invited to it, for the securing of his
Salvation, who knows he may be saved without it. Whereby it appears, that this
estate imports a profession of abstinence from the pride, the revenge, the
lusts and pleasures of the world, as well as from the riches of it; as well of
the humility, the patience, the continence, the meekness and obedience of our
Lord, as of the mean estate in which he lived; But that, for the means to
compass this end, it imports first, a profession of renouncing the rank and
estate which every man holds in the world: and of dedicating himself to the
service of the Church, and that employment which tends to the common good of
Christians.

If it should be inferred from hence, that the state of the Clergy, importing
the forsaking of the World, at this extraornary Rate, must therefore import the
profession of single life, as some of the Church of Rome would have it; The
answer is, that it will not follow. And the instance is peremptory; That the
Apostles themselves, who thus left the world, did not profess it. And if, by
undertaking the Clergy, a man was not obliged to renounce his goods; As appears
by those Canons which enable the Clergy to dispose of them at death; much less
does that estate import a profession of single life; being more difficult to
perform, then to live as a Clergy man upon the Church goods. For, it is
possible for them who have wives, to live as if they had them not, according to
S. Paul; No otherwise, then it is possible for them who have the dispensing of
Church goods, to use them as if they used them not. The reason of single life
for the Clergy is firmly grounded, by the Fathers and Canons of the Church,
upon the precept of S. Paul, forbidding man and wife to part, unless for a
time, to attend upon Prayer. For, Priests and Deacons being continually to
attend upon occasions of celebrating the Eucharist, which ought continually to
be frequented; if others be to abstain from the use of Marriage for a time,
for that purpose, then they always. And this is the reason, that prevailed so
far, even in the primitive times, that the instances which are produced to the
contrary, during those times, seem to argue no more then dispensation in a
Rule, which had the force of a Law, when an exception took not place; That is,
when those that were thought necessary for the service of the Church, thought
not fit to tie themselves to live single.

But this profession was evidently the ground for that discipline, which was
used all over the Church, in breeding youth from tender years, to such a strict
course of life, as only use and custom is able to render agreeable to man's
nature. And to this education and discipline, all the authority and credit of
the Clergy over the people is to be imputed; the dissolution whereof, is the
true occasion of the miseries which we have seen. For, did the people think
themselves tied to depend upon the Clergy for their instructions, to admit
their admonitions and reproofs in matter of Religion; (that is, did the
discipline and education of the Clergy maintain them in that authority with the
people) it is not possible, that the pride which has been seen, in setting up
new Religions, and giving new Laws to the Church, should take place. But this
authority is not to be preserved, without retirement from the world; that is,
from conversation with the People, of what rank or degree soever, whether upon
pretense of profit or pleasure. And therefore, being once lost, by the
debauches of the Clergy before the Reformation, it is not to be restored,
without restoring the ground of it, the said education and discipline; nor, by
consequence, the Reformation to be counted complete otherwise; Supposing
always the Reformation to be the restoring of that Church which has be, not
the building of that which has not been. The same education and discipline is,
by the express Canons of the Church, the ground of that title, upon which
promotion is due to the Clergy, in their respective Churches. For, what is more
against the Rules of the Church, then to take such men for Priests and Bishops
of such Churches, as men know not how they behaved themselves in lower degrees?
Those that talk of the Interest of the People in Ecclesiastical promotions,
without supposing this ground, do allege nothing but their own dreams, to bring
their own dreams to pass.

Having this premised, I must needs say, I see no manner of inconvenience in
that which the Presbyterians pretend for the chief cause of their distance;
that is, the concurrence of Presbyters with their Bishops, in Ordinations, and
the Jurisdiction of the Church; provided it be settled in that form, which,
being grounded upon the Rule of the Catholic Church, may tend to restore and
advance the common Christianity.

Now, I take the Rule of the Church to be as evidently this, as the common
Christianity is evident; that every City, with the Territory thereof, be the
feat and content of a Church. For, though it has been used with so much
difference in several parts and times of the Church, that those Countries,
which some whiles, and some where, might have been cast into fourscore
Churches, have other whiles, and elsewhere, been cast into four; yet, these are
but exceptions to a Rule, which, the Law says, do not destroy, but confirm it.
For, in matters concerning the Whole, the Unity of the Whole, may as well be
preserved by the concurrence of four, as of fourscore.

The Churches, (that is, according to this Rule) the Dioceses of England, have
been constituted and distinguished upon occasion of the Sovereignties, in
which, and by consent whereof, the Christianity of the Nation was first
planted. He that considers with half an eye, shall easily see, how the
conversion of Kent, of the East, and South, and West Saxons, of the East Angles
and Mercians, and lastly of Northumberland, produced the foundation of English
Churches. For, of the British foundations, in the West parts of the Island,
from the two Forths to the Lands end, the same account is to be kept; the
Dominion of the Britains being for some time divided into several
Sovereignties. He that is convicted of this truth, (which no man can be
convicted of, but he that considers the case; But, who so considers the
case, must needs stand convict of it) will easily grant me, that when the
Monarchy prevailed, and England came to be divided into Counties, the General
Rule of the Church would have required another course to have been observed.
For, had the Head Town of every County been made the Seat of a Church
containing that County, no man, that surveys the division of the Roman Empire
into Churches (made without the secular Power, as before Constantine) will
deny; That, the division so made would have been more correspondent to the
primitive form, tending to the Unity of the Whole.

But, let no man think, that, for the love of such a correspondence, I have any
itch to call in question the Unity of the Whole. The alteration is great, and
must needs produce a great motion, to ingraffe it into the Laws of the Kingdom.
And therefore, I am not of opinion to change the Law for hope of amendment,
with so much appearance of danger, to the being of the Whole. But I am of
opinion, that it would be easy to erect Presbyteries; that is, Colleges of
Presbyters, in all Shire Towns which have no Cathedral Churches; for the
Ecclesiastical Government of the respective Counties, with, and under the
Bishops; And that so, the Rule of the Church would be set on work, to the best
effect and purpose. For, those Towns have commonly Churches altogether
unprovided of means, through the horrible sacrileges that have passed; and yet,
in common reason, (agreeing with the wisdom of Gods Spirit, from whence the
Rule of Episcopacy issued) ought to be Nurseries of Christianity to the
respective Counties. And that intent cannot so well be brought to effect, as
by planting the wisest, and those that have most of the Clergy in their lives,
in the most eminent places, with authority next to the Chief, over their
respective bounds. By the ministry of such persons, the Offices of Gods
service might so be performed in the chief places, as might be a pattern for
their Country Churches to follow. These Presbyters might grow up, by education,
in that discipline of the Clergy, which I have recommended upon the experience
of the whole Church. They might live a Collegiate life in common, exercising a
care and inspection over Inferiors; together with the charge of instructing,
or seeing them instructed in the Scriptures. The Canon of the whole Church,
confining all degrees of the Clergy to their respective Churches, might be
revived by their means; The superseding whereof, being certainly one of the
irregularities of the Papacy, has conduced much to the dissolution of
Discipline in the Church. For, in conscience, how can he that is obliged to
any Church, give account of himself to another, to which the first is not
subordinate? And therefore, though the Presbyteries which I propose be not
Churches, yet may they take account of their respective Clergy, and render it
to their Bishops. The promotion of inferior Orders, belonging unto their
account, may procced upon the account which they give. The censures that are
requisite to pass in foro exteriori may pass them in the first instance, and
from them being transmitted to the Bishop, be either inacted or voided; Always
with right of appeal to the Synod of the Province, in cases of weight, and in
the intervals thereof, to their Deputies; To which purpose, and in which
nature, the High Commission ought to be revived. For, as it is by no means to
be allowed, that the Bishops negative be any way questioned; So is it no way
fit, that the consent of Bishop and Presbyters both be concluded in one and
the same instance. As for those Dioceses which are concluded within only one
County; there, I suppose, I need not say, that the Chapter of the Cathedral are
by inheritance this Presbytery.

Now, these Colleges of Presbyters consisting of those only, that shall have
run the whole course of their lives in the education and discipline of the
Clergy; is there any possible pretense of burden upon them, if the condition
of single life should be required, to qualify them for their places? For,
this were not to tie any man to single life, seeing who will may go forth, and
be provided of a Country Church; But it were to maintain the discipline of the
Clergy, in the most eminent places, wherein, there is a course proposed to them
who embrace it, of ending their days in it. And the course of a Collegiate
life, which I propose, seems a sufficient means and advantage to overcome
those temptations, which in these days, may seem too difficult for all the
Clergy to undergo.

As for the means of supporting these Presbyteries, wherein the Gure of all
Parishes within the Shire Towns is provided for, and included; It is no
difficulty to him that considers with conscience, that originally, the
indowment of the Diocese was the Patrimony of the Mother Church; and afterward
appropriated to Parish Churches, by abating the right of the Mother Church,
upon particular contracts, appearing to be for the good of the parts. For, if
the Mother Church have abated so much of her common right, when it was for the
good of the Parishes; Is it not necessary, that the Parishes now abate of their
property in their respective indowments, by Pensions to these Colleges, now
they appear to be for the good of the Diocese? And this I am now bold to
profess, though Superiors do not go before in it, because I am confident, that
by this position, I abate not a hair of that Power which the Bishops in England
now use; But I add much to the strictness of discipline, (that is, in effect,
of Christianity) by requiring all Ordinations, all acts of Jurisdiction in foro
exteriori, to pass both the Presbyters and the Bishop in several instances. And
further then this I extend not the opinion of a Divine to particulars; but
leave the rest entire to the wisdom of Superiors. And this may serve to show*
that there is no cause why the difference on foot, concerning the Government of
the Church, may not settle into a change, conducing to the advancement of the
common Christianity.

Which will hold till stronger in the other, concerning the Service, if men
take their measures by the common interest of Christianity, not by their
particular prejudices. For, I conceive, I may well suppose, that the Sectaries
pretense of praying by the Spirit, is content to be buried in oblivion and
silence; considering that the excesses are evident, and horrible, which that
pretense has brought forth. Besides, that no man now stands to that dangerous
position; That the Offices of Gods service are of no effect, when they are
ministered by such as are not in the state of Grace. For, I presume it is not,
nor can be supposed on any hand, that all whom the Church must employ, are
endowed with Gods spirit; that is, are in the state of Grace. I suppose
further, as not questioned on any hand, that the public service of God is to
consist of the praises of God, (by the Psalms of David, and other Hymns of Gods
Church) of the reading of the Scriptures, of the instruction of Gods people out
of them; in fine, of the Prayers of the Church, and in the chief place, of the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, and those prayers which it is to be celebrated
with.

Some of our Sects have been bold to pretend, that the Psalter, or Psalms of
David, are impertinent to the Devotions of Christians; as concerning the
particular condition of David, and composed with regard to it. Whereby they
overthrow the foundation of Christianity, standing upon this supposition; that
the Old Testament is the figure and shadow of the New, and that Christ has the
key of the writings, as well as of the house of David. For, seeing Christ and
his mystical Body the Church are all one, the meaning and intent of the Psalms
cannot concern Christ, but it must end in his Church. But, seeing the Church is
but shadowed in the Psalms, being part of the Old Testament; I can expect no
dispute of the necessity of other Hymns, composed under Christianity, in the
solemnizing of Gods public service. And seeing the question on foot concerns
the settling of the form of Gods service by a Law of the Kingdom; there can
remain no dispute concerning the necessity of a settled Order in reading the
Scriptures, and using the Psalms and Hymns of the Church. Nor do I know any
man, sincerely professing the Reformation, that could which not wish with all
his heart, that the whole order and form to be settled, with the circumstance
of the same, might be according to the primitive simplicity, and naked
plainness of the ancient Church; supposing the difference between the state in
which the Church lived under persecution, and now, that, being protected by the
secular Power, it receives all the World to take part in the service of God.
For, what difference this will infer in the Order and Rule of Gods service, to
be inacted by a Law of this Kingdom, common reason, and the perpetual practice
of Gods Church, together with the precedents recorded in Scripture, must be
admitted to Witness.

These things supposed, no man doubts, that the form of service now in force by
the Law of this Land, may be acknowledged capable of amendment, without
disparagement, either to the wisdom of the Church, that prescribed, or of the
Nation that inacted it. For, what positive Law of man is there that is not?
Nay, what arrogance can it be in a particular person, (having bestowed more
consideration upon it, then it is possible, that those who had the framing of
it should have leisure to do) to think that he knows some particulars, in
which it might be mended? For, neither does it follow, that it is better to
endanger the spoiling of it by calling it in question, then to let it rest as
it is: And that particular person, whosoever he is, that should think his own
opinion necessary to be followed, without compromising it to the public,
would justly incur the mark of arrogance. Since therefore, that this is the
time for such a debate, if any change be pretended; and that the reasons
mentioned before, are of sufficient consideration to oblige all sides, to prefer
unity before prejudice; what remains, but that, either it be left entire in
that State wherein it stands, or that nothing be changed, without sufficient
debate of reason upon the whole, what is fit to be changed, what not?

But one thing I must here expressly stand upon, because the form of Gods
service which has been usurped during the Schism, protests against the Law
in force. I acknowledge, that the whole Reformation protests against the
insufficience and defects of the Church of Rome, in the course which it takes
for the instruction of Christian people, in the duties of their Christianity;
against the abuses there practiced, in celebrating the Eucharist without any
pretense of a Communion, in private Masses: and in serving God in a Language
which the people understand not. For, these abuses are a principal part of the
ground for that change, which we justly maintain to be Reformation; The
boldness of those that opposed it, being come to such a height, as openly to
maintain, that it concerns not Christian people to know, or to mind what is
done at the Mass, (being the ordinary service of God, for which they come to
Church,) or what is said; But, that the intention of the Priest is enough to
apply the sacrifice of Christ to all that are present, (which they think it
does no less to them that are absent; and therefore leave us unsatisfied why
people should come to Church) who need do nothing but say their Paters and
their Aves. These abuses I do acknowledge. But, be the World my witness, and
all that know what has passed, for the matter of Religion, in the World; was it
ever protested, by those who demanded Reformation in the Church, that the
Eucharist ought to be celebrated but four times or twelve times in the year?
That by Gods Law, there ought to be two Sermons every Sunday in every Church?
That other Festivals beside the Sunday, and set times of Fasting ought not to
be solemnized with the service of God? That the Church doors ought not to be
open, but when there is preaching? Take the primitive practice of the Church
along with the Scripture, and they shall tell you another tale; that Prayer,
and the praises of God, is the more principal end of Christian Assemblies, then
Preaching. The reason is unanswerable; For, the one is the end, the other the
means. That the celebration of the Eucharist is the most principal Office of
Gods service under Christianity, is no less evident. For, other Offices are
common to Judaisme; this, consisting most in Prayers, consists of those Prayers
which are proper to Christianity; that is, to those causes wherein our
Salvation consists. And can there be question how frequent it ought to be?
Shall not the practice of the whole Church, from the beginning, decide the
question, if any remain? The single life of the Clergy prevailed for this end,
that they might be always ready to celebrate the Eucharist; say the Fathers,
and the Canons, which I alleged before. It is a question in Gennadius de
dogmatibus Ecclesiasticis, whether every man ought to communicate every day or
not. But therefore no question, that it ought to be celebrated every day, that
who so would might communicate. In conscience, would they be bound to Preach
every day, that are so much for Preaching? After the reading of the Scripture,
follows the Sermon, and after that the Eucharist; This is the primitive order
of the whole Church, at that solemn service, when the* Eucharist (on
Fasting-days in the Evening, on other days before Noon) was Celebrated. After
the Scriptures were read, the people were taught their duty out of them. A
thing necessary and possible. Not that every Curate should be bound to declame
by the Glass; But, that he should be bound to instruct his Parish out of the
Scriptures which are read: If he be tied to Preach as often as the Church
door opens, the Church door must be shut; because no sides can hold out, so
often as Christians ought to meet for Gods service. I call the World to witness;
Is it not as much a work of lungs and sides, as an Office of Gods service,
which takes up the time of their Church Assemblies? Is not the way opened, by
this means, to declame of public Government in Church and State, to intertain
the Hearers? For alas, should men confine themselves to that which the
generality of their audience might edify by, in their Christianity, the Trade
would be obstructed.

For, let me freely say, the undoubted truth of the common Christianity,
(which no Sermons ought to exceed, because they pretend the edification of the
generality of Christians) is contained in so narrow a compass, that no
eloquence (much less, the eloquence of all that must come into the Pulpit) can
change the seasoning and serving of it, so as to make it agreeable to men's
palats; without fetching in matter impertinent, if not destructive to the common
Christianity. And the same is, for more peremptory reason, to be said of
arbitrary Prayers. For, the very posture of him, that pretends to prefer the
devotions of Gods people to the Altar which is above, strongly impresseth upon
the hearts of simple Christians, an opinion, that thereby they discharge to God
the duty which he requires at their hands. Which, if the matter of those
Prayers be such as the common Christianity requires, they may do indeed. But,
if it be possible, that Rebellion, Slander, Nonsense and Blasphemy may be the
matter of them, as well as Christianity, then is it not Religion, but
Superstition which such devotions exercise: Nor, can that Kingdom stand excused
to God, which shall gratify that licentiousness, whereof they see the effect
before their eyes. All reason of Christianity concurres with the practice of
the whole Church, to witness; that the interest of Christianity requires the
service of God to be maintained and exercised daily, (yea hourly, were it
possible) not only by particular Christians, but by Assemblies of Christians,
so far as the business of the World will give leave, and as there is means to
maintain men's attendance upon it. There may come abuse in the order, the form,
the matter of that which is tendered to God for his Service. But, in stead of
reforming those abuses, to take away the means, the Rule, the obligation of
such meetings, is mere Sacrilege, in destroying, (under pretense of Reforming)
Gods Church.

And, though I charge no such design upon those who maintain the obligation of
the Sabbath to consist in two Sermons; yet I do maintain, it is manifest to
common reason, that the form which that opinion introduces necessarily tends
to that effect. Strange it is, that a Nation capable of sense, in an age
improved by learning, should be entangled with the superstition of so vain an
imagination; that God by the same fourth Commandment, should oblige both Jews
to keep the Saturday, and Christians the Sunday; Especially, no man daring to
maintain, that both were, or are tied to the same measure of resting. And
therefore, though, (rather then cross the stream of such a superstition; For,
let no man think, that all superstition can be shut out of Gods Church) there
may be reason to live conformable to the Rules which such superstition
produces; Yet, provided that the Ecclesiastical Laws of England, agreeing with
the Laws of the Whole Church, be not abated, so as to stick an evident mark of
Schism upon the Church of England. For, the Law that is recommending the
celebration of the Eucharist, upon all Sundays and Festivals; but commanding
the Service to be used, as well on Festivals and Fasting days, as upon
Sundays, (besides the week days) at the public Assemblies of respective
Congregations; To change this Order for two Sermons on the Sunday alone, what
is it but to renounce the whole Church, for the love of those that have divided
from the Church of England, upon causes common to it with the whole Church?

They that would have the Reformation of the Church to be indeed, that which
the Law of the Land calls it, should first provide a course to be
established for Law, by which, all Christian souls, (who have equal interest in
the commonsalvation) might serve God in public, all Sundays and Festivals.
For, seeing there was a course in Law, before the Reformation, for all
servants, as well as others, to be at Mass all Sundays and Festivals; And the
Church was enabled to require account of it at their hands; It will not be
Reformation to abrogate the abuses of the Mass, till a course be taken, that
all Christians may frequent that, which shall appear to be indeed the service
of God instead of the Mass. Let no Preachers flatter themselves with an
opinion, that they shall ever make Christians so perfectly Jews, as to persuade
them to dress no meat on the Sundays. If Servants must stay at home to dress
meat on Sundays, (and for other occasions they must stay at home, besides that)
will not the way to repair that breach, be to enjoin several Assemblies in all
Parish Churches, upon all Sunday mornings; that several Persons, of several
Estates and qualities, may have opportunity to attend the public service of
God, at several hours of the same Sundays and Holy Days? For, though I
understand very well, that this would impose upon the Church, (that is, upon my
brethren of the Clergy,) a greater burden, than an afternoons meal of a
Sermon; (which all men know, is furnished of the cold meat of the forenoon)
yet, it is necessary that the World should be cleared of this imposture that
reigns; that two Sermons every Sunday, is the due way of keeping the Sabbath
among Christians, or of advancing Gods public service.

I will not here dispute, that the Lent-Fast was instituted by the Apostles.
But this I maintain to be evident, that the Fast before the Resurrection of
Christ is and was as ancient as the Feast of his Resurrection; and that more
ancient then the keeping of all Lords days in the year, being merely the
reflection of that one, all the weeks of the year. Nor will any man, that knows
what he says, ever question, that the enlarging of it to forty days is a just
Law, voluntarily undertaken by the Whole Church, not to be condemned without
the like mark of Schism. For, since the World is come into the Church, is
there not manifest reason, that more time should be taken, for the expiating
of more sins, which are the sins of more people? to prepare, as well the Elder,
to renew their Christianity by communicating at Easter; as the younger to be
confirmed, and come first to the Communion at Easter, now they are baptized
Infants? Which, in former ages, was the time of their first coming to Baptism
As for the Wednesdays and Fridays, if we shall not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, unless our Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees; And, if it be evident, as evident it is, that the Scribes and
Pharisees prescribed Mundays and Thursdays for days of less solemn Assemblies
then the Sabbath; How shall we enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, if in despite
of the whole Church, which has hitherto used Wednesdays and Fridays, in lieu
of Mundays and Thursdays, used by the Synagogues, we void the Law of England
by which they are in force? Of the Ceremonies the same is to be understood;
Not because it can be within the compass of common reason to imagine, that the
same Ceremonies have continued, from the time that the Church was persecuted
into holes and caves of the Earth, to this time, in which the question is of
settling Christianity by the Law of this Kingdom. It were want of common
understanding to think that the same could serve. But, because so few, and so
innocent as we use, cannot be condemned, without condemning, not only Gods
whole Church, but also Gods ancient people; who will evidently be found in the
same cause.

One thing has been cast forth in bar to all this, which we must not
swallow whole, unless we mean to impose upon our selves. It is the pretense of
complying with the Reformed Churches. For, it is evident, that there are four
forms of Reformation extant; One according to Luther, another according to
Calvine, the third is, that of the Church of England, and in the last place,
(though first for time, because least known, and protected by no Sovereign) I
name that the Union in Bohemia. For, we are to know, that the followers of
John Husse having sent Deputies to the Council of Basil, they accorded to
reunite the Nation upon four Articles; The chief whereof was the Communion in
both kinds. They that stood to the accord, are to this day called thereupon
Calixtini, or sub utraque, in Latin. But another part of those that were at
distance, thinking themselves betrayed by their Deputies in that accord,
proceeded to settle themselves in a form of Religion, and the service of God,
by that which they held the pure truth of God, in all points that had been
disputed. The Emperor Ferdinand 1. King of Bohemia, having subdued his
subjects there, that rose with the Protestants in Germany, cast a good part of
these out of the Country; who, finding shelter in Polonia; and Prussia, there
planted and propagated their form, till the troubles of our time; when, by the
Emperors victory in Bohemia, and the late troubles in Poland, they seem to be
at a low ebb, though they impute it to the decay of their first discipline.

They that would reform the Church of England, professing already that
Reformation which it found best, will they not first show us reason, why we
are to leave Luther for Calvine? For, if they mean his form, when they talk of
conforming us to the reformed Churches, because of the Scots Presbyteries, they
must have better arguments, then either the learning or the Christianity of the
Scottish Presbyterians will yield, to persuade us. They say, those that framed
the Reformation in England, being bred under Melancthon among the Lutherans,
followed them much an end in the order and form which they prescribed. But is
that any reason for any change, before it appear which is in the right? I
freely profess I find Melancthon the better learned, and the more Christian
spirit. But the Church of England, which in diverse points differs from both,
why should it be thought to follow either, for any reason, but, as either
agrees with the Catholic Church? And for that I prefer the Unity of Bohemia
before both; For, they had the rule of Vincentius given them, to take their
measure by the consent of the Catholic Church, and those things which have
always and every where been professed and practiced in it: And, had they done
nothing but what is justifiable by that Rule, I should not blame them for that
which I blame in them most. But where they agree not with Luther and Calvine,
wherein do they not agree with the Church of England?

In particular, they sent all over the World, to inform themselves of a visible
succession of Bishops, whose profession was such, that they might derive the
Ordination of Bishops, for their Churches, from their hands. They took the
superstitions of the Greeks to be such, that they could not own it from them.
In that think they were in the wrong. For, I doubt not, the Greeks would have
granted them Ordination only under the profession of the Catholic Church; and
that had been enough. But, thinking themselves in a strait of necessity, they
chose twelve by lots; And hearing that the Waldenses lived in Austria under
Bishops, deriving their succession from the time of Constantine; (and therefore
from the Apostles) they sent them thither to be Ordained, protesting against
their weakness, in going to Mass for fear. The protestation was admitted, and
the persons ordained Bishops. Now, I take not upon me to maintain the truth of
that information, concerning the succession of these Bishops, whereupon they
proceeded. But, they being reasonably persuaded of it, and not knowing how to
proceed otherwise, (through a mistake or an exigent, which they could not
overcome) and settling themselves upon an innocent presumption; why should the
effect of these Ordinations seem questionable? For, under these Bishops they
have subsisted from that day to this.

And, with what conscience is it demanded, for conformity to the Reformation,
that we acknowledge them Priests who are ordained against Bishops? If we do
not, we shall condemn those Reformed Churches, which have no Bishops. Is it
the fashion, that a man quit his cloak, because his fellow has none? Or is it
any thing else, to renounce a good Title, because they cannot plead it? There
was a good expedient in the ancient Church, to refer things to God, which could
not be decided without a breach in the Church. Let their zeal against the
abuses of the Church of Rome be counted pardonable with God, which caused them
to think the Order of Bishops a support of Antichrist; when as the Papacy is
visibly raised upon the rights of Bishops which it ingrosseth. Let the
difficulty of procuring Ordinations, and having Bishops, render them excusable
to God. Those that are ordained by Presbyters against Bishops, on purpose to
set up Altar against Altar, how can we count them ordained, refusing the
concurrence of the Church to their Ordinations? They that would tie us to
comply with the Reformation, are first to show us, that the Unity of Bohemia is
no part of it; And, that their Reformation is not to be preferred, either
before that of Luther, or that of Calvine. For, can we acknowledge the
Ordinations of Presbyters against their Bishops, and not condemn them, that
sought all over the World for Bishops to ordain them Bishops, that the Bishops
so ordained might ordain them Presbyters?

But, not only in this prime point of our differences, but also in the
difference of the Clergy from the people, in the three Orders, of Bishops,
Presbyters, and Deacons, in the matter of Justification and the Eucharist, of
Confirmation, and Penance, of the Festivals and Fasts of the Church, and of
diverse Orders and institutions of less consequence, their profession agrees
with the ancient Church, and the Church of England, where it departs from
both Luther and Calvine. In the matter of Penance (though with much humility)
they tell the Lutherans roundly, they have but one of the Keys, viz. that of
loosing, but bind not; as pronouncing absolution without injoyning of Penance.
The discipline of Geneva they magnify indeed, as they find it described by
Bodine, in his method of Histories; But they distinguish not, whether they mean
the civil discipline, which the Laws of that State enforce, or that which the
Power of the Keys, exercised there according to Calvine, does constitute. For,
the Civil Law of a Christian State (especially, no bigger then that of Geneva)
may settle such a discipline over the outward man, as may restrain from the
outward act of sin, without mortifying the inward man to the inward love of
God. The late Usurpers Army we have seen well disciplined, against the
ordinary vices of the Camp; Who, appearing now to have been then enemies to
their Country, are thereby discovered not to have followed the reward of
Christiens, but of Soldiers. And the Laws of Christian States, by the means of
Christianity which they maintain, may reach to the mortifying of sin, and the
quickening of righteousness at the heart; But of themselves, being Civil Laws,
and proposing no further reward or punishment, then that good which a man's
Country signifies, they reach no further then the outward man, for the better
or for the worse. Nor is it of any* greater consequence to Christianity, that
the outward act of sin or virtue is repressed or encouraged, by the rewards and
penalties of Civil Laws. But, when the discipline of the Church takes place,
he who forfeiteth his Christianity by gross sin that is notorious, forfeiteth
also Communion with the Church; and recovereth it not, till the presumption be
no less notorious, that he has recovered his Christianity. Now, Communion
with the Church is the consequence of our Baptism, which intitleth us to life
everlasting. Therefore it is not duly forfeited, without forfeiting the effect
of Baptism, our right to life everlasting. So, our right to heaven depending
upon the Communion of the Church; the discipline of the Church must needs reach
the inward man as effectually, as any outward application can reach the heart,
which is invisible. For, the presumption is grounded upon visible works of
Penance; the effects of that invisible disposition; without which they could
not be constantly brought forth. Whether or no this discipline be visible at
Geneva; I will not pronounce. This I undertake, that, comparing the Doctrine of
Calvine with their Orders; they need not set a value upon the Power of the Keys
exercised according to his Doctrine, in comparison of the same exercised
according to their own Orders. So that supposing, not granting, that the Laws
of the Church of England, (being the Laws of the primitive Catholic Church)
are to be changed for conformity with the Reformed Churches; it follows not
therefore, that they are to be changed, for those of the Churches reformed
according to Calvine. Certainly, the receiving of the Communion kneeling having
been one of the Orders of their Reformation from the beginning, and so stiffly
insisted upon by them in Poland; they that pretend to change the Law of England
in that point, for conformity with the Reformation, think they have not men but
beasts to deal with.

The Church of England, in the Commination against sinners, has declared a
great zeal for the renewing of that ancient discipline of Penance, which was in
force in the primitive Church. And certainly, the Church of England is not the
Church of England but in Name, till the power of Excommunication be restored
unto it, which there was not, nor ever can be sufficient cause to take from
any Church. But, the discipline of Penance, though depending upon the Power of
Excommunication, is as much to be preferred b^^ore it, as it is more desirable
to bring men to the Church, then to shut them out of it. If prejudice and
faction have not more to do in the pretenses of this time, then the truth of
Christianity, and zeal to advance it; it is a point that cannot be neglected
in any deliberation of Reforming the Church. I cannot render a more visible
reason, why so godly a zeal, in those that first prescribed our Reformation, to
the restoring of Penance, has not been improved by their successors; then the
partialities which sprung up in it like tares in the wheat, and have now
prevailed to choke even the power of Excommunication, wherein the being of a
Church consists. And though many sins of this Nation may be alleged, for
the cause why God has taken this sharp revenge upon us; yet can no reason be
so proper, why he should permit the hedge of the Church to be cast down, (for
all Sects to devour, and tread his Vin^yard under foot) by suffering the power
of Excommunication to be taken from it; as the neglect of improving it, in and
to the discipline of Penance. True it is, not only all capital, but all
infamous crimes, whereof men are convicted by Law, are thereby notorious, and
require this discipline, no less then those which the Law of this Land
punishes not otherwise then by Penance. And if the Church did make a
difference among those that dye by public Justice; owning only those, who
approve their desire to undergo regular Penance, in case they might survive;
then were this discipline visible, no visible crime escaping it. For, all
capital and infamous crimes, that are not actually punished with death, must
by that reason remain unreconciled to the Church; though free of the Law; till
Penance be done. And seeing crimes that are not known cannot be cured upon
easier terms then those that are; would not the judgment of the Law,
authorizing the Church in the cure of known sins, move even them that believe
their Christianity, no further then it is authorized by Law, to submit
invisible sins to the same cure? For, what is it, but the slighting of this
cure, that makes men's sins fester and rankle inwardly, and break out into
greater and greater excesses? And therefore, to debate of Ceremonies, and words
in the service, and May-poles, and Sabbath days journeyes, not considering the
Power of the Keys, upon which the Church is founded, and the restoring of the
same; is to neglect a consumption at the heart, pretending only to cure the
hair, or the nails.

Now if any of our Sects insist upon a pretense that deserves to be insisted
upon, far be it from us to cast off the consideration of it, because they have
unduely separated from the Church for it. Our Anabaptists, it is known, infist
upon two points; The baptizing of Infants; and that, by sprinkling, not by
dipping. In both, they have neglected St. Peter's Doctrine; That Baptism saves
us, not the laying aside of the filth of our flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience to God. For, were the profession of Christianity, celebrated by the
Sacr^^^nt of Baptism, believed to be that which saves us, men would not go
to baptize them, as not baptized, who by their profession (which they
acknowledge by seeking the Communion of the Church) are under that bond, which
intitleth them to the Salvation of Christians. Nor can there be any greater
presumption, then the voiding of Baptism so celebrated, that they expect
Salvation upon other terms. But*, in making void Baptism ministered by
sprinkling alone, without dipping, they neglect St. Peter again; when he
makes the Baptism that saves not to consist in cleansing the flesh, but in a
due profession of Christianity; signifying this to be the principal, that
only the accessory Ceremony, which it is solemnized with. And therefore, they
are to acknowledge this difference, by acknowledging Baptism so ministered to
be good and valid, not void. But, this being acknowledged, well may they
insist, that it is unduely ministered. For it is evident, that, neithe^ the
Scripture, nor the practice of the whole Church, can by any means allow the
sprinkling of water for Baptism; though the pouring on of water, in case of
necessity, be allowed. Nor does the Law of the Church of England allow any
more then pouring water upon a Child that is weak, commanding therefore dipping
otherwise. And therefore this Law, being much weakened by the tenderness of
Mothers and Friends, (supposing all Infants weak, which the Law supposes not)
and by undue zeal for Foreign Fashions, ought to be revived and brought into
use by all Ordinaries, that there may remain no color for such an offense. And
therefore, reparation is to be made for the sacrilege of the late Wars, in
destroying the Fonts of Baptism in Churches, and bringing in Christening out
of Basins by force.

I cannot say that I have touched all that is fit to be touched. But I hope I
have said nothing, but that which follows upon the ground, which I have
justified. That which is proposed, and is not so justified, seems to demand the
consent of those who propose it, as able to hold the Church divided, if they
be not contented; But that calls to mind a reason on the other side, that men
use to get a stomach with eating, in such cases. The due measure is not the
satisfying of men's appetites, but the improvement of our common Christianity.

FINIS.
Faults Escaped, thus Amended. Page 7. line 2. mistakes. Point mistakes? p. 40.
l. 32. none read now p. 49. l. 16. Church, p. Church; p. 60. l. 36. Laws r.
Land p. 79. l. 14. of the Judgment. r. of Judgment. p. 84. l. 34. Trihes r.
Tribes p. 90. l. 10. Praedestinarians. r. Praedestinatians l. 12. West, p.
West. p. 108. l. 33. Bishop; Priest and Deacon, p. Bishop Priest and Deacon; p.
112. l. 14. Service; p. Service. p. 134. l. 12. all these r. those p. 143. l.
34. he performing r. the p. p. 145. l. 15. Hierachy r. Hierarchy p. 157. l. 24.
prescribled r. prescribed l. 29, 30. the the Power r. the P. p. 158. l. 6.
Memoral r. Memorial p. 173. l. 37. Order r. Orders p. 179. l. 29. leave r. bear
p. 189. l. 31. which r. with p. 201. l. 25. Church, p. Church;


