THE SOULS SOLACE In times of trouble. With several particular remedies
against DESPAIR, collected out of the Psalms of DAVID. And some short
Meditations and Ejaculations upon the Attributes of God, the Lords Prayer, and
the ten Commandments.

Written for the comfort of all the afflicted. By F. THORN, Gent.

Psalm. 92.5.6. O Lord, how glorious are thy works, and thy thoughts are very
deep.

An unwise man does not well consider this, and a fool does not understand it.

LONDON, Printed by THO: HARPER, and are to be sold by Philip Nevil at the
sign of the Gun in Ivy Lane. MDCXLIII.

The PRINTER to the READER.
Judicious Reader,
THe Learned Author of these ensuing Divine Poems, (The souls Solace in times
of trouble,) having with great pains, care and industry, perused diverse
Authors for the furtherance of this his Work, as thou may perceive by the
first printed sheet thereof; and leaving the same to my dispose, I finding the
said quotations so far to exceed the place, against which they ought to stand,
that according to diverse printed Books, I resolved (for thy ease and benefit)
without my Authors consent, to place them at the end of the said Poems in a
fair Character, with reference to each page and line, marked with several
letters of the Alphabet: as thus (a) etc. where thou may easily find them.
And so I commend them with the whole unto thee, resting

Thine T. H.

To the indifferent Reader.
REaders, you I mean th^e are led by reason, not by affection, when this or
any other Book presents it self to your view or censure, read not to
contradict, nor to believe, but weigh and consider, despise not the matter for
the meannesse of the style; solid and sober natures have more of the ballast
then of the sail; decaying Merchants have many tricks to uphold the credit of
their wealth and ability, empty and barren brains fine glistering phrases and
flourishes to m^intaine the credit of their sufficiency, discretion of speech
is more then eloquence, and to speak agreeably to those with whom we deal is
more then to speak in learned words. Christ for the good of the town where he
was brought up (a pattern imitable) went, nay (...), traveled from Galilee to
Nazaret, from a Village to a Hamlet, from a great City to a small Village, Sic
vacat exiguis rebus adesse Jovi: I, for the good and benefit as well of the
rude and unlearned, as otherwise, have laid aside Poetical Additions,
Allegories and Illusions, dark and obscure Parables, Phrases, and flourishes,
(wherewith some men's writings are unreasonably stuffed) and observed (though
perhaps with more difficulty and pains) this plainness of writing, that so I
might be understood of the meanest capacity: Charge me not with arrogancy nor
presumption, for as I know that faculty and ability ought to go before
practice, because the object cannot be received without the instrument, so I
also know that where these are bestowed they either are or should be
operative, because the object is ordained for the faculty, unumquodq, est
propter operationem suam, I sp^ake not this to animate and encourage those, who
only out of a diabolical spirit of pride, envy, or arrogancy, will undertake
that funct^on which they are neither called to nor qualified for and here I
cannot but admire at the abominable impudency of many proud Iesabels in these
times, who imitate their Grandmother Eve in usurping the office of teaching,
and their sister Miriam, in grudging and murmuring against Moses and Aaron:
None might presume to enter into the Sanctum Sanctorum but the high Priest; the
Egyptians had their mysteries in Hyeroglyphick letters lest the vulgar should
dive into them, Suitor ne ultra crepidam, let not the Shoemaker go beyond his
last, let the Cobbler attend his boot, the Water man his boat, the Fisherman
his bait, and the Scholar his books, an hammer is for the Smith, a Homer for
the School.

We may justly take up that complaint which St. Hierom made against some in his
time, Quod medicorum est promittant medici, tractant fabria fabri, sola
scripturarum ars est quam sibi omnes vendicant, hanc garrula anus, hanc delirus
senex, hanc sophista verbosus, hanc universi praesumunt and lacerant. But I
will say to such, as Basil once did to an Emperors Co^k, who thought himself to
be (...), and was foolishly and arrogantly prating about matters of faith and
religion, tuum est pulmenta curare non divina eloqui a decoquere, it belongs to
thee to mind thy cookeries, and not to meddle with points of divinity: O
imprudent impudent men and women, put chains and fetters upon your hands and
feet, (your actions and affections) not those wherewith Venus Morpho was bound
among the Lacedaemonians, but fetters of reason and civilitie, put a ring upon
your lips, not of brass (according to the custom of the Egiptian women) but
of prudence and modesty, but this by the way, I return to the Reader. Out of
an overweening opinion of your own worthiness and ability, undervalue not
another, the more ignorant many times the more impudent, if you have better
parts you should have better manners; the most eloquent may learn humility, and
he that thinks himself the wisest may discourse at large of his uowe folly:
Censure not the plainness of my writing, nam haec animis non auribus scripsi,
If any thing appear childish, and upon further trial be so, impute^t the
tenderness of my years, if not so, to the slenderness of your judgments; If
any thing may be variously taken, let charity move you to make the best
construction thereof, if you say it is in the accusative case, I answer, it is
also in the plural number, and therefore none needs be offended. Lastly, your
favorable acceptance of the first fruits of these my unvarnished labors for
the present, will not only encourage but engage me to the like respective
service to you for the future.

Valete Fran. Thorn.

To all the afflicted.
Job 5.6 7. Job 7. usuque ad 6. verse.
MAN and sorrow are like Hypocrates his twins, two inseparable adjuncts, and his
life may fitly be resembled to Ezekiels rool, full of lamentations; to the
moons of April, spent in continual showers of grief, ubi finis unius mali
gradus futuri, where clouds of adversity are ever breeding, and the farewell of
one sorrow, is but a welcome to another; yet the godly man, as if he were the
sole-borne heir to sufferings, has for the most part the largest possessions
in this field of sorrow, in this vale of misery; so that the profession of
Christ, Psalm 79 4 5.
in respect of outward calamities, which are many; the contrarieties between
the Flesh and the Spirit, which are implacable; the assaults of the Devil,
strong oppositions, and corrupt conversation of wicked men may seem a burden
insupportable; yet truth it self, and the testimonies of godly men sufficiently
declare, That the ways of the Lord are not grievous, Psalm. 119.40.
and that his commandments are not burdensome: for frst, The regenerate are
partakers of the divine nature of Christ, whereby they are enabled to do and
suffer all things, Credenti omnia sunt possibilia, John 1.5.
all things are posible to them that believe. Secondly, they have spirits well
qualified, humble and meek minds, loving and tractable dispositions toward
Christ, and love takes away difficulty, leve fit quod been fertur onus, love
makes a heavy burden light. Thirdly, they have Christ the head of all the
faithful, as fellow members to sympathize with them in their sufferings, and
solamen miseris socios h^buisse doloris, they have the God of hosts within
them, the hosts of the Lord without them, the God of hosts, and all the hosts
of God for them; if men dare offend, God will and can defend: What need
Mattheus care if an angry Peter cut off his ear, if Christ be by to cure it
again? What need Job fear the roaving Sabbeans, and robbing Chaldeans, if
Gods protection uphold him? What need Lot fear to be carried away captive, if
Abraham follow to redeem him? What need a Christian fear to sustain trouble,
sorrow, need, sickness, or any other adversity, since Christ the Son of God
will make his yoke easy, and God our tender Father will in his due time both
ease and release us? Yea God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost
are ever ready to apply their helping hands, and we commonly say, multorum
manibus grande levatur onus, many hands make light work: Yet in the holy
Scriptures, we find that many godly and Religious men (through the imbecility
of the flesh, the extremity of pain, and strong assaults of the Devil
thereupon) have been for a time so possessed with a spirit of heaviness, that
they have appeared to themselves and others, for a time, as men utterly lost
and forsaken, and by this means have been made unfit to serve God, and
scandalized their Religion; to prevent this and such like evils which might
hence arise, I have in this small Treatise proposed to your serious
consideration: First, the brevity of affliction or difference between the
Cross and the Crown. Secondly, the benefit that comes to the soul by
affliction. Thirdly, what Christ has suffered for us. Fourthly, the ends why
God afflicts his people. Fifthly, the author of affliction. And these five
thoughts, as David's five smooth stones being rightly placed in the sling of the
heart, and levelled by the steady hand of faith, will be sufficiently able to
beat down the great Goliath of our souls despair: first, consider the
difference between the Cross and the Crown; the brevity of suffering, the
perpetuity of reigning; afflictions are but for a short time, during the time
of this present life, I count, Romans 8.18. 2 Cor. 12.
says the Apostle. etc.

Therefore the time of affliction is sometime termed a day of trial, sometimes
a night of sorrow: Heaviness may endure for a night, says the Psalmist, but
joy comes in the morning; sometimes to an hour, of watching, as Christ said to
his three Disciples, Matthew 26.40.
Can you not watch with me one hour? Besides this, the burden of afflictions,
2. Tim. 2 12. 2 Cor. 1.2, 3, 4, 5.
has consolations qualifying; As the sufferings of Christ do abound, so his
consolations much more: Blessed are they which are persecuted for
righteousness sake. Let Stephen have his eyes in prayer to see the heaven
opened, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, and he shall nor be moved
with the stones which the Jews violently throw at him: Let Moses see him which
is invisible, and he shall not fear Pharaoh, but rejoice rather to suffer with
the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season: Let Paul
and Silas consider for whose sake they are imprisoned, and they will sing and
rejoice in the midst of their sufferings. Secondly, the power of the oppressor
is limited, his days are numbered; I have said you are Gods, but ye shall dye
like men: the rod of the wicked shall not always rest on the back of the
godly, God will either cut off the oppressor in his fury, or take the oppressed
to his mercy; Statutum est omnibus semel mori, It is appointed for all men once
to dye: Quicquid generatur corrumpitur, omne ortum interit: Here is our comfort
then, if we dye, we shall live like Angels; if we live, we shall see our
enemies dye like men, and post hac ve^it judicium, and then comes judgment.
Christ our blessed Savior, God and Man, will one day come to exercise a
judicial course against them, otherwise God should be unjust in rewarding, and
the godly of all men most miserable. Secondly, Romans 5.4. Luke 24 26. Romans 8.17.
Acts 14.21. Heb. 12.6 7.
consider the benefit that comes by affliction, Via crucis, est via lucis, the
cross is the high way to the Crown; we must go through Rethshemesh, to
Betheden, through many tribulations into the Kingdom of heaven.

Affliction to the soul, is as physic to the body, more wholesome, then
toothsome; for although simply in it self it be not good, yet being
prescribed, directed and ordered by the wise hand of God, it oftentimes proves
very useful and advantageous to the soul: David speaks upon his own
experience, Psalm. 119.71.
that it was good for him; and Paul affirms the same, There is no affliction
for the present joyous, but it brings forth the quiet fruits of righteousness.
Adam in the garden of pleasure, was overcome by the Serpent; when Job upon the
dunghill of misery, was more then a conqueror: Affliction makes men mourn for
their sins, and beati sunt qui l^gent, Blessed are they which mourn. Affliction
makes men humble, and humility makes the soul happy, Deus resistit superbis
dat gratiam h^nilibus, God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble:
Afflictions make men meek, and beati sunt mites Blessed are the meek, Psalm.
3.25.
for they shall inherit the earth: Dirigit mansuetes injudicio, docebit mites in
vias suas. Affliction makes men hunger and thirst after righteousness: Beati
qui ^surium, Blessed are they, which hunger, etc. Affliction does purge and
purify the soul, and beati mundo cord, Blessed are the pure in heart, etc.

Heb. 12.1, 2, 4.
Thirdly, Inspice vulnera pendentis Christi, sanguinem morientis, pretium
redimentis, cicatrices resurgentis, cap^t habet inclinatum ad osculandum, cor
aptum ad diligendum, brachia extenta ad amplexandum, and totum denique corpus
expositum ad redimendum Aug. de pas. Christi. Consider what Christ has done,
and suffered for thee: Multa dixit, mira fecit durapassus est verba, durlora
verbera, how he was incarned, and assumeth the nature, not of pure and
immortal Angels, but of sinful mortal men, how he came from Galilee, to
Nazaret, from a Region to a hamlet, from Heaven to earth, from Joy to sorrow,
from the Crown to the cross, from his Fathers house where were many Mansions,
to lie in a manger, from a Hall to a stall, from eternal life, to dye a
shameful death, from glory to ignonimie; For he that thought it no robbery to
be equal with God, made himself of no reputation, and came down from
Heaven, and became man, pro servis Dominus pro gregepaster obit, propopulo Rex
mactatur, pro milite ductor, and all this he has done for us, yea when we were
his utter enemies; He was wounded for our sins, and broken for our iniquities;
the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed.
Pharmaca sunt potius quam vulnera, vulnera Christi, Curat enim plagis vulnera
nostra suit. The serious and right consideration of these things will make us
truly submissive, humble and thankful, and to cry out with the Prophet David.
Quid retribuam Domino pro omnibus quae tribuit mihi, primo nihil eram and fecit
me, pererar quaesivit me, Psalm. 116.11.
quaerens invenit me, lapsum redemit, emptum liberavit we deserve fratrem fecit
me, What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits, etc. he made me of
nothing, he sought me when I was lost, and seeking me he found me, etc. O bone
Jesus, quid tibi moris est nos debuimus and tu solvis, nos peccavimus and tu
luis, opus sine exemplo, gratia sine merito, charitas sine mo^o, Bernard de
pas^ Christi. O sweet Jesu, what do thou mean? We owe, and thou paiest, we
sin, thou pardonest; a work without example, grace without merit, love
without measure, and quid mirum erit si malus servus vitam deponet pro bon^
Domino, cum bonus Dominus vitam deposuit pro malo servo? What wonder is it, for
an evil servant to lay down his life for a good Master, when a good Master
has first laid down his life for an evil servant?

Fourthly, consider why God afflicts his people, as namely first, Iam. 1.2.
that those excellent graces of his Spirit in their hearts might appear more
famous and illustrious in the eyes of the world, Haector a quis noscet felix si
troja fuisset: How had the faith of Abraham, the patience of Job, the meekness
of Moses, and fidelity of many of the Apostles been so illustrious, if God had
not proved them? Stellae interdiu latent, nocte micant, virtus non apparet in
prosper is micat in adversis, Torches and Tapers show dim when the Sun
shines, the Moon and Sta^^ appear not at noone; our love, zeal, hope and
fidelity, is best seen in time of extremity. Secondly, that the edge of their
affections might be taken off from the world, the pomps and vanities thereof.
Thirdly, for the subduing and quelling of some lust yet unmortified. Zach. 13 9.
Fourthly, that we might prize and value his favors, blessings and benefits at
a higher rate; ^ona magis carendo quam fruendo sentimus bona a terga
f^rmosissima, we never know the right worth of a thing, until we are sensible
of the want of it; meat is sweet to the hungry, rest to the weary, etc.

Fifthly, that they might not be condemned with the wicked of the world
hereafter, the father suffers his child to burn his finger in a candle to
prevent the danger of a greater fire.

Sixthly to try the disposition of their hearts, the father crosses his child
of his will, to see of what humor and disposition he is, to see whether he
will grumble, murmr, or repine, or no.

Seventhly, to discover the hypocrisy of many, who in the time of peace and
prosperity, will make great show of Religion and Piety, when as indeed their
chiefest holiness toward God, is to palliate and cover their foul injuries
toward men, saepe latet vitium proximitate boni, it is the nature of
hypocrisy to get as near Religion as it can: And it is not easily discovered,
the dross can hardly be distinguished from the silver till it come out of the
furnace, the Player hardly known until he be unmaskt; now times of trouble
and persecution are Gods unmasking times, times of discovery; if the Player
want his wonted auditory and applause, he presently grows out of heart, if
these have not their wonted health, peace and plenty, they are ready to forsake
their God and Religion, and to say as Iorams profane Pursevant did, This evil
is of the Lord, 2 Kings 6.33. Esaias 58.3. Mal. 3.14. 1 Samuel 28.6, 7.
and why should we depend any longer on him? Whereas the godly then cleave
nearest unto the Lord. Bells keep their tune whether they ring for funerals or
festivalls, they that are truly Religious, will be Religious as well in want,
as in wealth, in adversity, as well as in prosperity, in solitudine as well as
in theatro, in private, as well as in public.

Fifthly, and lastly, consider who corrects thee, thou art under the hand of a
wise God, and pitiful Father, who both can, and will order all things for thy
good, prosperity, adversity, sickness, health, life, death, Romans 8 28.
and omnia cooperantur, and all things else shall work together for the good
of such as love the Lord, for nothing happens to the godly by chance or fortune
(as many ignorantly suppose) there is not a sparrow falls to the ground without
the providence of God, there is not a hair upon our heads but it is numbered.
Eccles. 2. usque 14. Esaias 55.9. Romans 11.33.34.
Repine not then at the hand of God, neither let thy heart be troubled at the
continuance of trouble, His ways are not as our ways, he is infinitely wise,
and knows what will make most for his glory, and our good, our extremity is
oftentimes his fittest opportunity, In monte videbitur Deus, In the mount will
the Lord be seen, and God usually affords the greatest comforts in greatest
troubles; first, that we might bid his comforts more heartily welcome. Secondly,
that his power, providence, wisdom, and goodness might be more evidently seen
in the delivery.

Grudge not at the prosperity of the wicked, wealth is not the badge, but the
baggage of virtue, and according to the Roman word, Impedimentum, for it is as
advantageous to him that travells toward heaven, as a long cloak is to him
that is to run a race, therefore says Christ, it is a hard matter for a rich
man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Secondly, riches are but res mediae
good or bad, as they are used, therefore true happiness cannot consist in
abundance, they cannot deliver the soul from the power of death, nor pains of
hell, the rich man died, Luke 16.
and was carried to hell. Thirdly, they are uncertain, hodie Craesus cras
Crodus, he that is a King today may be a beggar to morrow; and therefore no
solid ground of felicity, Stulte hac nocte eripient animam tu^m, Thou fool
this night shall they take away thy soul. 4. Hab. 2.5.
They cannot give content to the appetite of man, much less able are they to
satisfy the soul. Lastly, there must be a red rationem villicationis tuae,
rich men must answer their receipts, thy must be called to account how they have
used the talent given them.

In things transitory and mutable keep as near as thou can a just decorum
and temper in thy soul, miles Christi non divitiis tumet nec contrabitur
paupertate, sol non urit per diem neque luna per noctem. Ambr. sup beat
immaculat. wind not up the pinnes of thy affections too high, not let them
down too low, In secundis nemo confidat, in adversis nemo deficiat, alterna
sunt vices r^rum, Sense. in Thyeste lib. 30. not. quaest; let not peace and
prosperity make thee so merry as to forget thy God, nor adversity so sorrowful
as to forget thy self, in seeking power some have lost liberty, in obteining
power over others, many have lost power over themselves, prosperity oftentimes
slaies, adversity sometime saves the soul, riches and pleasure cast Dives into
hell, misery and affliction exalted Lazarus into heaven: If thou art in
poverty, or any other calamity, look as well upon such as want what thou
injoyest, as on those which have what thou want.

In prosperity flatter not thy self with any certain perpetuity, riches have
wings in adversity; Psalm. 27.16.
promise not thy self a sudden delivery, for this is as dangerous to the
soul, as predigestion is to the body; Esaias 28.16.
sanctus non prafestinabit, i. e. ex impatientia and infedilitate non ad res
praesontes confugiet nec festinatione praepostera Deum antevertet: Iuven. God
will deliver his people from their troubles and calamities whatsoever, in his
(...) though not in our (...), let the waters of Mara be never so bitter, God
has a tree to sweeten them, Exodus 15.25,
let the rivers of Jericho be never so unsavorie, God has a salt to season
them, let the sorrows of this life be never so sower, God both can and will in
his good time sweeten them. When thou entrest into the way of christianity,
promise not thy self too much ease and security, worldly honor, and heavenly
wisdom, like the oak and the olive delight not to grow together, and to
seek ease and tranquillity in this world, is to seek Christ in Golgatha, the
living among the dead; mandere qui panem jubet in sudore diurnum, Non dabit
aeternas absque labor dapes, we must work out our salvation with fear and
trembling: If Jonathan will surprise the garrisons of the Philistines, he must
climb up with hand and foot between two rocks, if David will be son in law
to King Saul, 2 Samuel 14.
he must bring a hundred foreskins of the Philistines for a dowry; 1 Samuel 18.
if Jacob will have Rachel he must serve fourteen years; if any man will be
the Disciple of Christ, he must deny himself; take up his cross and follow
him; there must be no ciphers in Gods Arithmeticke, no mures in his Grammar, no
dumb shows on his Stage, no loiterers in his Vineyard; there is always in
Christianity a (...), a furthermore, and the motto of Charles the fifth, plus
ultra; our life must not be like Nero his five first years, full of peace and
hope, For we must work out our salvation with fear and trembling: Regard not
the malicious oppositions of wicked men, it was the case and condition of thy
Savior, and therefore it may well be thine, The disciple is not above his
Master.

Secondly, it is a sign that thou art of another world, simile, simili gaudet,
if ye were of the world, says Christ, the world would love you: Contraria se
mutuo expellunt, light and darkness, Christ and Beliall cannot agree together:
Non been convenient nec in una sede morantur, Sheep and Wolves cannot feed
quietly together.

Lastly, fear not the tyranny of men, nor devils, it is the advice of thy
Savior, Be not afraid of him that can kill the body, this is the worst they
can do, nay they cannot do this without divine permission: Wild. 3.1, 2, 3, 4.
Quis ei de saeculo metus est cui in saeculo Deus tutor est, non labefaciat
mentem humana infestatio sed corroboret fidem divina protectio, Cyp. de orat.
Dom. the Devil is chained up and cannot reach thee, the power and policy of
his agents is limited and cannot hurt thee, 1 Chronicles. 29 11, 12, 13.
Balaam cannot curse, the fire cannot burn, the Lions cannot prey, the Devils
cannot enter into filthy swine, without leave and permission: Omne sub regno
graviore regnum est, Senec. Wicked instruments may happly being the nearer and
soorner to thy Savior: but they shall never separate thee from him: I am
persuaded, says Saint Paul, Romans 8 38.
that neither principalities nor powers, etc. All creatures both in heaven and
earth are at the command of God, Psalm. 97 9.
the Stars shall fight against Sisera, the Sun shall stand still in Gideon, and
the Moon in the valley of Ailon; Judge. 5.20. Josh. 10.13.
if Joshua fight against the Amorites, 2 K ng. 19.
If Zenacherib come with an innumerable host against the people of Israel, the
Angels in heaven shall fight against them; the red sea shall overwhelme
Pharaoh, and all his Host, the sea, and the fish in the sea, fought against the
superstitious Spaniard, Anno 1588. enemy to God, and his true Religion, the
wind and the water I say overcame that unvincible army prepared for our
destruction; the earth at the command of God opened her mouth and swallowed
Corah, Dathan and Abiram, Numb. 16 30.
an army of frogs or lice, sent from God is able to dismay Pharaoh and his
host: God is omnipotent and has a liberty in the use of his creatures, praeter
naturam, for of him, and through him, and for him, are all things; inferior
Magistrates have their authority from superiors, God has being primo, and
quod primum est suo genere causa reliquorum, all things are of him as maker or
efficient cause, all things are through him; through his care, providence,
power and goodness, all things are maintained, governed and ordered; all
things are for him, for his use and service, for the effecting of his good will
and pleasure; Romans 11 35.
and to him who is Lord over all, God blessed for ever, be glory and praise
world without end, Amen, Amen.

To the inquisitive Reader.
Saepe sub agresti latitat sapientia vest.
INquire not what I am, Gods gifts are free,
With able parts, mean men adorned may be;
Sound brains may be within a rugged felt,
An honest heart within a leather belt:
Always fair birds have not the sweetest noates,
Arts are not alwais decked in velvet coats;
From highest trees are croaking ravens borne,
When the sweet nightingale sits on a Thorn.
Arguments moving the Author to write upon this subject.
I Can say (for my conscience witness bears)
That I have taken notice many years
Of these backsliding, and declining times,
Wherein so many crimson colored crimes
Have been predominant: I also have
Seen honest dealing used as a slave;
Virtue suppressed, and foul vices swarm,
Them most oppressed, that have done lest harm
In Church and Commonweal; truth out of date,
Dissembling prised at too high a rate,
Knowledge disdained by some earthly moles,
As if that it were fatal to their souls,
And discipline both moral and divine,
Thought worth as much with men, as pearls with swine;
Shepherds grow fearful, wolves and foxes bold,
Poor silly sheep affrighted from the fold;
And how both in the Country and at Court,
Too many men have made their sins their sport;
I have observed how a golden Ass
Has got preferment, when as some alas
Better for parts by manifold degrees
Have gone without, for want of bribes and fees:
Under the Sun an evil I have seen,
But stay, under or over has it been?
Under, thank God, though it did seem of late,
Above the sun it self to elevate;
It is no wonder for to see the sun
Eclipsed, obscured by mists, for that is often done;
It is not strange to see some vapors mount
Up to the skies, as if they made account
To darken all the world; it is not strange
To see false-blazing-starres and comets range
About the lower spears, but that those foggs,
Vapors, and mists, which rise from noisome bogs,
Should not alone strive to obscure the light,
But to extinguish it, that so they might
Have their designs; this often has made me wonder,
And fear they would not be dispersed asunder,
Without some claps of lightning and of thunder:
These and such observations with some other,
Which upon force I am constrein'd to smother,
Have ofttimes made me sad, and I to cheer
My drooping mind (perplexed with daily fear,
Of what in justice might ensue) began
To call to mind the miseries of man,
Gods tender mercies and exceeding love,
The ever-over-flowing joys above,
To which good God us in thy mercy bring,
That we for aie may Halelujahs sing.
Arguments mooving the Author to publish it.
I Cannot say (as many will pretend)
That at the earnest suit of some dear friend,
I have this little Book brought to your view,
Because my conscience knows it is not true;
No, no, I kept it close within my breast,
Till conscience it no longer could digest,
For when I with my self considered well,
What curse upon that idle servant fell,
Who did interre his talent in the ground,
No quiet rest within my self I found,
Until I had resolved to make that known,
Which I intended for my self alone.
Non nobis natisumus.
Nec sibi, nec patriae, nec amicis commodus esse,
Qui studet huic vivo mortua vita placet.
In the defense of Poesy.
NOne (I suppose) but men in judgment weak,
In the dispraise of poesy will speak:
For howso'ere some censure of this art,
It is by God inspired into the heart,
And upon further trial will be found,
To be most antique, and the very ground
Of many other arts, and to disclose
As worthy things as ear was writ in prose,

Divulge those things in rimes which are not fit:
As hell-hacht-libells, ballads, foolish songs,
To vent their malice, or avenge some wrongs
Done unto them as they conceive, or friend,
And such as these I much more discommend,
Yea such if I might have my wish or will,
Should walk up Holborne not Pernassus hill;
For by their means this evil often does follow,
Men slight the Muses and despise Apollo.
Proximus est oratori poeta.
The Author to his Muse.
MY drowsy Muse, I muse, and musing rest,
As one amazed, to see thee so oppressed
With sluggish thoughts, behold the day awake,
Stir up thy self, and off thy slumber shake;
Do know thy task? To whom to dedicate
This little book which I have writ of late?
Prepare thy self then to be gone with speed,
Declare thy message, but withal take heed
Thou do not so far err as to mistake
The parties herein meant, and thereby make
Thy self and book a laughing stock to those
That of thee or the message nothing knows;
That better thou this error may prevent,
First understand to whom thou art not sent:
Not to the lofty, high and haughty mind,
But to the contrite, and to such as find
Through doubts, fears, horrors, and distrustful care
Their souls often wel-neare drowned with despair;
Not unto such as covet or delight
To satisfy their fleshly appetite;
Not to the worldly wise which far surmount
In subtle plots, but unto such as count
Themselves as fools, so that they may obtain
That wisdom which makes wise that perfect gain.
Unto the soule-sicke, and all such as find
The want hereof in body, and in mind;
Not to the selfe-conceited Pharisee,
Or merit mongers; though of high degree,
Who of their seem^ng-good deeds make great brags,
When God esteems them but as filthy rags;
But to the Publican who through the sight
Of his foul nature, and Gods glory bright,
Dare not approach unto the throne of grace
Being ashamed to look him in the face;
Whom he unjustly many ways and times
Has so disgraced by such reproachful crimes;
Not unto libertines who will give scope
Unto their raging lusts, and live in hope
To make the Lord amends before they die
With some dissembling tear, sob, groan, or sigh;
Not unto such as mercy and free grace
Turn into wantonness, for they the face
And countenance of God shall never see,
Which is the height of true felicity:
And now my Muse, go and thy charge attend,
And if thou know for what, my book commend
To all afflicted Saints, and let them know,
I wish that everlasting joys may flow
Upon them as a stream, and so revive
Their fainting souls, when Satan seeks to drive
Them with what might he can to black despair,
And to distrust Gods providence and care;
That then and all times else, yea in all
Assaults into this gulf they never fall:
Go, tell the weak in faith, and such as find
Themselves, poor, sinful, simple, wretched, blind
That Gods right handwill help them that want might,
He saves the arm that has no strength to fight;
He fills the empty with good things, and sends
The rich without; his ear and heart attends
Unto a sinners suit, his eyes behold
The sorrows of his Saints, his mercies old
He calls to mind, he gives grace to the pure,
His counsels to the simple and obscure;
Declare thy comforts to the smoking flax,
And bruised reed, whose spirits melt like wax;
Whose minds are so affrighted with the sight
Of their most loathsome sins, that day nor night
They cannot rest; tell them the Lord is near
Unto the meek in heart, and such as fear
His holy name, he will not slight the cries,
The tears, nor sighs of one that groaning lies
Under the weight of some soule-wounding crime
If he repent, and turn to him in time;
But barely tell such as are proud in mind,
That they are wretched, naked, poor and blind;
Tell them the best may mend, and that I know
The worst must mend, or to the devil go:
Tell such as shall my person laugh to scorn,
Unwisely they but spurn against a Thorn;
And tell them that revile what I have writ,
I doubt not but they have more hair then wit;
More wit then wisdom, for if they were wise
To know themselves, they would not me despise.
To the General Reader.
With judgment read, in reading judgment get
To judge and read; in reading ever let
Thy heart be free from scorn: For thou art told,
Judgments for scorners are prepared of old.
Prove. 19.29.
The Souls Solace.
WE may, like Genesis 47 ^. Psalm. 119.54. Heb. 11.13 1 Pet. 2.11. Heb. 13.1^.
Pilgrims, wander in our race,
And be constrained to fly from place to place,
Wild beast may meet us in the way and make
Their prey of us, robbers and thieves may take
All that we have, briers may tear and rend
Our credits and good name, a flattering friend
With sugared words may winn our hearts, Impia sub dul^ melle venena latent.
Naso.
that so
He with more ease might work our overthrow.
Sore-biting dogs may at us snarle and snatch,
Hunters with snafes may seek our souls to catch;
Adders and subtle Serpents as we pass,
Over fresh meads, and fields of pleasant grass,
May spit their venom at us; death may sease
Upon our bodies by some ill disease;
Yet this our hearts may still revive and cheer,
That God will save the souls of such as Psalm. 33 18. Psa. 43 21 Psalm. 121.7 2 Timothy 4 1^. Psalm. 97.10 Psalm. 31.^. Sim^s sine vest sed non sine side, sine
Domo, sed non sine Domin^ sine ci bo non sine Ch^isto salvatore nostro.
fear
His holy name, so that live they or die,
They die and live to live to eternally:
Sky threatening waves our crazy barks may toss,
Unconstant winds may often our voyage cross,
Sirens may tempt us with their pleasant notes,
That they with gilded knives may cut our throats:
Rocks may lie in our ways, some little chinke,
If not the sooner stopped, our barks may sink;
Pilot and Bark may fail both waxing old,
Our anchor may be cast and take no hold,
We may presume and hoist up sails on high,
As if with Icarus we meant to fly:
And cross these brinish waters with a blast,
And in this Sea at length be headlong cast;
But grant our barks be strong, and that the wind
May favor us, and Neptune should prove kind,
And lead us home with plenty, pomp and store,
Yet may a Pirat come and make us poor,
Yea poorer then before: and thus we see,
That in this life there is no Omnia hic mihi cad^^t praeter perfectam pl^ra
praeter v^t m^sed tutum nihil. Per. 33 Sermon Cant.
certainty;
Still yet are we sure that neither To 8 35 36.37.38 39 Col 3.3 4. S^mel el^ct
^ semper d lectus, Ioh 13 1 Ioh 10.27 28.29. Amittamus div^tias Dei, sed
n^nquam Deum divitiatum and quid si amitte mus omnia dum habemus habentem omnia.
change nor all
The chances that us may or can befall,
Shall separate our souls from Christ above,
Because he Ioh 13 2. Psalm 89 34 Ier 31 3.
never alters in his love:
The tender lilly with the thorns may grow,
Wild beasts may crop Christ's vineyard here below;
Amongst devouring Psalm. 120.4.5. Heu mihi quia incolatus meus prolongatus.
Psalm 57.4.5. Qua^^^u lucta bor influctibus mortalitatis meae clamans ad te Dom.
and non ex audis. August.
lions, tigers, bears,
The Spouse may be; wheat may be mixed with tares,
Yet to our endless comfort, this we know,
That God will one day manifest and show
To all the world, and that in open view,
That he in Psalm. 103 6. P al. 89.15. Psalm. 98.10.
word and deed is just and true.
We may, and must expect, a winter here,
As well the worst, as best part of the year:
As well great Psalm. 107.25
storms as calm, the Psalm. 30.5.
night as day,
Sorrow as 2 Cor. 6.1^
mirth, Psalm. 126.5.
a March as well as May.
Sowing before reaping, April showers,
To make our gardens flourish with May flowers:
Ebbing as well as flowing, want as wealth,
Weakness as well as strength, sickness as health,
Some doubts Et timent and iperant Bern. Egredere anima mea quid time^?
egredere quid tre^ida? Hilar.
in midst of hope, some loss, some gain,
Some Habe^us lactum cum gaudio mixtum. Pet. Martyr. in 2. Sam. 24.
grief in joy, some pastimes mixed with pain,
Some darkness mixed with light, some dross with gold,
In our new robes some patches of the old:
Grace in the soul as sap within a tree,
May for a time from man concealed Vt decidetanti jucundior sit and valid oris
pretii 2. ut majore vigilantia and timore grat^am adeptam custodiemus. Quod
lachrimanter agemus ademptum vigilanter servamus adeptum, te docuit lapsus
magis vest^ga firmes, ate; ^agi^ Christo consociere tuo^m^lier fetum conceptum
non semper molitantem sentit! Semper felicita^em p^isuam non intellig^nt,
S^neca: dob tatio^i^, in p^^^a^i^ ando cad^nt. 1 Samuel 27.1. ita s^^l^ae
aliquando o ^caran^^^^t l^c^t in coelo extent non (...) nostra appa ent si^e^e
al^quando va^^^ te^t^tioniha^ita ob^^^. antu^ p^oriu^ extinct. idcan^ur. Psa.
51.10. mergitu^ in erdum sed non s^bme^git^r ^^^^^m.
be.
An Autumn in our souls, we often may find,
A deadness both of spirit, soul and mind;
Yet sure we are, this cannot always last,
A springtide comes when winters gone and past.
The Sun of Mal. ^ 2.
righteousness shall then appear,
And with his beam of grace, revive and cheer
Those sprouts of grace which winter with cold rimes,
And bitter blasts of trouble oftentimes
To humane reason, and a carnal eye
Had made appear as barren, dead and dry:
Thick fogs, and stinking mists, with their black streams
May for a time obscure the Suns bright beams;
But let these vanish into air, and then
We with his beams shall be revived again,
The knowledge of the first, our hearts may rue,
For we have found it too too late too true.
Our Sun for many a day, yea month and year,
We have observed, as in another sphere,
Yea in so much, that this strange observation
In many men, has wrought great admiration
How they could be, but let us cease to wonder,
Me think, the air, with lightning and with thunder,
Begins to clear apace, some of our fogs,
Are gone to Callis, some to the Irish bogs;
Some into Spain, and some to Rome in hope
They shall obtain a pardon from the Pope:
Some into France, Bermoodes, and Barbados,
Who here have vapour'd with such great bravadoes,
As if that they had meant the heavens to bring
Under their feet, and to disthrone the King:
But blessed be the Lord, yea blessed be
His holy name to all eternity;
These strange polluting mists are blown away,
And we behold the dawning of the day:
Our Sun we hope with splendour will appear,
Our frozen hearts again to thaw and cheer:
Now God which made the Psalm. 104.19.
Sun to rule the day,
Grant such like mists, may never bear like sway:
Great buzzards little birds may sore afright,
And with their talons wound them in the night;
But when the Sun shall shine forth in his hiew,
The little birds great buzzards will pursue,
An old devouring fox may hurt the sheep,
In a dark night when Shepherds are asleep:
But when the Sun to Horizon does touch,
He takes his den, nay often his fear is such,
That all his life lies in his heels, his bed
And den he leaves, he dare not show his head,
Where he has made his prey, and mischief done,
But will into some other Lordship run;
Yet often he leaves so strong a sent behind him,
That by his footsteps, we know where to find him.
Fat bulls of Basan, with their horns may gore
And hurt the lesser bullocks, but the more
They do, sooner to the block their heads are brought,
Because they are often better fed then taught:
He that Elias could so strangely feed,
When he was pincht with poverty and need,
As by a 1 King. 17.^.
raven; can what way seems best
To him, our bodies and our souls oppressed,
Relieve and comfort, yea Romans 11 33, 34, 35. Psalm. 7^.14, 15.16.17, 18, 19,
20. 2 King. 14.26, 27.
and that often by,
Those ways and means which to a carnal eye
Seems most unlikely, and not only so,
But altogether Mat. 19.26. Apud homines hoc mpossibile apud Deum autem omnia
sunt possibilia: plane Deo nihil d fficile. Tertull. ad Prax. Cui voluisse
fecisse est. Psalm 115.3 135.6, 7. Qui dixit and facta sunt. Psalm. 148 5.33.6.
Vbi definit huma^um, ibi incipit divinum auxilium ler. 32.27. Genesis 18 14.
opposite thereto.
He that a son the Shunamite could give,
And after raise him up from death to live,
Can give us grace, the life of grace, and when
Our souls seem dead, give sal 66.8. Psalm. 71.18.19, 2^, 21, 22.
life to them again.
He that made 2 Kings 6 6.
iron swim, and could of stones
Raise children up, and by Elisha's bones
Revive the dead, Psalm. 7 18, 24. Jude 24.
can if it may please him,
Our drooping souls command aloft to swim:
He that could make Qui modo Sa^lus e^as in verso homine Salvus Factus est
(...) q^i modo (...) eras.
a persecuting Saul,
A lover of his Saints, a preaching Paul,
And could convert Manasses from these crimes,
Whereby he had so many ways and times,
Offended God, can in what way seems strange
To carnal reason work in us a change.
He that could cleanse the Exodus 4.7. Mat 8.2. L^c. 10 14.
Leper of his sore,
And men borne Luc. 4.18.
blind to perfect sight restore,
Can cleanse our 1 Ioh 17. Psa. 51.10. Ezekiel. 36.25. Ioh. 15.3.
souls from sins foul blot and stain,
And to their former sight restore again:
He that could give (b) limbs to the lame to walk,
To Exodus 4.11.
deaf and dumb, ears, tongues, to hear and talk;
Strength to the impotent, health to the sick,
A quiet mind unto the (d) lunaticke:
For each disease and sore, a salve can find,
Whether pains of the body, soul, or mind:
That God which could the 1 Kings 1^.10.11.12 13.14
widows oil augment,
And by his grace (f) five hundred men content,
With five small loaves, and two little fishes,
As well as with five hundred costly dishes;
Can both Ephesians. 3.20.
increase that modicum we have,
And satisfy our souls with what we crave;
What though thy house and dwelling be but small,
Was not thy Lord contented with a stall?
He that with Nimrod thinks to raise his name
By building Babels, or enlarge his same,
By shows and titles, shows himself but vain,
For he and Qu c^u^d altum est haud diu tatum manet: Apollod:
they must both to dust again:
Where is brave Iam cinis est and detam magno restat Achil. Nelcio quid, par
vam quod non been complete u^nan. Ovid met.
Hector and his glory? where
Are those nine worthies, whose name once was dear,
And dreadful too? alas they and their glory,
Lie now entombed within a little story.
Where Is grave Mecaenas, and divine Apollo?
Lo these are gone and we their steps must follow:
What though thou art not dect with rich array,
The sage Futrape lus right wise y ^ad his (...) should have the ^iche^t
cl^^thes he had, Think ng he did them harm, himself much g od, For it made
him more humble, them more p^cud. Hor.
Beggars and Pall^da mors aequo pede pullat pa^petum tabernas regume; ^urres.
Q^id superbis pulvis and cin^? qu^d vest nitida gloriaris subter testernitur
tinea and operimentum tuum erunt vermes; hectua vestis crit Chrysist.
Entrapelus cuicunque nocere volebat vestiment^ dabat pretiosa, beatus enim jam
pro pulcheris cunicam ^^met concilia nora.
Kings must both return to clay;
Besides gay clothes which fools delight so in,
Wise men esteem but as the badge of sin.
What though thou have not choice of dainty dishes?
Christ fed on barley bread and little fishes:
Besides, those Ebrietas ge^e^at multos in corpore morbos ergo nulla potest
esse salute. Salus: Vivere natu^ae si convenienter a^a^ent, mortales, medica
nil opus ess^t ^pe. Sine cere^e and libeto friget Venu^, venture mero estuans
s^umat. Hierom:
things which best the palate pleases,
Often fills the body full of foul diseases;
Do not we daily see that drunkenesse,
And lust provoking Multa sercula multo^ mo^bo^: Quae n^si divitib^s nequeunt
cont ngere mensis? Hor. lib. 2. Sa. vr 4. Nascitur libido conviv. is nutritur
deliclis vino acc^nditur: Vnde hoc Annagram: salutare. Opto tibi multam nullam
tibi poto salutem. Est potior po^a sicca salute: Salus. Job 1.5. Lu. 2.12
Joseph: and Mat. Christ. amiser^nt conviviis Eccl. 31.16.17 18 37 C. 29.
meats eat with excess,
Make men more wanton, and more seeble grow,
More prone to vice, to pious deeds more slow?
If thou have meat and drink, clothes for thy back,
And Gods good blessing, here can be no lack;
Note those that are in greater want and need,
As well as those that do in wealth exceed:
Blessed be God thou have no lack of bread,
Doves dung is little worth, an Asses head
Is not worth fourscore pieces, thou art not
Constrained to eat thy young; this was the lot
Of some (of whom we read) 2 King. 6 25.
who maybe were
As good as thou art, and to God as dear.
Indeed to be Peremtoria res estin gratitudo Bernad. Ventus u^ens and exiccans
August.
ungrateful, and repine,
May bring a famine upon thee and thine:
What man that is not void of humane wit,
Will not confess it to be meet and fit,
The Matt 20.
Master of the house and feast should be,
The chief disposer of his family?
God is the great Romans 11.14.35.
householder, we are all
But as it were the ushers of his hall,
Beggars out of his service, slaves to hell,
Bondmen to Satan, therefore may we well
Give him free leave to do what he thinks best,
And count our selves both happy and well blessed,
If we have any part of what he carves,
He that has Gen 32 10. In pa^ su^ om^ibus istis benisiciis tuis.
least, has more then he deserves:
What though in wealth thou do not much abound,
Nor have a penny to another pound:
Do thou not know they are Nam eum pos (...) it plutima (...) p: a^t: vela
T^^^lus (...) plenitu d nc^ ^mini (...) si^^ Pessim^s non an e s t^a^ur:
co^^o^i is au^o q^am corpus aura. Bernard. H^b. 2.5. Ecci 5 10.
tormented more
With scorching thirst, and hunger, then the poor,
They gape for more like to the grave or hell,
For in the midst of wealth they want, as well
That which they have, as that they never had,
Which makes them discontented, poor, and sad.
With D vit ae a^que ^^ctus co^^^es (...) t. Omnem ^or^ do ^omnolent? ^^cu^it,
^on ta^^a est in m^l^is a^t magnis felic^asq an in parvis and paucis securitas.
fears and cares their minds are so oppressed,
That they must * watch whilst Cantabit vac^^s ^otam la (...) v^ato* P^ra^ae
navig^^ va^us non n^sidiantur, mercibus onusta vi omni invidunt. Chrysostom.
poor men take their rest,
Their thoughts are ever troubled in this way,
How others may deceive them, or how they
May other men delude, they live in fear
Of thieves and robbers, if perhaps they hear
A door but clatter with the wind, their hearts
Tremble and quake as struck with deadly darts.
Or else as if an ague had possessed
Their trembling bones, they know not where to rest,
But by and by their cold fit's gone and past,
And then they will begin to sweat as fast:
They thirst, and thirst, but for what do you think,
For bags of gold, not for a cup of drink;
They lie and think, and thinking makes them sweat,
But would you know the cause of this their heat,
Doubtless their heart-distempering love of gold
Makes them so out of temper, hot, and cold:
But would you think a miser should sweet so,
As to have need to shift from top to toe:
You may believe it, for I have been told,
Their sheets have been as yellow as their gold.
But more of this I will not speak a tittle,
Its good to hear, and see, and to say little.
Yet I confess I cannot speak too much,
Because the vanity of men is such,
That for to purchase dross, muck, mire and clay,
Which will condemn their souls another day;
They fondly will true joy and freedom sell,
And slaves become unto the pit of hell:
I wish with all my heart that such a miser,
Would leave his (a) folly and in time grow wiser,
That for the getting of a little pelf,
He would not to the Devil give himself:
What though amongst great men thou art not known,
The (b) world we know respects and loves her own;
I tell thee thou art happy in such wants,
For oftentimes they prove but Sycophants:
Make but inquiry of such as have tried them,
And they will say they are not semper idem.
Honor besides a (c) burden is, and who
Knows whether it be for his good or no:
For oftentimes it makes men prone to (d) lust,
Wanton, forgetful, idle and unjust;
Inconstant, cruel, proud beyond all reason,
Apt against King and kingdom to plod treason;
On proose hereof I need no longer stand,
It is well known to most part of our land:
Beware then great ones by another (e) fall,
Unto remembrance your own vices call,
Maugre the thirst of honor and renown,
God from their seats the mighty will cast down,
Show mercy, follow peace, do poor men right,
Worship the Lord, walk humbly in his sight;
For when man thinks to eternize his name,
He is most likely for to fall with shame.
Strive to be good not great, the wise man knows,
Honor in titles cannot long (a) repose,
This if you be not wise, will in conclusion,
Bring soul and body both to sad confusion;
And for the arrogant how ere some deem them,
As haire-brain'd fools the wiser sort esteem them;
What though thou have not had such education,
As might beseem thy kindred, stock, and nation:
It Is not thy fault, thy blemish, blot or shame,
No no, thy parents were too much to blame,
Who for to gather muck took so much care,
That they a penny scarce this way could spare;
Grieve not at this then, for it is in vain,
But rather (b) seek true honor to obtain:
In form thy self well in Gods sacred word,
Which does to man such ways and rules afford,
For course of life, that if he mark the same,
Psalm 21.5 6 7. Psalm. 112 6.
He may obtain an everlasting name.
What though thou art in prison, when as some
In sinful pleasures swim, their paine's to come;
Did thou those soule-tormenting pains but know,
That they eternally must undergo,
Thou would not judge so hardly of thy state,
Nor count thy self so much unfortunate;
Despair not in distress, thou do not know
What God intends, wealth often brings endless woe;
But let thy present state be always such,
As not to be over joy'd, or grieved too much;
For let a man observe but in this kind,
His course of life, and he shall sometimes find,
That look what he has most delighted in,
His greatest cause of grief has often times been:
And what he thought a cross, and to annoy,
Has often been the ground of his best joy.
I must confess (although unto my shame)
That I have been herein to often to blame,
I have been apt at each thing to repine,
That did but cross this stubborn will of mine;
I sought preferment once, and thought my self
As fit as some that had more store of pelse,
I little thought preferment had been sold,
As I have found of late it is for gold;
I thought men had respected been for parts,
And honor had according to deserts,
But I have been deceived, the more's the pity,
For it were better for each town and city
If it were otherwise, how can men deal
In matters that concern a Commonweal
That have not discipline, what makes a state
More weak and poor then this unhappy sat?
What makes the Artist lay aside his art,
And take himself unto the plough and cart?
What makes our foes triumph? our weakness sure;
What makes us weak? contempt of literature;
What makes art despicable in the eyes
Of such as wont the meanest art to prize?
Cause gold is thought more worth then art, for he
That is best able to bestow a fee
Shall have a place, let him be knave, or fool,
Or one perhaps that never went to school:
And here indeed I might my thoughts enlarge,
My over-loaden stomach to discharge,
And speak of many things, though to small boot,
But I will only at some gunners shoot,
Yet will I for some of my brethrens sake
A Saker, Minion, or some small piece take,
For loath I am their weakness to disclose,
But much more loath to make the world suppose
That all are such, no I would cut my tongue
Out of my head before I Would do th^^ wrong:
I know some are deserving for their parts,
Honest and able men of good deserts:
Well, then my care must be to level right,
That I may hit the black, and miss the white;
The Gunner (as some know) w^nkes of an eye,
That he the mark the better might epsy;
But there is small hope that he should hit the mark
That wants both eyes, or levels in the dark,
I durst let such a Gunner for a tester,
Shoot at my cap from Christmas day till Easter.
Some scarce know how (if that to proof it came)
To charge a Cannon, and discharge the same;
Yet these are best thought of by some, and why?
Cause they have gold, and gold can credit buy:
I would to God that those to whom't belonges,
Would take a course for to redress such wrongs,
For what they mean I do not understand,
Unless it be to undermine the land;
Though (a) God in mercy has remooved far,
Great thunder-threatning storms of civil war,
And for these many years preserved our land,
We cannot tell what dangers are at hand;
Though we be now at peace with France and Spain,
We are not sure how long this shall remain;
As safe as we suppose our selves to be,
E're long we may great alterations see,
To cross the proverb here, a heavy purse,
Upon a land (in this kind) bringes a curse,
Not a light heart, needs must their spirits droope,
Whose safety rests upon fair Venus troop,
Need must that Kingdom in great danger be,
When those are blind which should the ill foresee:
But thus much by the way, I come from hence,
To speak of things of greater consequence;
What though this night may prove a night of sorrow, Psalm. 30.5.

We shall have perf^ct joy and peace to (b) morrow;
He that saved Jonas without sail or oar, 3. Jonah.

Can safely bring our crazie Barks to shore:
Let mirth and sadness of each other borrow,
So live to day, as so to die to morrow;
For what know we but that e'ne in a trice,
Our pains and pangs may prove a paradise:
Those evils which we think will soon'^ betide us,
God if he please with ease can put beside us;
They that in trouble, tears and sorrow sow, Psalm. 1^ 6.5 6. John. 16.20. Esa
35 10 16.13 14. Psa^. 3.11.27.

Shall reap in joy, their joys shall overflow:
They that as Pilgrims wander in this race,
Shall have at length with Christ a dwelling place:
They that sail in this sea, and are oppressed
With waves and storms, at length shall find true rest: Esaias 64 9. Man 3 17.
Number. 14.13.

They that are trod here underfoot, one day
Over those (e) tyrants shall the Scepter sway: Ie^^. 30.20.

They that go on now weeping in the way, Luke ^.21.

And good seed bear forth, doubtless shall one day
Return with gladness, and have cause to sing,
For they with joy their sheaves with them shall bring: 2 Timothy 2 12. 1 P^t 5
10. 2 Cor 1.5.^

They that Christ's cross with perseverance bear,
His crown of glory shall for ever wear,
Besides, our troubles are but transitory,
But everlasting is the crown of glory:
What though the way be difficult and hard,
Look with the eye of faith on the reward
Before thee set, and thou will soon confess
Romans 8.18.
That all the troubles of this wilderness,
May not (a) compare with that estate of bliss,
Which God our guide long since prepared for his;
Besides, we need not doubt but that his grace
Phil. 4.13. 1 Cor. 10 13. 2 Cor. 3 5 2 Cor. 12.9. Jude 24. v. Heb. 2.18.7.24.
Will mightily suppot us in our race,
For had we faith upon him to depend,
Unto our troubles he would put an end,
Or give us meekness humbly to submit,
And so much strength as he for us thought fit:

His child's obezance, and humility,
Some heavy weight upon his shoulder lays,
The child submits, and readily obeyes;
His father seeing then a willingness
In him, to bear that which would overpresse
His tender back, his hand applies so,
That under it with ease the child may go:
If then the earthly parent be thus mild,
And careful not to overload his child;
Psalm. 103.13. Job 34 23.
We need not fear at all but that our God
Will give us meekness to endure his rod,
And so increase our strength that still we may,
His Cross upon our shoulders bear away;
He knows our frailties and whereof we are made,
He knows we are but dust and apt to fade,
He knows full well the cruelty of those
That to our welfare are most deadly foes;
He knows the world is subtle, and how apt
We are with golden baits to be intrapt,
He knows that roaring lion which each hour, 1 ^e^ ^ ^.

Our deare-bought-soules seeks closely to devour
Is merciless, and how the flesh with guile,
Both soul and body labors to defile;
And how we are not able to withstand,
The least of them, should he withdraw his hand:
Our tender father therefore for this end,
To us his holy Spirit of truth did send; Rom 8 26.

And when our souls are so perplexed that we,
Through anguish of our pain and misery,
In so good terms (c) cannot our mind reveal,
That man may understand, to God appeal,
We, with a mournful sigh, a sob, a groan,
He will conceive for what we make our moan,
And in due time we shall such mercy find, 1 Cor. 3.4 5.

As shall give ease to body, soul, and mind;
The Church of God in Egypts slavery, Exodus 2 23 24.

Could not tell how to pray, but with a sigh
Expressed their minds to him who knew the thought
Of each man's heart, and suddenly he brought
Them out of bondage, by his mighty hand,
And after brought them to the blessed land
Of promise, where with freedom they his will,
And holy testimonies might fulfill;

Unto his tender child, his son most dear,
That seeing him lie sick upon his bed,
As if his soul were from his body fled,
That he both speaks and weeps, the child alas
As if it were a trifle lets it pass;
He takes him by the hand, my child quoth he,
Knew I thy wants I soon would sucker thee;
The child not able to express a word
Unto his tender father, does afford
A smiling look, and fixing of his eye
Full fast upon him, striveth earnestly
To make his moan, to show where lies his pain,
But wanting strength his striving is in vain:
His father does the best he can to ease
Him of his pain, and what he thinks may please
His mind or palate, he forthwith takes care
How to provide the same, he does not spare
His purse nor person, but as one that were
Out of his wits, he without heed or fear,
Goes, runs, and rides, and makes with spur and whip
His horse over valleys and high mountains skip,
But finding still his labor to no end,
He makes what haste he may or can to send,
For its dear mother and his tender wife,
And bids the messenger run as for life,
And tell her that her child is grown so weak,
That for a world, a word it cannot speak;
She hearing this sad news, makes no delay,
Her husband runs to meet her by the way,
And meeting her, his mind does thus unfold,
Deare-heart I doubt not but thou have been told,
How that my son lies sick and cannot speak,
His heart with pain is ready for to break,
And mine with grief, because I understand
Not what he means, when he with head and hand,
And other moving parts does what he can,
To show his mind to me unhappy man,
I pray thee go and see if thou can find,
By any signs, its meaning, or his mind,
And though it cannot speak through grief and pain,
Yet if thou can imagine, guess, or gain
By any sign, what it desires of me,
Doubt not my love, it shall soon granted be:
More tender mercies will God manifest
Unto his children, when they are oppressed
With waves of sorrow, and in such distress,
That how to pray aright, or to express
Their minds, they known not, (a) he accepts their sighs,
Their sobs, their tears, their groans and mournful cries;
He takes their godly meaning for the deed,
In pieces he will not break the bruised reed,
Nor quench the smoking flax; Mat. 12. Esaias 42 1. Psalm. ^2 12.33.1.
oh then be glad
And much rejoice in God, you that are sad
In heart, because you cannot pray, draw near
To him with boldness, doubt not, God will hear
The chatt'ring of his Saints, and their request
Will grant, or what in wisdom he sees best,
For we often times for want of judgment crave,
And earnestly desire such things to have,
As are at best but loss, dross, dung and dirt,
And such as might both soul and body hurt:
The earthly parent will not give a stone
Unto his child, when he for bread makes moan, Mat. 7.7.

Not yet a serpent when he craves a fish,
Nor for an egg a scorpion, nor a dish
Of deadly poison; if then parents know,
How on their children good things to bestow,
Much better can our heavenly Father tell,
What Is for our good, who does so far excel,
In grace and wisdom, parents whilst they live,
For want of judgment, to their children give
Such things as prove their bane, yea often such things,
As strange diseases on the body brings;
Psalm. 75 3 104 8.145.14.
But God that did both earth and heaven frame,
And every thing perteining to the same,
Who governs all things by his mighty hand:
Their ends and natures well does understand,
He knows what is pleasing unto flesh and blood,
And what may further our eternal good,
And therefore does in mercy often deny (a)
Us what we ask with zeal and fervencie,
Yea when we ask for stones he gives us bread,
The food of life eternal, yea in stead
Of serpents, fishes, and for dung and dross,
A weighty crown of glory, yea for loss
Of life, goods or good name, eternal gain,
In stead of pearls and jewels he a chain
Of his celestial graces will bequeath,
Whose splendour will obscure all things beneath.
In stead of partridge, woodcocks, snipes, and phesants,
(Which now a days are meats for clowns and peasants)
In stead I say of such like dainty fare,
(Which many make their god) God will prepare
A table for his Saints, decked with such meat,
As shall them so suffice that thereof eat,
That they shall never thirst nor hunger more,
After those things they thirsted for before:
In stead of costly buildings and great places,
Which upstarts often for want of grace disgraces,
We with the Angels shall in heaven sing,
Sweet songs of praise to our eternal King,
In stead of great attendance and respect,
(Which many as some more then God affect)
We have the blessed Angels to attend
Our persons, and from harm us to defend;
In stead of high-borne kindred and great friends,
(On which so many fools too much depends)
God makes himself a father, and a mother,
A wife to one, a husband to another;
In stead of milk and honey, wine and oil,
(Whereof too many prodigalls make spoil,)
We have the sincere milk of his pure word,
Which does both honey, wine, and oil afford;
For rich attire (whereby so proud some grow)
That they themselves or friends can hardly know;
With robes of sanctity he clothes us here,
That we for aye his princely robes may wear;
In stead of music for to please the ear,
A pleasing voice we shall from heaven hear,
Saying, this is the way to life and light, De^tro 4.12. Ezekiel. 33 32.

Turn neither to the left hand, nor the right.
The second thought.
Who is it that strikes us? is it a deadly foe?
Or one desirous of our overthrow?
No it is our best and dearest friend, nay rather, Psalm. 94.12.66.10. La^. 1.12.

Our ever-loving God, and tender father:
What comfort may this yield unto a soul,
That is constrained its weakness to condole?
Who can express what ease the grieved find,
When they this truth consider well in mind?
Troubles and sorrows may the good befall,
But this will make them triumph over all

His Doctors care, who has a father dear
For his Physician, nor the least doubt make,
Whether those medicines he may safely take,
Which he prescribes not only with great care,
But with his own hand likewise does prepare:
Less cause Gods people have to be afraid,
In time of trial, or so much dismayed
When they should suffer for the Gospells sake,
Which lies then bleeding as it were at stake;
If they consider well who does them call,
Yea, for what end and purpose and withal,
How by his mighty and all-ruling hand,
He governs all things both on sea and land;
So that the devil nor his instruments,
Can bring to any purpose their intents
Without leave from above: this truth we find
Mark 5.12.
Confirmed by Scripture, to confirm the mind
Of all the faithful, how the devils were
Not able of themselves once to draw near
The heard of swine, for they of Christ besought
Not only leave to go, as if they thought
That of small force, but to be sent, that so
They might be able into them to go:
What comfort may the soul from hence apply
Unto its self, in its extemity:
How may it reason with the Lord and say,
My God, my guide, my judge, my staff and stay,
Could not the devils go into those swine,
Without thy sufferance and leave divine?
Could thou oh Lord by thy almighty hand,
So merciless a creature so command,
As fire, and such a fire, in such a place,
That those three children through thy strength and grace
Could walk in the midst thereof, Dan. 3.17.
and not so much
As have their garments smell: was thy power such?
And shall I fear the face of mortal man,
Whose life is but a bubble, blast or span:
I know oh God of might thou art the same, Psalm. 75.2 Numb. 1^.23.

Thou can not change, Jehovah is thy name;
Thou did the Jsraelites with Manna feed,
And gav'st them quails in their great want and need;
Thou brought forth streams from rocks both hard and high,
Thou made great swelling rivers to be dry.
Bashan and Carmell are at thy command,
Great Princes at thy voice amazed stand,
The Cedars tall thy voice asunder rends,
At thy rebuke great-swelling Neptune bends;
Thou can effect things opposite to nature,
To pleasant wine thou can turn running water:
Saint John th'Evangelist was put to boil,
Into a Cauldron full of scaulding oil,
Yet by thy hand of providence, oh God,
He rather came anointed forth then sod:
I know thy hand has wrought many a wonder, Psalm 89 5 6.7. to the 19. Psalm 74
14.15.16 17.18. Psalm. 136.4. Psalm. 78.13.21.

Dividing seas and cleaving rocks asunder;
Slack in thy promise I thee never took,
Thou have no time thy chosen flock forsook;
At thy command I never took up arms,
But thou have stood between me and my harms, 1. Sam. 17.35 3^.

Then though my foes in camp against me lie,
And will in battle picht, their forces try,
I, in thy name will be both strong and stout,
Because thy hand does fence me round about,
For sure I am thy all supporting grace,
Will strengthen me my foes quite to deface:
Dan. 3.
Had not those hungry lions so much power,
As Daniel thy dear servant to devour?
Could they not hurt him with their griping paws?
Nor tear his limbs asunder with their jaws?
Then give me (blessed Lord) true faith that I,
In time of trial may on thee rely,
Being assured that it is the rod
Of a kind father, and a loving God:
1 Samuel 3.18.
It is the Lord says Eli that does smite,
Let him do what seems good in his own sight;
I was as dumb and would not speak a word,
Because I knew that it was thou, oh Lord;
Job. 1.21
The Lord does give, says Job, and take away,
And blessed be his holy name for ay;
Lament. 3.37.38. Amos 3.6.
What evill's there in any place or land,
That is not wrought by my alworking hand,
A sea of comfort for the comfortless,
In times (a) of trouble, sorrow and distress;
Is this our father and our tender God,
Like children let us humbly kiss the rod;
How may this elevate our drooping hearts,
When Satan with his sore-soule-wounding-darts,
And such as are his factors here below,
Our souls and bodies seek to overthrow:
Anno, 1588.
Had not the Lord himself, may England say,
Been on my side when mountains high of prey,
And such as did delight to swim in blood
Came in upon me as a swelling flood,
Their rageing streams had overwhelmed all
My worthy cedars, shrubs, and bushes small:
Had not the Lord himself, the soul may say,
Been on my side, hell gates before this day
Against me had prevailed, death and the grave
Had made of me a bondsman and a slave:

If for a fault committed, he should hear
His tender father in his fury say
Unto his servants, take you him away
Out of my sight and presence, and for it,
Give him what punishment you shall think fit:
If this were our condition, surely we
Of all men should most miserable be,
But knowing that we neither can nor shall,
Thus in the hands of men or devils fall,
We may triumph, and in our troubles sing,
Glory be to the Lord, Our Supreme King,
Whose word a lion to a lamb can turn,
At whose command the fire shall cease to burn,
Mountains shall dance, the roof of heaven shall shake, Job. 26.10.11.

Earth like an asping leaf for fear shall quake;
The stars shall cease to shine, the moon perforce
Shall be compelled to alter in her course,
Rocks shall grow moist, great hills shall be made plain,
Great swelling Neptune shall be cleft in twain,
A raven shall Elias feed, the flood
Shall not hurt Noah, nor such as be good;
The greedy whale shall Jonas cast on shore,
Whom she had swallowed down three days before:
The crowing of a cock shall Peter bring
Upon his knees, a viper shall not sting
A holy Paul; a stone in David's sling,
Shall bring Goliath to the dust, the Sun
Shall cease, his swift and wonted course to run;
The fire of Sodom shall not hurt at all
A holy Lot, prison nor bonds a Paul:
A cruel Pharoh, nor a bloody Saul,
A Moses, or a David, no nor all
The policy and might of devils in hell,
Or of their instruments, which so excel
In hellish subtletie, (a) shall able be
To hurt the godly in the least degree;
The Lord does reign oh let the earth rejoice,
And let his Saints triumph with cheerful voice.
The third thought.
Rom 8.28.29.
THough troubles grievous seem to flesh and blood,
Yet all things work (c) together for the good
Of such as love the Lord, whether they be,
Advanced to honor, or in low degree,
Whether they be in sickness or in health,
2. Reg. 6.27.30.33.
Whether they be in poverty, or wealth,
For nothing (d) happens to the just by chance,
But by the hand of divine providence;
And though God seem to disregard our cries,
And mournful tears, and for a time (e) denies
Our earnest suites, yea in our greatest need
And cause our troubles much more to exceed;
1 Cor. 19.9.
Yet he no time has his forsook, nor will,
Because he will his promises fulfill:
A wise Physician seeks not for to please
The sick man's fancy, but look what may ease,
And mi^igate his pain, he will apply,
Though for the present he increase thereby
The measure of his grief, and as it were,
Add sorrow unto sorrow, fear to fear;
Yet in the end he cures him of his pain,
And to his former health restores again:
Such is the weakness of our flesh, that we
Think nothing good for us, but what may be
Pleasing to nature, but the God of grace,
Often from his dearest servants hides his face,
And makes them for a time in wants (a) to live,
That he to them eternal life may give; Psalm. 94, 12.13, 14.

He often suffers them to be perplexed,
And by infernal spirits strangely vexed,
That they might walk more humbly in his sight,
And fear to sin against his grace and might;
Yet in due time they (b) shall find ease and rest,
And with great gladness see their foes suppressed,
For sure his mercies are, and from above,
He loves them with an everlasting (c) love:

Cures many times a man, by taking part
Of that away which does by (d) nature feed
The vital spirits, when they moisture need:
He can so temper poison by his skill,
That it will prove a very wholesome pill:
And shall not God, who by his power brings
Light out of darkness, and does call such things
As never were, shall he not able be,
To make his cross our chief felicity? Psalm. 68 4^. Psalm. 103.19.

He that could turn those waters into blood,
Can turn what we term ill unto our (e) good;
He that could cause clear water to be wine,
A barren tree to be a fruitful vine;
Without all controversy if he please,
And see it for our good, can with like ease,
Convert our sorrows into joy, our tears
To sollid mirth, yea our soul-wounding fears,
And doubting of his care and providence,
Unto well-grounded hope and confidence;
He can so order all our crosses here,
That to the world at length it may appear
That it was good for us, to bear the rod
And scourges of so merciful a God:
If by affliction then thou hop'st to find,
Good to thy soul, peace to thy troubled mind,
Look not so much upon the (a) Cross to see,
What hope or likelihood therein may be;
As to the promise (b) which the Lord has made,
Which shall stand good, when earth and heaven fade:
Cast all thy soule-disturbing cares aside,
God can and will what is for thy good provide:
Could we our hearts unto this temper bring,
And fully be persuaded of this thing,
We should not so much stagger as we do,
When we the cross of Christ should undergo;

From time to time, in waiting for a cure,
As launcing, (c) searing, cupping, loss of blood,
Hoping all will at length be for their good,
Even so this would correct the too much fear
That is in us, if we persuaded were,
That all the troubles of this present life,
As loss of friends, of husband, children, wife,
Of goods, good name, yea and of life, if we
Be called thereto, much for our good will be:
Then thou oh mighty God of gods, who art
The framer and disposer of the heart,
Convince our minds, and so our hearts persuade,
That in these brinish waters we may wade
With cheerfulness of spirit, soul and mind,
Although we sail against both tide and wind,
For sure we are, though storms and waves may rore,
We safely shall at length be brought to shore,
And when this pilgrimage shall have an end,
The noble peers of heaven shall attend
Upon our persons, and with triumph bring
Us to the city of our heavenly king,
Unto a city made of gold most pure,
Whose groundwork shall for evermore endure;
Unto a city, that shall neither have
Need of the Sun, or Moon, Revel. 21.43.
for God that gave
Them lifght and splendour, at the first, will be
Our light, and life, to all eternity:
O joy above all joys, what can annoy,
The soul that is possessed with this joy!
O light above all lights, without whose light,
Man cannot judge the day time from the night;
What mists and fogs man's mind should so obscure,
That he should not discern thy light so pure!
O light of all the world, teach us the way
That leads unto this light, that so we may
In despite of all lets behold at length,
Thy blessed face in vigor and full strength;
O blessed sight, God in himself to see,
My self in God, and God himself in me!
O soule-rejoycing-sight, what shall I see?
My friends and kindred in felicity:
O full and perfect light, what (a) shall I so
Enlightend be hereby, as God to know
As I am known! what shall I understand!
The secret works of his alworking hand;
Shall I poor sylly wretch acquainted be
With all the secrets of the Trinity!
How shall my soul triumph, when in this place
I shall behold my Maker, face to face!
How shall I shout for joy, exult and sing,
When I shall reign with my eternal king!
If in his mothers womb, John Baptist were
Constrained to leap for joy, when Christ drew near
Unto his mother Mary, how shall we
Exult for joy, when Christ himself will be
Not only with us, but in us, that so
Our joy and peace might ever over flow!
If that the Israelites for joy did sing,
When Solomon the wise was crowned king,
What cause shall we have to rejoice, when we
Shall Christ behold in pomp and Majesty!
The wisemen greatly did triumph, when they
Found out the babe, which in a manger lay;
How then shall we rejoice triumph and sing,
When on his throne we see him sit as king!
O happy sweetness, and sweet happiness,
Thy soule-rejoycing joys who can express!
1. Cor. 2.9.
Here Is fullness without loathing, strength and health
Without decay or sickness, gain and wealth
Without loss or deceit, peace without fear,
Joy without grief, love without hatred, here
1. Cor. 13.15.
Is knowledge without error, holiness
Without uncleanness, truth and godliness
Without dissembling, concord without strife,
Beauty without deformity, Dan. 12. Esaias. 32.
and life
Without the fear of death, or any fainting,
Fame without shame, and feature without painting,
Rest without sloth or labor, grace and glory,
Transcending (a) all things that are transitory:
O holy judgment seat, shall I appear
Before a Judge, Acts 10 23. Mat. 3 9, Ioh 8.34.
that neither will for fear
Nor favor partial be! what shall I see
Those men condemned, who have condemned me
Without a cause! how can they in this case,
Without amazement look me in the face!
O blessed fellowship; what shall I be
By grace united to the Trinity!
Shall I be seated in the Angels row,
Who for my sins deserve to be below
The worst of all the devils! oh what heart
Is able to conceive the hundred part
Of those soul-chearing joys, which from this root,
In great abundance, daily spring and shoot!
O blessed feast of feasts, here is indeed
The true and perfect Manna, which will feed
And please the (b) eater so, that he no longer,
After the world shall either thirst or hunger;
O real royal feast, who can relate,
What King did such a feast e're celebrate!
We read in Esther of a feast, Est. 1.4.
that were
Kept by King Assuerus half a year,
But where is now the meat, the mirth, the men
That was in so great estimation then!
Doubtless like to a bubble, post, or blast, Job 9.25.

They all are vanished, gone by, and past:
We have our wakes, our meetings, and our feasts,
At which too many make themselves like beasts,
Drinking and swilling without wit or reason,
Till they disgrace themselves, their friends, and season;
But at this holy feast where none appear,
Except such as the wedding garment wear,
Of sanctity of life, we in excess
Cannot in any kind sin or transgress:
Heb. 11.25.
And what is the (a) pleasure we can here obtain,
More then an itching humor mixed with pain!
For in the midst of mirth, for ought we know,
We to the pit of hell may headlong go;
When overcome with drink we lie asleep,
We may fall down into the dungeon deep;
When we are singing filthy alehouse songs,
God justly may deprive us of our tongues;
When we are piping, peeping in the cup,
To see our fellow drunkards drink all up,
God may in justice take away our sight,
Because we know not how to use it right;
Before the hand can get the cup to the head,
For ought we know, we may be stricken dead;
When we are m^rrie drinking of some health,
Sickness may come into our room by stealth,
And one arrest in great Jehovahs name,
On pain of death to go from whence he came;
The party struck grows ill and sick at heart,
Yet with good fellows he is full loath to part,
Some wishes him to stay, some not to shrink,
Some tells him he was hanged that left his drink,
But what says he? alas I know his mind,
He with his mates had rather stay behind;
I cannot blame him, for the truth is this,
Without repentance, there is small hope of bliss;
The way is narrow, how then shall the blind,
And staring-staggering drunkard it e're find!
Or having found it keep in it, since he
Has all his life been used to haufe and ree;
Beware then drunkards and grow wise in time,
Hate and forsake this soul-condemning crime;
Watch and be sober, pray, and fast and pray,
That thou may feast with Christ another day:
We have our Ember weeks, and in a year
A hundred days at least we should forbear
Eating of flesh, according to command,
For the increase of cattle in the la^d:
But this eternal feast shall ever last,
Here is no Lent, no need to pray or fast;
O soule-contenting rest, what shall I be
From cares, fears, doubts, and molestations free!
O peace (a past understanding, who can dive
Into the depth hereof, what man alive
With all his cunning policy and art,
The (b) worth hereof is able to impart!
Shall I with blessed Angels sit, and sing
Sweet Hallelujahs to my God and King!
When these transcending joys I call to mind,
I grow forgetful of what is behind,
And forward (c) press with all my force and might,
As one that covets for to have a sight
Of what we never saw, and when I mount
With such high and surpassing thoughts, I count
The troubles of this present life to be
But as a trifle to eternity:
These soul-contenting (a) thoughts often make my soul
With restlesse-longing wish to kiss this goal,
As if possessed with a holy pride,
It scorned within me longer to abide;
Man, what is God that thou should disregard him!
Lord, what is man that thou should thus reward him!
Man, thou art dust, worms meat, a lump of clay,
Lord, thou art just and great, our rock and stay;
Man, thou art (b) dust, and must to dust again,
Lord, thou art just and do not dust disdain;
Man thou art frail, thy substance is of earth,
A slave to hell without a second birth;
Man, what is God that thou should then neglect him!
Lord, what is man that thou should then respect him!
The fourth thought.
THe common soldier must not look to have
More favor showed him, then his Captain brave;
Our Captain (c) has drunk freely of the cup
His father gave him, to the brim filled up;
He has endured the Cross, despised the shame,
And shall we (d) shun to pledge him in the same?
It is our souls health, shall we then refuse?
Shall we our souls so horribly abuse?
No rather let us willingly (b) embrace
It, as a favor dignity and grace,
That sinful men should be so worthy thought,
As for to pledge him in this healthful draught.
In some well governed family we see
Each one observes his rank, place, and degree;
The wife unto her husband will submit,
Unto their parents what respect is fit
Good children give, and as discretion steeres
Their minds, each one according to his years
Without constraint, do give respect to other,
Such privileges has the eldest brother,
That none may go beyond them, no nor all
Be equal with him, and if any shall
Attain so great a dowry and estate,
On such like terms, or upon such a rate,
The same conditions they must not refuse;
Unless they will their privilege abuse,
And through their pride of heart will so far err,
As before him their persons to prefer:
Christ is our noble Master, and shall we, Ioh. 15.20

That openly profess our selves to be
His faithful soldiers, be (a) ashamed to bear
His cross with us, and livery to wear;
He is our supreme King, and moderator,
The mighty Prince of peace, our great Creator; (b)
And shall we that aloud our selves proclaim
His loyal subjects, reckon it a shame
Or blemish to our names, to do the thing,
Which has been done by our eternal King!
Shall we that are but younger brethren scorn
To be brought up that way, Heb. 2.10.
Romans 8 29. Psalm. 89.17.
that the first borne
Has been before us! shall we as it were,
Disdainfully tell Christ we (c) will not bea^e
The burden of his Cross, nor undergo
What he has undergon, for friend nor foe!
O let us not his glory thus obscure,
Nor stain his honor with such deeds impure;
For if we be ashamed to own him hear,
He will not own us, when we shall appear
Before his judgment seat; oh let us then!
That are the sons of frail and sinful men,
Confess his holy name, his truth and word,
And humbly bear his (a Cross with one accord:
Upon good grounds the Captive or the slave
Cannot expect more liberty to have
Then has his Lord, (b) why then poor slaves shall we
When God afflicts, so discontented be?
Why should we so repine, when as Gods hand
Corrects us for our sins? why should we stand
On terms with God? the matter to dispute,
As if he were mistaken in the suit,
Or any thing should rashly undertake,
For which he could not a good answer make:
As if we had forgot that we are dust,
Or did conceive the ways of God unjust:
Surely this lesson we were never taught
By Christ our master: for when he was brought
Before ungodly Rulers, and did hear
Their unjust judgments, yet we ^ead he were
Like to a harmless sheep, both dumb and mute,
He does not stand the matter to dispute,
He entertaines no malice in his breast,
But meekly dies with Consumm^tum est;
In times of trouble, then the Godly may
Ponder these things well in their minds, and say
Unto their stubborn hearts, why are you sad?
Why do we fret and fume as men half mad?
Did thou sweet Jesu with such meekness bear,
The heavy weight of sin for us who were
Thy deadly foes? did thou not shun nor scorn
O mighty King to be so meanly borne?
O blessed God, Heb. 7.17.
were thou content to take
On thee our humane shape, and for (a) our sake,
Become a servant who art Lord of all!
Would thou come from thy throne unto a stall,
To be so meanly lodged as in a manger,
To be scarce entertained as a stranger!
Would thou oh great Lawgiver subject be,
Unto the censure of the Law, that we
Might be set free! did thou oh Lord I say,
For us poor slaves so great a ransom pay!
Would thou, oh blessed God, become accursed
For such as were of all thy creaturrs worst!
Would thou, oh supreme Judge, so far submit,
As to be judged of men! did thou acquit
Those that condemned thee! yea did thou pray
To God for their (b) forgiveness, who did lay
Their bloody hands on thee! and shall not we
In all estates and times contented be!
Did thou such drops of blood and water sweat,
To cleanse our souls from sins so soul and great!
Would thou be taken when thou might have fled,
That we to hell might not be captive led!
Would thou by sinful men be bound, that so
The twisted cords of sins thou might undo!
Did thou in meekness, blessed Lord, permit
Those sinfull-shamelesse wretches for to spit
Disgracefully upon thy blessed face,
To cleanse our faces from sins soul disgrace!
Would thou be hoodwinked with a veil, that we
Thy lovely face and countenance might see!
Would thou be buffetted, and beat with staves,
From strokes of hellish fiends, to free such slaves! Mat. 26 6^.

Could thou sweet Lord of life contented be
To suffer death for such as hated thee!
Have thou done this, all this, and that for such
As rebels were! and now shall we think much
To bear thy cross, who understand and know,
How thou such love did manifest and show,
Freely and fully, when we were both slaves
To sin and satan, helfire, and our graves!
Surely sweet Jesus, did we understand
This love of thine aright, it would command
Our stubborn wills, and stony hearts constrain,
Before all things thee to affect again:
And surely did we love (a) thee as we ought,
Our hearts to such a temper would be brought,
That at thy hand we should not so repine,
But cheerfully submit our wills to thine;
Then God of love we humbly thee desire,
With this thy love our hearts so set on fire,
That in these evil days we may submit,
To bear what punishment thou shall think fit
To lay upon us, give us faith to stay
Our selves upon thy promises always.
The fifth thought.
1 Pet. 1.6.7. Prove. 17 3. Eceles. 2. leg. cap. ^ot. Psalm. 119.176.
WE ought to count all trialls, as the rod
And favor of an over-loving God;
Who still corrects us when we go (b) astray,
And err like lost sheep in an unknown way,
Yet so corrects that he his (c) love might show,
And that the world may plainly see and know
That he will not spare sin, though in the best
Of his dear Saints and servants, truly blessed;
That he from sin their hearts might purify,
And prove their faith, love, zeal, and constancy: 1 Pet. 1.6 7.

A tree well-rooted in the ground stands fast,
And is not shaken down with every blast;
Silver and gold the furnace can endure,
The dross consumes, the gold remains more pure;
So by these trialls some are (a) purer made,
When others like to dross consume and fade,
Who in the time of peace will make such show
Of zeal and godliness, that none can know,
Or judge by outward works, but that they are
Such as Gods holy will and word prefer
Before all worldly profits, yea before
Their lives and liberties, their pomp and store;
Although they reign on earth as petty kings,
Fully possessed with all outward things,
They go to church twice on the Sabbath day,
As if they went to hear what God would say,
They hear, they read, they fast, and daily pray,
And where their tithes are due, they duly pay;
Out of their plenty, great excess, and store,
They give unto the needy and the poor;
Yea in their lives such fruits they will express,
Of truth, integrity, and godliness,
That all the world would judge them pure in heart,
And such as would from Gods laws never start;
Yet when the time of trial draws nigh,
And God begins his Saints to prove and try,
They are so danted, 1 Kings 18.21.
that they do not know
Which way to take, what in this case to do,
For want of faith on Gods word to rely,
Meekness to wait, and servent zeal to fly
To him for aid, who never fails the just,
Or such deceive, as in his mercy trust;
They fall away from God and godliness,
And scoff at what they did before profess,
They are not semper idem, for their minds
Are found to vary ofter then the winds;
And such as these would sooner shed their bloods,
(If there were cause) for saving of their goods,
Then for the Gospel, such will lose their lives,
Undo themselves, their children, friends, and wives,
Rather then want their wills, or put up wrongs,
When in Gods cause they want both hearts and tongues:

Luke 8 13.
And floods come in so fast, to overflow
The wonted bounds or limits, know we shall
Whether our houses will stand firm or fall:
In times of trial some are constant found,
Others like seed (cast into stony ground)
Wanting both root and moisture, faith to lay
Fast hold on God, and meekness for to stay
The leisure of the Lord, cannot abide
The scorching heat wherewith the just is tried;
The empty vessel makes the greatest sound,
Those that seem best, the worst are often found;
The fairest birds may have the foulest feet,
Mars for a time great Jove may friendly greet,
And promise weather fair, and happy gales,
And make the Navigator hoist up sails;
Yet in this case he dares not be too bold,
Because he fears it is too calm to hold;
For if Saturnus cross him in his way,
He comes forth as a Lion for his prey:
Thus did the Lord prove in the wilderness,
The Israelites, whereby they did express
What was in each man's heart, for we may find
How some adored Idols, some repined
At Gods just dealing, how some were content
Meekely to bear his plague and punishment;
How some grew worse and worse, and did commit
Offenses fetched from the infernal pit;
Thus God the faith of Abraham did try, Genesis 22 1. Heb. 11 17

To manifest unto the world thereby,
That such as truly love and fear his name,
Will do his will thouhg to their loss and shame;
Sins, nor sons, though they be darlings dear,
Will they withhold that Gods law truly fear;
God Abraham commands to slay his son,
The word's no sooner spoke but it is done;
Reason might seem to put in ifs, and ands,
And challenge God upon such harsh commands:
The flesh might reason thus, What shall I slay
My only son? the son might seem to say,
O father dear, can you find in your heart,
The head and shoulders of your son to part,
Your son, your only son, your son and heir,
Heir of the promise, upon whom your care,
And love has been so sixth? what will you prove
A murderer of your child? where is that love
Which once did flame like fire? is there no spark
Of thy good nature left? a riddle dark
For nature to conceive, a thing most strange,
How in a fathers nature such a change
So strangely should be wrought. Oh let me pause
A little with my self, what might this cause!
What have I done? wherein have I offended?
Cannot my fault by fair means be amended?
O spare a little, and withhold thy hand,
And I will do what thou shall me command:
But he regarding God, more then the cry
And moan of Isaac, seems thus to reply,
My child, my tender child, my son most dear,
I have command to sacrifice thee here,
Or otherwise my love to thee is such,
That for a world thy life I would not touch.

But rather does the weapon good then hurt,
The flaile may bruise the straw, the chafe great winds
May blow a way, but still the seedsman finds
His corn more fit for use: the furnace may,
Both wood and dross with heat consume away;
The purge may drive ill humors from the heart,
And not hurt it or any other part;
Troubles often purge our souls from some soul sin,
Or other, which we have long lived in;
Before I was afflicted I astray
Did go (says David) but now I obey,
And keep thy statutes daily in my mind,
And more delight and comfort therein find,
Then can the rich man in his wine or oil,
Or the undanted victor in his spoil:
So stubborn is the will, so cross the mind,
The heart so hard, and understanding blind,
That cords of mercy will not us withdraw
1 Samuel 6.20. 1 Samuel 12.10.
From the transgressing of Gods holy law,
Troubles and (a) sorrows oftentimes prevail,
When admonitions and good counsel fail;
Troubles made David to refrain from sleep;
Sickness King Ezekiah made to weep;
Egypts burden, servitude, and thrall,
Made Israel upon the Lord to call;
Judgments upon his knees proud Pharaoh brought;
The prodigal how to return want taught.

With gifts, fair promises, and speeches mild,
Using what means he can from time to time,
To make him see the vileness of his crime;
He talks to him, and often in talking weeps,
And seems to reason with him in his sleeps,
His yearning heart with grief is so oppressed,
That dainties will not down, he cannot rest
In any place, but goes from friend to friend,
To see if they can tell what course will mend
A prodigal; some tells him this, some that,
Some bids him take no care for such a brat,
Some bids him keep him short, and others say,
To give him scope will be the only way;
He listens to their counsels, and first tries
All fair and gentle means he can devise,
So loath is he his darling should be lost,
That he regards no labor, care, or cost;
Yet when he finds all this to be in vain,
He sends him over sea, to France, or Spain,
And to the Master of the ship gives way
To keep him short, and curb him day by day,
Until such time, as he shall clearly find
Him of another nature, will, and mind;
The dingthrift knows not this, but lives in hope,
That he shall have more liberty and scope,
He goes aboard the ship, as one that were
Void of all humane reason, wit, or fear;
He thinks to have the like, or more command
Upon the sea, then he had upon land,
Luke 15 16.
But when this prodigal is through great need,
Constrained on durtie husks with swine to feed,
And calls to mind, upon what dainty fare
His fathers servants feed, he then takes care
How to return, his folly to confess,
H^s great rebellion, and unworthiness
To be his son, and therefore much desires
To be but as a servant, which he hires
For yearly wage, so that he may obtain
His former love, and countenance again:
This course the Lord is forced often times to take
With his, when they his holy ways forsake,
To follow their own fancies, and delight
To satisfy their sinful appetite:
Should God not sometimes strike us with his rod,
We should forget that there was any God;
Nay, should not God often strike, we soon should grow
So well conceited, that we (a) should not know
God or our selves aright, but run on still,
The measure of iniquity to fill:
Should we have all things at our hearts desire,
We should like swine, so wallow in the mire
Heb. 11.9.10.
Of worldly pleasures, that our hearts would be,
More bent to trash, then true felicity:
Had not the Israelites been in distress,
And long perplexed in the wilderness,
The land of promise had not welcome been,
Neither had they Gods love so clearly seen:
Tidings of (a) peace unto the soldier brings
More true contentment, then all other things;
The wether beaten Mariner desires
To be on shore; the traveller aspires
The top of some high hill, hoping to see
His journeys end; the labourer would be
Rather at (b) rest, then roast; the silly slave
Expects a day to come, when he might have
His liberty; the sick man prizeth (c) health,
And fortitude; the poor and needy wealth;
The hungry food; the naked clothes; the blind
Their sight; the cripple limbs; the sick in mind,
And soul-afflicted, joy; and such as know
The pains and miseries they undergo,
Who suffer in some sort the pangs of hell,
In soul and mind, whilst upon earth they dwell,
Will heaven prize, and ever think it best,
To be with Christ in his soule-easing rest.

That quietly one hour it scarce will rest
Without the same, yet when the child is grown
Unto some bigness, and begins alone
To creep about, the mother much desires
To weane it off and for that purpose hires
One for to tend her child, that so she may
Keep for a day or two out of the way;
The child grows mother-sick, and is so wed
Unto the breast, that it will not be fed
With any other food, but roares and cries
Both day and night, as it in the cradle lies;
She hearing this to be of so small boot,
With some unpleasant thing, as't might be soote,
Her breast besmeares, to try if it will take
The same, the child what have it can does make,
And so begins to suck, as if it thought
To fill its empty belly with a draught,
But it not liking of the taste, dislikes,
And leaves the breast, and it in anger strikes:
Our natures are alas too prone and apt,
With worldly vanities to be entrapt;
Besides, the devil uses so much art
To blind the mind, and to delude the heart
Of sinful man, with pleasures, profits, gains,
Thereby to bring them to eternal pains;
That should not God through his abundant graces,
Somewhat their beauty and fair form deface,
And sometimes cross us in our pomp and wealth,
And sometimes in our vigor, strength, and health,
Our hearts would be to (a) Egypt so much wed,
That we for stinking leekes, should shun the bread
Which came down from above, the bread of life,
For bread of sorrow, discontent, and strife;
Ecl 7.4 5. Esaias 61.3. Ecl. 2.1.
Again, in holy Scriptures we sh ll find
Troubles; and sorrow, needful in this kind,
For till we understand our (b) Christ-crosse row,
Unto our Father we can never go;
For we are taught, and that in sacred story,
^eb. 12.6.
That God (c) corrects whom he receives to glory:
Sweet mercies bind the body and the soul
To serve the Lord, but crosses must enroule
Us in the book of life, and make us sure,
His faithful servants ever to endure;
For (d) were it not for this, how should we know,
Whether we were adopted sons or no;
Should God not scourge us for our sinful crimes,
We might well fear the plague of future times:
From pastimes great much bitterness does spring,
And sorrows deep their deep contentments bring:
The sweetest descants birds we know are taught,
When from the woods, they to the cage are brought;
The choicest corn is always cleanest dressed,
The sweetest grape is ever hardest pressed;
The sweetest fish, in saltest waters live;
And cammomile trod under foot will give
A fragrant smell; the grape unprest will yield
No sweet and pleasant wine; a fruitful field
Will barren prove, as husbandmen well know,
Unless they mucke and plow before they sow:
In troubles then let not our hearts despair,
Let not our minds give way to needless care;
For sure I am, he that his grief extends
Beyond the bounds of reason, (a) God offends;
Does it not argue in us misbeliefe,
To have our souls ore-whelm'd with care and grief?
As if we did conceive it was in vain,
To hope we or our friends should rise again?
Unto your conscience let me but appeal,
Does not this quench the heat of godly zeal?
Does not this grieve the Spirit of God? and make
Your hearts and minds unfit to un^ertake
Religious duties? Does not this offend
Such as their minds to godly courses bend?
May not the world conceive it is in vain
To serve the Lord, if this be all the gain
Of godliness? Does not this scandalize,
And make Gods worship hateful in men's eyes?
Does not the skillful archer rightly know
That (a) too much bending breaks a brittle bow?
Does not the husbandman well understand
That too much rain does hurt upon the land?
We if we be not senseless and stark blind,
May see this hurt both body, soul and mind;
Let hope support us then, a shower of rain
Often lays great storms, and makes it calm again;
And calmes (as I have heard some Seaman say)
Have been more hurtful then some storms; for they
(Finding great Neptune sometimes over kind)
Have waited for some happy gales of wind,
Till they have been half starved, and forced to eat
That which some men on shore would scarce call meat:
Think not that wealth then is the ground of joy,
Or that all troubles do the soul annoy;
For godly sorrow in times of distress
Shall bring forth fruits of peace and righteousness:
Seed cast into the bowels of the earth,
Becomes more fruitful by a second brth:
That man from grace to grace may daily grow,
He must be truly humbled and brought low;
For daily sunshine without timely showers,
Rather consumes, then causes fruit or flowers.
1 Cor. 11.31.32.
Lastly, (b) God strikes because we should not be
Condemned unto eternal misery;
Hosea 2 6.
Yea for this end God often corrects his own,
When as the wicked escape as men unknown,
Psalm 14.2.53.1.
Which makes such fools in heart to boast and say,
There is no God that we ought to obey;
Or if there be a God we are more blessed
Then those that are with want and need oppressed:
In (a) safety in our houses we still dwell, Job 21. usque ad 14. v.

Our stock increases, each thing prospers well
That we both take in hand and go about,
Our names grow famous all the world throughout:
We have more then we ask or what we crave,
Or would have come to pass we forthwith have; Psalm. 10.3.5 6 Amo 6 4. Job 21
4.

Even to our hearts content we softly lie
Stretched out upon our beds of Ivory;
We have the fairest objects for the eye
That may be had from France or Italy;
The sweetest smelling odours for the nose,
Musk, Civet, powders, and the damask rose;
All sorts of music which may please the ear,
Revive our spirits and dull senses cheer;
We have our pleasant walks, and summer bowers,
Our gardens decked with strange-outlandish flowers;
For sustenance we take no thought or care,
For we have plenty of superfluous fare;
Twice in a day we have brought to our boards
What (b) water, earth, and air to man affords:
The Persian Kings for dainties we exceed;
On roots and herbs (like swine) we scorn to feed;
We have our jellies, marrow pies, rich sack,
Oringo roots, potatoes for the back;
Poor John comes not within our cellar door,
No, we have ale, strong beer, and wine great store;
Besides our March beer, and a cup of Hum,
That'le make a Cat to speak, a Cato dumb;
And if our squeamish stomachs loath to eat
Bacon or Beef, or any such gross meat,
We can have Mutton, Lambs, young Kid and Veal,
Capon, Duck, Partridge, Woodcocke, Phesant, Tea^e:
Our carcasses are decked with rich attire,
As silk and sattins, and what we desire
Within the compass of the sea or land,
Our purses or our persons may command.
We have both hawks and hounds for our delight,
Cards, dice and tables fit our humors right;
We eat and drink our fill, and rise to play,
With mirth and merriment we drive away
The time; we hunt, we hawke, we foul, we fish,
To please our appetite with some new dish;
When such who think themselves more pure perhaps
Would be contented with our crusts and scraps:
But let these fools this ponder well in mind,
That they a greater difference shall find;
When the great Shepherd of the soul (a) appears
With all his company of noble Peers;
Matthew. 24 31.
His Angels, Martyrs, Saints, for to divide
The goats from sheep, the impure from the tried;
Acts 17.32.
When once the Judge of all the world shall come
To pass that just and everlasting doom,
Venite, ite; come ye truly blessed,
Matthew. 25.34.
Enter into my everlasting rest;
Come you true Jacobs, and my blessing take;
Go cursed Esau's to the burning lake,
For you have sold your birthright, grace and glory,
For gain and pleasure, and things transitory;
O come ye blessed Martyrs, you at stake
Have burned for my truth and Gospel sake;
Lives, lands, nor livings, friends, nor kindred dear,
Matthew. 3.18.
Could make you swerve, or to forsake my fear;
You have not served the Lord your God in vain,
Your greatest loss shall be your greatest gain:
Come now from labor unto perfect rest,
From bloody Tyrants hands to Abraham's breast;
From shame to honor, from the jaws of death, Esaias 25.8.9.10.

To joys eternal; from those toys beneath,
To things of consequence; from dross and loss,
To perfect gain; from bearing of my cross,
Unto the wearing of my Crown; from pain,
In happiness for ever to remain:
In meekness you have suffered at the hands
Of wicked men much wrong, in cruel bands
Of slavery and thraldom many years
You have been kept, Apoc. 21.4. Esaias 25.8. Apoc. 7.17.
but now behold your tears
Are vanished, you shall possess a Crown
Of everlasting glory and renown:
Upon my (a) throne you shall in judgment sit, 1 Cor. 6.2.

And see your foes sent toth'infernall pit
Which burns with fire and brimstone, they shall hear
Unto their great astonishment and fear
This dreadful sentence past, Depart from me
O all ye workers of iniquity! Mat. 25.41.7.23. Psalm. 5.4.5.

The pleasures of this life like as a stream
Have flowed upon you, Psalm. 76.5.73.17.18 19 Iam. 5.1.2.3.4.5. Psalm 17.14.
but now as a dream
They shall deceive you: and not only so,
But aggravate your misery and woe,
Because your (b) plenty you have often abused;
And to relieve my servants have refused,
Nay in their wants you have so backward been
To comfort them, that I have often seen
You persecuting some with bloody hands,
And driving others into foreign lands,
Therefore depart from me: but is this all?
No: it might seem a punishment too small,
Yea in some sort a favor if they might
Have leave to go, and keep out of his sight:

The Judge; the malefactor glad would be
If he might have that favor or that grace,
As not to see his countenance or face;
But being upon force constrained t'appeare
Before an angry Judge; in how great fear
And horror stands he then, because he knows
He cannot justify himself in those
Condemning crimes which are against him brought,
Nor have of friendship one conceit or thought!
Because he is indicted for such things,
As present death unto the actor brings,
High treason he against his King has wrought,
And the destruction of his Judge often sought;
And can he hope for mercy at his hands,
Who has thus forfeited his life and lands?
Out of his sight the Judge bids him depart,
That Is his desire; but this strikes to his heart
Be gone, depart from me, unto that place
From whence thou can; and there for a short space
Thou shall remain, and after dragged be
To end thy days in pain and misery:
Thus at the great Assise when Christ shall come
To judge the world; no doubt there will be some
1 Cor. 1.7. Heb 9.28. Apoc 9.6. Esaias 2.18.20, 21. Hosea 10.8. Luke 23.30.
With joy expecting when he should appear,
When others seek to hide their heads for fear;
Not daring to behold the Judge his face,
Nor to abide the splendour of the place;
Such being guilty will with all their heart
Wish that they might out of his sight depart:
So holy is the Judge, so pure his throne,
That it can be delightful unto none
But holy Saints; so that if Christ should say
Depart from me, and there his censure stay,
It might a favor seem, could they thereby
From everlasting pains and torments fly;
Therefore (a) this holy Judge in his just ire,
Bids them depart unto eternal fire; Matthew 25.41. Esaias ^0.33.

Is this Gods dealing, let us then induce
Unto our profit hence a triple use?
As first, let no man think that man most blessed
That has most gold and silver in his chest;
For outward things we fully may possess,
And yet fall short of real happiness:
The rain both upon good and bad does fall,
The Sun sends forth his beams alike on all;
Yea oftentimes the wicked wealth possess,
When as the godly are in great distress: Ierem. 18. Eccles. 2. tot. cap.

And secondly, let not the godly be
Much troubled, when they wicked men shall see
Grow wealthy in the world; but labor still
To be submissive to their Fathers will:

May for the present time more money have
Then Is Masters son; yet must he not compare
For mastership because he is his heir;
Ungodly men may for a time advance
Themselves over Gods beloved inheritance;
They may command as Lords and domineere,
And think to make the godly stand in fear
Of their high looks and threats; but God one day
His mercy and his justice will display;
Psalm. 58.10. Mal. 3.17, 18.
And with an everlasting crown reward
Such as unto his laws have had regard:
2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Mal. 4.1.2.
When such as did on earth the just disdain
Shall be rewarded with eternal pain;
As sheep go to the fold, they to the grave,
And in that day the just shall Lordship have;
Their beauty shall consume when they shall go
From their brave buildings to eternal woe.

As with a Partridge which the Hawk does chase;
The silly Partridge knows not where to rest,
Nor where in safety she may build a nest
To save her self and young ones; for if she
Presume to foare aloft, and in a tree
Shall think to hide herself, the Hawks quick eye,
And flying vermin her would soon discrie;
Should she creep in some hollow place ith'ground
To save herself from harm, she would be found
By creeping vermin; should she take a flight
Up to the mount, the Hawk still by his might
Would make her fall the greater; should she take
The water for her refuge, it would make
An end of her; should she creep in a bush,
Into the same the nimble dogs would rush,
And pull her out again; and thus we see
That she from fear and danger is not free:
When as the Hawk is highly entertained,
And worthy thought of most to be mantain'd
In Princely houses, and esteemed fit
Upon the hand of some great Lord to fit:
But now observe their ends, and you shall see
That there a greater difference will be;
The Partridge being dead and neatly dressed,
With Kings and Princes is in great request,
When as this stinking foul (as nothing worth)
Unto the dunghill with disdaine's cast forth.
God suffers many times his children here
To be in extreme wants, and as it were
Lost and forsaken, sometimes giving leave
Unto blood thirsty tyrants to bereave
Them of their lives and livings, so that they,
Not without cause, may with their Master say,
That foxes have their holes, the bird her nest, Luke 9.58.

But we have not a place wherein to rest,
Or put our heads, but are from place to place
Tossed like a tennis-ball with great disgrace,
When such as have their minds bent unto ill,
In honor and in wealth do flourish still:
But now observe their ends well in thy mind, Esaias 65.13, 14.

And thou the godly man's estate shall find
More to be wished; Psalm. 37 37.
the wicked we may see
A while to flourish like a laurel tree,
But so he dies, and suddenly to hell
Is dragged by devils, Luke 16
evermore to dwell
In utter darkness, and for aye to be
In everlasting pains and misery:
Behold the world's turned upside down with him,
For he that did in worldly pleasure swim,
Must now sustain an angry Judge his ire,
And ever burn in ever burning fire;
He that was wont to feed on dainty fare,
Now pines away with horror and despair:
His dainty mouth that relished naught at all
But what was sweet, now nothing tastes but gall:
His throat that once did swallow down strong drink,
Is now more full of filth then any sink:
He that had music once to please the ear,
Can nothing now but hellish yellings hear,
He that had all things that might please the eye,
Sees nothing now but what may terrify
Him to behold: he that was wont to have
All pleasant odors that contentment gave
Unto the sense of smelling, now in hell
Can nothing else but noisome savours smell;
He that was decked with silks, and crowned with fame,
Is clothed with horror and eternal shame;
He that had many friends, and kinsfolk dear
In time of sickness to revive and cheer
His dying heart, salves for his grief and sore,
Shall weep and howl in hell for evermore,
And shall no comfort, ease nor succor find,
Nor any friend where to disclose his mind:
He that spent many days and nights in vain,
Would give a world one minute to regaine;
He that was wont to brag and brave it out,
With big and daring words and valor stout,
With thunder threatening words can neither daunt,
Nor with fair speeches hellish fiends inchant;
His feet that nimble were to run and go,
Cannot convey his soul from endless woe;
His hands that once were able to defend
Himself, his goods, his neighbor and his friend,
Are now fast bound in everlasting chains,
And cannot free his soul from endless pains:
And last of all, he that did once possess
All pleasures and delights this wilderness
Could yield to man, is now in such distress,
That men nor Angels can the like express:
He that did once drink wine and water strong,
A drop of water craves to cool his tongue;
Those pleasures which before he thought most dear,
As daily soule-tormenters now appear:
Sweet meats require sour sauce, vain pastimes pain,
Mirth, misery, after fair weather rain;
Hot summers, thunder, lightnings and strange sights,
Cause in the air, fair days often foulest nights:
The just shall this behold, and fear the Lord, Prove. 29.16. Psalm. 103.15, 16,
17, 18.

And laugh at him, and say with one accord,
Behold the man that made not God his stay,
But trusted in his strength, his muck and clay;
But now observe the upright and the just, Psalm. 119.142.

Which in the Lord at all times put their trust,
For sure the end of such is endless peace,
God in the end their comforts will increase:
Behold poor Lazarus falls sick and dies,
And there is an end of all his miseries:
The case is altered much, for he that lay
At Dives gate in want, is now for aye
Even with an everlasting Crown possessed,
And ever shall in Abra'ms bosom rest;
He that at Dives gate begged crumbs of bread,
And such as from his table fell, is fed
With blessed Angels in that blessed place,
Where he beholds his Maker face to face;
He that a beggar was of petty things,
Is now advanced above all earthly Kings:
Then let us be content in (a) each estate,
And not esteem our selves unfortunate;
When we the wicked and ungodly see
To flourish as it were a laurel tree,
For sure the just man's poor estate's (a) worth more
Then the ungodly man's great pomp and store;
Yet ought we not in any case to be
So far content with our estates, that we
Thereby grow careless if with plenty blessed,
Or desperate in mind, if long oppressed
With want and need, for such unpleasant weeds
Not from the spirit, but the flesh proceeds;
If God then give us (b) peace and happy days, Deuteronomy. 6.10, 11, 12.

Let us remember evermore to praise
And bless his holy name, and humbly crave
His blessing on our selves and what we have,
Or else our (c) health and wealth, our strength and peace,
Will our eternal misery increase:

And comes unto a place where he may eat
His fill, may glut his feeble stomach so
That he thereby more faint and sick shall grow;
So when we, fading-false-conceived pleasures,
Honors, preferment, and all worldly treasures
Embrace with too great and too deep content,
They often prove to us a punishment:
Or if the Lord afflict us any ways
With sickness or diseases, that our days
Grow wearisome to us, yea if he send
The plague so hot amongst us, that one friend
Dare not come to another, if his hand
Bring the devouring sword into our land,
And after that a famine, if he smite
Our souls with pangs of hell, and so affright
Our minds with honor of our sins, that we
Cannot tell where to rest, still (a) let us be
Grateful and meek, yet ought we not to stand
Like stocks and stones when God shall lay his hand
Upon us, or our Kingdom, as if we
Did not discern or feel our misery;
This is no true contentment, but a kind
Of sottishness, or wilfulness of mind,
It Is not enough to say in God we trust,
Though we say well therein, for so we must;
Such thoughts as these must not be entertained,
Without we use the means by God (b) ordained
To set us free, for this may prove a sign
That we are such as tempt the powers divine:
Let Us not in anger then with God dispute,
Nor through despair in mind grow resolute, James 5.13

But take St. James his counsel whilst we may.
Are we affl cted? Let us humbly pray.
We may in times of trouble and distress,
Unto the throne of grace have free access;
We may with boldness to the Lord draw near, Heb. 10 19 cap. 4. v. 14, 15, 16.

And crave as many things as we want here,
So that we crave them in that manner still
Which is best pleasing to his holy will:
If grievous troubles long upon us lie,
And God seems for to slight our doleful cry;
Let us reflect unto our selves, and see
Whether our hearts be humbled, for till we
Return with contrite spirits, Number. 21.5. 1 Ioh 1.9. 3 K^^g. cap. 8.49. to 50.
^am. 3.42, 43, 44. Psalm. 66.16, 17, 18.
and confess
The vildnesse of our sin and wickedness,
And (c) steadfastly resolve them to forsake,
God will not hear the prayers which we make;

To scourge his tender child, Ier. 3 4 5.
so that he might
By fair means win him; but if once he find
In him a stubborn and a wilful mind,
He will correct him, and correct him till
He does submit himself unto his will:
Let not the afflicted then much daunted be
At the (a) prolonging of their misery; Heb 12. 1 2.3.4. Exodus 1.12. Luke
24.26. Acts 14 11.

But be assured that God intends by this
To bring their souls unto eternal bliss.
What though thou art afflicted more then all
Thy friends besides? What if the Lord should call
Thee out alone to suffer for his word?
If he a greater measure will afford
Of strength to thee, thou have small cause to grudge,
Or of his justice rashly for to judge:

The purge the father takes, but one that is mild,
One that may with his tender years agree,
And to his nature correspondent be:
The great Physician of our souls does know
What we are able best to undergo; Psalm. 119.72. Psalm. 7.10. Rom 8.25. Heb.
4.13.

He knows the frame and nature of our hearts,
He tries the reins and our most inward parts,
And will not lay his hand on all alike,
Neither at all times with the same rod strike:
One man is crossed in his reputation,
Another in his birth and education;
Parents sometimes are crossed with a child
That proves a prodigal, and grows so wild,
That he will not be ruled do what they can,
Standing in awe neither of God nor man;
The child with an ill father, and the wife
With such a husband, that her very life
Seems as a hell on earth, some in their health
By daily sicknesses; some in their wealth
By loss of goods: then (a) let not mortal men
Dispute, why, where, by whom, what, how, and when
They suffer at Gods hands? But be content
(Since they have sinned) to bear the punishment:

To give his physic, as the cure of such
As he shall take in hand, and therefore tries
One way at first, if that serve, he applies
No more, but leaves them off; (b) but if he find
Much dregs and corrupt matter still behind,
He uses launcing, cupping, letting blood,
Yea any way whereby to do them good;
And if at any time he intermit,
It is because his patients are not fit
By reason of their weakness, not that he
Intends to leave them off; and thus we see
God deals with his own people many times,
In purging them from soule-corrupting crimes;
For when the ways of God we are not taught, Esaias 50 ^.

Nor by the first (c) cross profit as we ought,
He either lets it longer on us lie,
Or sends another, though not presently, Ier. 5.3.6. Esaias 9.17.20. Hos. 5.12,
13, 14. Amos 4.6. usque ad 13.

Because we cannot bear it; let us then learn
To profit by our troubles, and discern
The hand of him that strikes, and for what ends
The Lord unto his children crosses sends;
And when at any time we see his hand
Stretched out against a City, Town or Land;
Lam. 3.40.
Let us both search our hearts and ways to see
Wherein we might offend his Majesty,
And so incense his wrath; but we alas
As if it were a trifle let it pass.
We sleep (a) securely on our sinful beds,
Till vengeance be powered down upon our heads:
We wanting wisdom to discern aright
The evil (b) imminent, Gods threatening slight;
Seldom or never do we take to heart
These sins which justly cause God to depart
From his own Saints, we do not understand
Wherefore the Lord in justice plagues our land:
We all are (c) apt enough to blame the times,
But few or none record their bloody crimes;
We say the times are bad, and think them strange,
But where is the fault, what is it that makes this change?
Esaias 59.1.2.3.4. Lam. 3.42 43, 44. Ie e^. 5 25. usque ad finem.
Doubtless our crying sins, our great backslidings,
Our scoffing of Religion, and deridings;
Those that with fervent (d) zeal profess the same,
Though with the loss of life, goods or good name;
Our high-aspiring minds, our great excess
In (e) diet and attire, our drunkenness;
Our swine-like rooting in this muck and mire,
Our (f) whoredom and inordinate desire;
Our (g) worshipping false gods, our adoration
Of the true God after a strange fashion;
Our taking of Gods name so often in vain,
By sin-procuring words, and oaths profane;
Our stubbornness and disobedience
^ Pet. 2.13. Exo^ 2^.^8. Romans 13.1.2.7.
To (h) governors, whom with great reverence
We freely ought to obey in all commands,
That equal with Gods Law and Justice stands;
Our profanation of that day of ^est
Which chiefly God for his own service blessed; Exodus 16 2^. De^t ^ 12 Exodus 20 10.

Our sacrilege, the wounding and the tearing
Our ne^ghbours credits, by false witness bearing; H^^ 27 usque ad 13.

Our inhumanity, and great (a) oppressions,
Our getting with injustice great possessions;
Our grinding poor men as it were to dust
For lucre of the world, which mothes and rust
Shall in the end consume; our guile and fraud,
Our usury and theft, our little laud;
Our great contempt of God and Christ in all
His moral and Laws Evangelicall;
Our tyrannizing over Gods people here,
As if we were set in a higher sphere
Or regiment a purpose for this end,
When as the God of Justice does intend
That such as are advanced to high degree,
Careful preservers of his flock should be;
That they should help the fatherless and weak,
And in the poor man's case uprightly speak:
Our (b) coffeehouse and ingratitude
Toward the Lord for such a multitude
Of undeserved blessings; Esaias 1.2.5. cap. 4, 5, 6. Ier. 2 5. usque ad 12. Romans
1.21. usque ad finem.
which ofttimes
We have repaid with most provoking crimes;
These are the loc^sts daughters which St. John
Notes in his holy Revelation; Revel 9 7.10.

Who f^ces have as fair as men, but bear
Stings in their tails; O fly from them and fear.
With sweet embracements iv^e kills the tree,
With vain delights thy lusts will murder thee:
As Jacob to his household, so speak I
Unto each City, Country, Family;
Away with those strange gods that are among you,
Zephan. 1.8 9. Ierem. 5.7 8 9. Esaias 5 11.^2. Esaias 28.1 2 3. Acts 12.21 22.
Esaias 6.3, 4, 5.
And change your garments, for these things will wrong you:
Away with who^edome, drunkenness and pride,
Gods purity cannot such sins abide:
Away with all profaneness, filthy talking,
Lust and uncleanness, all ungodly walking:
For these infect, pollute and much defile
Each house and Country, City, Town and I Will;
Psalm 38.18.
For what is past unfainedly be sorry,
And spend your time hereafter to his glory:
Boast not great Britain of thy force and (a) might,
1 Samuel 2 9.
It Is God that does prepare the hands to fight;
If thou have great Jehovah on thy side,
Thou need'st not fear thy foes ou^rageous pride;
But if he be against thee, all thy powers,
Psalm. 127.1.2.3.
Wel-fortified Cities, Castles, Towers,
Thy multitude of people, store of we^lth,
Bulwarks and walls, thy fortitude and health
Thee cannot save: thy Towers whose lofty roof
Threaten the Heavens, are not vengeance proof:
Thou by thy sins have highly God offended,
And without doubt some evil is intended,
Unless thou (b) meet him by thy true repentance,
And thereby cause him for to change his sentence;
Thy forty days have been twice forty years,
And yet in mercy God to strike forbeares;
Thee in his bosom he had rather cherish,
2 Pet. 3.9. 1 Samuel 15 26.
Then in thy sins thou should for ever perish:
Go then with speed, thy time no longer spend
In vanities, thy heart in pieces rend;
Thy antick-apish fashions lay aside,
Let sackcloth serve thy nakedness to hide:
Unfift thy self, reform, return, repent,
With brinish tears thy bloody crimes lament;
Repent in dust and ashes, pride must fall,
And if not here, it doubtless elsewhere shall;
Thy forces which thou trustest in will fail thee,
Wealth in the hour of death will not avail thee;
About things needless trouble not thy brain,
Thy study turn into a better strain:
Wrestle with God (a) let not thy courage fail,
By earnest suites thou may at length prevail:
Go sue, and sue again, take no denial, Matthew 7.7.8. Mark 11.24.

Thou may obtain upon a further trial;
To stand upon (b) deserts it is in vain,
Then cry for mercy, cry and cry amain;
Mercy sweet Lord, good Lord, what shall I do,
For Jesus Christ his sake some mercy show!
My sins are great, thy mercies Lord are greater,
Though I be sinful, Lord, I am thy creature;
On thy sweet mercy all my hope relies,
To thee my only rock I bend my eyes;
Knock at H aven gates as if thou would all break,
Till God to thee a word of comfort speak;
Possess him with thy sad complaint and grief,
Give him no rest until thou findst relief,
And if it please him for to heal thy sore,
Lest worse things happen to thee, sin no more. John 5 14.

But st^y my m^se, have thou made known thine errant,
According to the tenure of thy warrant?
Have thou not skipt the sins which are her bane,
F^e thou art out, and must begin again?
Yet let prudentia be thy tutor still,
And let charissa moderate thy quill;
Let not thy passion make thee too austere,
In passing sentence be not too severe:
Choler has often made me fume and swell,
But I have curbed it as a fiend of hell;
I would not blaze abroad another shame
In hel-hatcht libells that should want a name;
I never did affect to scold or brawle,
As many men have done to purpose small:
Will lofty spirits be out-braved? No:
Reason their stubborn wills must overthrow:
And how shall wit or reason there be found,
Where haire-brain'd choler does so much abound?
Yet on the other side I blame as much
All such as tongue-tide are, and chiefly such
As are in place, and have command to tell
Our Judah of her sins, our Israel
Esaias 58.1.
Of her transgressions: these are sick and weak
In soul and mind, I mean they cannot speak
A plain or perfect word, or else for fear
They should discountenance the upper sphere,
They with the dog star will lie hid at noone,
And when they bark it will be at the moon:
You know my meaning, well, I cannot stay
To make it plain, but in conclusion say,
Were not their words so eaven we should see
That many men by odds would better be:
Here Is (a) Scyll^ and Charybdis, shall I shun
The danger of the one, and headlong run
Upon the other? No, it were far better
That in my horn-booke I knew not a letter:
I Will (b) look before I leap, yea and before
I Will run upon such rocks, I Will keep on shore;
Then my best way as I suppose will be
To have recourse unto my Geometry,
And to this brainsick study bend my mind,
Between these two extremes a mean to find;
Which if I do, I Will take my rule and square,
And compass too, and then I need not care
What malice can invent; nor need I fear
To view the Zenith of the upper sphere:
Some for my (a) pains perhaps may call me fool,
And say it were more fit I went to school
To learn my Accidence, then to relate
The misdemeanors of so high a State:
I must confess full loath I am to enter,
And yet my vow compells me for to venture;
Yet I will have my rule and compass by me,
That if in malice any should belie me,
Such demonstration I may draw at large
As ever shall an honest mind discharge:
Yea by this rule I Will draw my lines so squarely,
And cipher out these evil times so fairly,
That in conclusion they shall answer make,
It Is very true, it is but our mistake:
Thus having made my way, I will begin
To name and to an^tomize each sin:
Injustice and oppression shall be first, Injustice, and Oppression.

For these alone will make a land accursed:
We were of late to such disorders grown,
That what we had we scarce could call our own:
Monopolists, and new found tricks in store,
To make the Commonwealth both bare and poor;
But blessed be the Lord we are befriended,
Herein we see the matter well amended:
Our hearts are grown lukewarm, yea and stone cold,
There Is scarce a man alive that dare be bold
To speak the truth, for fear he should offend
His noble Patron, Parish or dear friend:
Some with the Gergesites their hogs prefer
Before their sweet Redeemer; others are
With Demas too too prone Christ to forsake,
And for their part this present world to take.
This hellish charret termed avarice, Covetousness.

Runs swiftly on four wheels of sin and vice:
Faint courage, greedy-griping, churlishness,
Contempt of God, of death forgetfulness:
The horses drawing it are chiefly two,
Greedy to catch, and loath for to forgo:
The carter driving it; desire to have
The whip held in one hand, is called save;
The reine in the other, stoppage; and the road
Wherein he drives is pleasing, (a) smooth and broad:
The footmen running by are chiefly three,
Envy, deceit, and gross hypocrisy:
The journies end is everlasting woe,
For to the pit of hell we headlong go,
Unless the Lord of his preventing grace
Block up our way, and cross us in our race:
What is the cause the child does so desire
To see the death of his indulgent fire,
That he can neither wait on Gods good pleasure,
Nor yet with patience stay his fathers leisure?
But if he have not one thing or another,
He grows sick of the father or the mother?
What is the cause that there is so much strife
Between the husband and his lawful wife,
Who ought to have one heart, one will and (a) mind?
What is the cause so many are inclined
Closely to filch and steal one from the other,
With fraud and guile such things as they can smother?
What made that cursed cative to betray
His loving Master, sure the love of clay? Mat. 26.15.

Quid dabitis? O cursed avarice,
Which the Apostle terms the root of vice!
What makes the Judge (b) the poor man's cause neglect,
And with such reverence the rich respect?
The clinch-fists Lawyers mouth is closely shut,
Till in his hand a fee his client put;
And after that his cause shall have no end
Whilst he has land to sell, or coin to spend:
And thus with tricks and shifts, and strange delays,
They wealthy grow by other men's decaies:
And to requite the Devil for his shifts,
They give their souls to him for new-yeares gifts.
The sacrilegious (c) patron robs Christ's Spouse, Sacrilege.

The holy Church, to furnish his own house:
The cruel Landlord racks his rent so high,
That he racks out his tenants hearts thereby.
The Tradesmen playing upon poor men's needs,
In raising of his prices, much exceeds, Cruelty and deceit.

Or by false weights, or insufficient wares
The Country man beguiles, cheats and insnares:
Some Barber Surgeons as I have been told,
Will often prolong a cure for love of gold;
For if perchance one fall into their hands
That has good store of money, goods or lands,
Their hearts consent to make of him a prey,
Their heads invent, how in what friendly way
They their intent may bring to pass, and seem
Such, as they would the world should them esteem,
And that of them men might not judge amiss,
They use some complementing way as this,
Which I will briefly unto you relate,
That honest men their knavery may hate:
You Are very welcome, Sir, boy reach a chair,
A cushion too, and fetch a cup of beer,
This Gentleman and I may drink a cup
Before his sores we venture to rip up:
Oh art thou com'd, it is well, where is thy dame?
In bed, now fie upon her, fie for shame!
These City dames mind nothing but their ease,
Run quickly (sirrah) to her for her keys;
Come cut a toast and wash a pot, and fill
Me a full cup: Sir, with heart and good will
I drink to you; I thank you honest friend,
And I would pledge you would it not offend
The humor of my leg; you need not fear
To drink a cup or two of such mild beer;
Boy, fill him up his cup, I dare presume
Into his leg this beer will never sum:
Now in the name of God, Sir, when you will,
I shall be ready to improve my skill;
I fear you have concealed your grief too long,
And thereby done your self the greater wrong;
Turn but your chair more fully to the light,
And what it is I will resolve you right:
Oh heavens! what a malady is here,
I vow it is ten times worse then I did fear:
To meddle with it I am half afraid,
Yet, Sir, I pray you be not you dismayed:
You may be sure I Will do the best I can,
And I can do as much as any man;
Yet for my part I will assure you this,
As yet I do not know what sore it is;
But be it what it will or can, I fear
It scarcely will be healed in half a year:
Well, to be brief, he takes in hand this sore,
And seems for aid the heavens to implore;
But note their knavery, for when they please,
They can assuage their pain, and give them ease;
Perhaps this monster is six months and more
In healing of some ordinary sore,
And sometimes makes him better, sometimes worse,
According as he finds him strong in purse:
For if he find the yellow humor stay,
With speed he takes his corrosive away,
And in a week or two will heal it more,
Then he had done in twice six weeks before.
I might speak more at large, and somewhat say
Of such Physicians as incline this way,
But they by this may see their own disease,
And cure themselves, if that their worships please.
The cursed Usurer (that biting thief)
From others labors gets his whole relief, Usury.

And for this truth as well by night as day,
Christ in his members closely does betray,
Not with What will you give me? but commands
Eight in the hundred at his debtors hands;
Let him be rich, or of a mean estate,
He will not lose a penny of the rate,
Before he will do so, his greedy hands
Shall seize upon his body, goods, and lands;
Some of this sort in theft thieves far exceed,
Prove. 6 30.
For oftentimes they steal but for their need;
Yea, some are worse then Judas in this kind,
Judas betraying Christ but once, we find:
Judas struck with remorse, desires to pay
His money back, these oftentimes betray
Christ in his members, and have hearts so hard,
That they no honest course of life regard;
They care not so they get but muck and mire,
And satisfy their lust, and fond desire;
Though they their Lord and Master Jesus sell,
And damn themselves unto the pit of hell;
Nay, shall I say that some are worse then hell,
Should I say so, the truth I should but tell;
Hell and the devil torment only those
That unto God and godliness are foes;
These good and bad; hell, none before they die;
These, while they live in want and misery.
Vanity of youth and old age.
We are grown vain in words, in thoughts and deeds,
With vain conceits each man his fancy feeds;
Some in the air build-Castles, and suppose
True honor chiefly to subsist in shows:
Old doting Misers are most prone to crave,
When they should have their minds upon the grave;
As if they thought true happiness and bliss,
Was not in worth equivalent with this;
We may admire it, yet it is no wonder,
Since that their thoughts have ever been kept under:
The younger sort of each sex and degree,
Make this their care that they from cares be free;
Therefore their minds and wits are ever bent,
To find out sports, and pastimes, to prevent
The melancholy humor; for say they,
In such the devil bears the greatest sway;
Hang care and sorrow, says mad-braines, for that
My father spend-all said would kill a cat;
Fill me the the other pipe, and the other pot,
What, shall I spare that which I never got?
Lightly it came, and lightly it shall go,
By others gains I will not wealthy grow;
E're this estate be gone, some friend or other
Will leave the world, and give me such another;
Lets (a) eat and drink our fills whilst we have health,
In sickness who can take delight in wealth?
God knows what may become of our estates
When we are gone, who knows at what low rates
Land may be sold (b) e're long? well, to prevent
Such doubts and fears, let us freely give consent
To make our selves as merry as we can,
For what is life more then a blast or span?
And therefore will you sin? rash youth take heed,
If life be frail and brittle, there is more need
Of watchfulness and care, how can you hope
For life eternal? when you give such scope
Unto your lawless lusts? what, do you think,
That at your follies God will ever wink? Esaias 30.13, 14. 2 Pet. 39.

No, no, besure (c) God will you call at last,
To give account for what is done and past;
And whilst you strive (d) Charybdis for to shun,
You to your ruin upon Scylla run; The melancholy humor.

For though your passage please you very well,
The haven at which you shall arrive is hell:
I cannot but admire to see how some,
As if no death or judgment were to come,
Will pawn their very souls the world to win,
As if they thought true bliss to be therein.
For want of understanding, some (a) men think,
If they can eat good meat, and drink good drink,
Afford to take tobacco, drink rich sacks,
And for to put rich raimenton their backs,
Then they are well, and we say more then this,
When as we say such cannot do amiss;
Alas poor silly men, you in conclusion,
Will find the world to be a mere delusion,
When death appears your wealth will not avail you,
Your stomachs and your palates both will fail you;
Those meats and drinks which pleased you best of all,
Will be as bitter to your taste as gall,
Your crazie bodies will be sore and tender,
Sickness will make your joints so weak and slender,
That rich attire will then torment you more,
Then ever it did please you heretofore.
Some think if they can get a fair estate,
And put their wares off at a handsome rate,
Be it by lying, (b) theft, deceit, or worse,
Then they are happy men, although the curse
Of God and man be upon them and theirs;
And to our view a (c) reason hence appears,
Why many great and fair estates are brought
So often and soon to little or to naught:
Alas poor man, I pity much thy case,
And wish that God may give thee better grace;
What art thou better for a golden mine,
If that a (d) curse be upon thee and thine?
Leave off this evil course of life, and pray
God to forgive thy faults, and not to lay
This to thy childrens charge, repent in time
Of this thy crying crimson colored crime:
Hereafter let thy chiefest care be this,
To make thy self and them true heirs of bliss:
Some place their happiness in lofty Towers,
In walks and gardens, decked with dainty flowers; The vanity of men's minds.

In orchards some, and some in spacious grounds,
In cards and dice some, some in hawks and hounds;
In horses some, and some in cocks and bulls,
Some in their whores, some in their drunken guls;
Some in a tennis Court, and some in bowls,
And some to range abroad at night like owls
To take the air, or else to seek their prey,
You know my meaning take it either way:
Some take delight in making foolish Plays,
Others to act them; some spend all their days
In foolish vanities, until at last
The golden times of Gods free grace be past:
What comfort will it be to thee to think
That thou have eat good meat, and drunk good drink?
That thou have had the world as in a string,
And did command thy tenants as a King
To do thee service? Yea what comfort can
All earthly pleasures yield to any man
When pale and grim-fac'd death shall wound his heart,
And very soul with his al-slaying dart?
Thou tookest great delight in hawks and hounds,
To find out sport, to range about thy grounds; The vanity of worldly
pleasures.

But sickness now has brought thy head so low,
That for a world one step thou can not go;
Thy head is weak, and noise thy temples wounds,
What pleasure have thou now in yelling hounds?
Alas I know they but torment thy mind,
Therein thou can small ease or comfort find!
But in what state now lies thy silly soul?
Alas I cannot but thy case condole!
Now thou have ceased thy nimble hounds to follow,
And can not hear thy huntsmen whoop or hollow:
Yea when thy pain through sickness most abounds,
Death will prevent thee with a pack of hounds;
I mean distracting cares, thoughts, doubts and fears,
Whose hellish yellings shall be in thy ears
As long as thou have life: but is that all?
No, still, as if thy torments were too small:
Conscience as huntsman comes in with a crew
Of cruel bloody hounds, which will pursue
Thy fainting soul with so much force and might,
As if they had forgot to do thee right:
No breathing space, no law (as huntsmen say)
Thou must expect, and for to fly away
It is in vain; for it has been debated,
Whilst thou art living they will not be rated:
But will thy death give them content? O no,
To judgment they with thee along will go;
And never think themselves for to be well,
Till thou and they with hel-hounds meet in hell:
But will they let thee be at rest there? No,
They daily will augment thy endless woe;
Those very dogs which thou have choisely bred,
And at thy table plentifully fed,
Will surly grow, and fly up at thy face,
Unto thy final horror and disgrace;
And as regardlesse of thy pains and groans,
Will daily gnaw upon thy flesh and bones:

We read in Judges how that Balaams Ass
Did check his master, and we know right well
That dogs did lick the blood of Iezabel
When she was dead, but that these dogs should strive
To eat their master, yea and that alive,
Yea and dogs that were daily fully fed,
And lodged with him upon a feather bed;
Of such a slaughter I have never heard
That dogs their master should so ill reward:

They had not brought him to this shame and woe;
To all the world it might have been a wonder
If he had sought in time to keep them under;
But seeing he permitted them to reign,
It is not strange; but you may say again
That they were still well kept, it is very true,
And hereupon this evil did ensue;
For had those dogs (I mean his raging lusts)
Been (as we say) kept short with scraps and crusts;
Had they been kept but at an under rate,
They had not brought him unto this estate
Of misery and woe; well, then from hence
I may infer one use of consequence:
If earthly pleasures cannot long remain,
And after end in everlasting pain;
If they have been abused, let me advise
You that have faulty been, now to be wise,
From vain delights your minds and fancies weane
From the extreme (a) excess thereof I mean;
I know some pastimes (b) lawful are and good
Both to preserve the health and cleanse the blood,
And how they will both soul and body make
More fit and ready for to undertake
Pious and holy works; but when men will
Their extreme raging fleshly lusts fulfill,
And take no care whither their souls shall go,
Needs must their pastimes end in endless woe:
Others there are vainer then these by ods,
The vanity and folly of idolaters.
And such are they that bow to senseless gods,
To graven images of wood or brass,
To carved stones, to pictures wrought in glass;
O foolish folk, is this the sum and scope
Of your religion, confidence and hope?
Out of the (a) Scriptures were you ever taught
Deuteronomy. 6.13 14. Deuteronomy. 8 1. Exodus 20 5 ^l. 96 5 6 7*8 9.
To serve and worship what your hands have wrought?
So void of humane reason can you be
As to conceive a senseless stone or tree
Subject to rottenness, should be a God,
When underfoot the same is daily trod?
Where is your warrant then, faith is not sound
Which is not built upon a steady ground?
You say, you have it from your honest Friars,
Believe them not, they have been always liars:
What are their legends, but a mass of lies?
Cobwebs for to entangle butterflies:
You may have many gods, and many gawds,
You must use beads, and so you may your bawds;
You may use murder, theft, yea and what not?
Since all shall be forgiven and forgot;
If to your ghostly (b) father you confess
How, where, when, and with whom you did transgress:
Is this Religion true? How can it be?
Falsehood and truth could never yet agree;
Your ground is false you much mistake the mark,
Great is their fault who keep you in the dark:
The word of God, the only ground of faith,
The perfect rule of true Religion faith,
Thou sha^t not kill, Exodus 20 4.
attempt how dare you then
To murder Kings you bloody minded men?
Out of the Scriptures can you bring good reasons
To justify rebellions, murders, treasons?
What rule or warrant have you there to pray
To stocks and stones, does not the (a) Scripture say, Exodus 2^.1. Luke 5 21. 3
Kings 8.39 40.

God is the Lord thy God, and him alone
Thou shall adore, no Saint, no (b) stock or stone; Esaias 19 20. Ps. 50 15 76
11. Jude 24 25. 1 Samuel 25 34. Esaias 64 6.

In c) merits why do you such trust repose?
How often he does offend his God who knows?
Be not deluded by your silly Friars,
Let God be true, (d) and let your Priests be liars; Rom 83.4.

And some bewitched with a hellish pride
The yoke of government will cast aside;
And for this cause in part I fear the hand
Of great Jehovah is upon our land;

As snares and scourges some inflict our laws;
And it is time to stir, for if these might
But have their wills, where should we seek for right?

Assuage the rage and raging might of man;
For we are told in holy Writ, Psalm. 103.6. Heb. 10.34.
that when
We seek to vindicate our selves, (e) we then
Dishonor and affront the Lord, therefore
When tyrants rage, let us God for aid implore: The misbehaviour and incivill
carriage of women.

Yet I have one thing more to do, that is this,
To show wherein some women do amiss;
A task too hard for me who only have
So small an insight, let the wife and grave
Then speak in their behalf as they have found them,
For open hearsay I am loath to wound them;
Much I have read, and much I have been told,
But what I Have seen to speak I may be bold;
Women are rebels, yet I mean not all,
But such as love to scold, to fight and brawle,
Such as do strive the scepter for to sway,
Such as would have their husbands to obey;
But are these matrons, monsters I think rather
A brood of hell, the Devil is their father?
I speak not this so much in their disgrace
(For I my self perhaps if in their place)
Should faulty be herein, as for to shame
Men, that have been and are herein too blame;
For did not men on women so much dote,
They would not be so often cast over boat;
For if they get a man upon the hip,
O they will go near to get the master-ship!
Men must do this or that, or they will brawle,
Men must be ruled, and they must govern all;
Men must as slaves be subject to their wives,
Or they will make them weary of their lives;
I would men wiser were, for in conclusion,
This great disorder will bring great confusion:
Man ought to love, the woman to obey,
Ephesians. 5 22. 1. Pet. 3.1.
Man may command, she should entreat and pray;
Man is as head, the woman as the heart,
The head we grant to be the upper part;
Where is thy wit? O head, where are thy brains
That as thy head thy heart thus rules and reigns?
Where is thy courage thou faint-hearted snaile
That thou pluck'st in thy horns if heart but rail; Abuse of mercy.

Some (rather worms then men) conceited elves
In hope of (a) mercy often delude themselves:
It matters not, say they, what Prophets say,
We hope to morrow will be as to day; Amos 6.3.4.

The Lord is just, yet merciful and (b) good,
And one that takes no pleasure in our blood:
Will he that made us, damn us? Surely no, Wisd. 11.24.25.

He made us that he might us show;
O brutish man, will not you understand,
Till you stand under his revenging hand?
Will you not fear until you feel his rod?
Why do you think so slenderly of God?
Be well advised, Eccl. 12.13. Psalm. 50.22. Esaias. 27.21.
and for a truth this know
That God is sure, although to anger slow;
And that abuse of mercy will augment
Thy everlasting pains and punishment:
I cannot but much wonder for to see
How some will stand upon their pedigree,
And to their predecessors worth lay claim
When by foul vices they disgrace the same:
The charge of many souls some rashly take,
And after little or no conscience make
How they are fed, Slothfulness in Clergimen.
so they but feed the purse
They care not though their flock grow worse and worse:
They feast, and power down wine in silver bowls,
And in the mean time starve the peoples souls;
Some think it once a month they can prepare
Themselves to preach, that it is very fair;
I wonder how this blockishnesse should be
In such as should foresee, see, oversee;
It is against Religion, sense and reason,
That such as should preach in and out of season,
Should think a Sermon once a quarter well,
When as (a) each day they teach the way to hell:
We often Gods holy name and day profane
By idle words and works, and pastime vain;
In seven days the Lord requres but one,
We by our deeds reply he shall have none;
Our hearts are so bewitched with gain and pleasure,
Profanation of the Sabbath day.
That in seven years we scarce can be at leisure
To serve the Lord, nay I may boldly say,
In seaventy years some scarce give God a day;
Some had much rather labor, drink, or play,
Then go to church, to hear, to read, and pray;
Some will be looking to their shops and trades,
Some walking in the fields with pretty maids,
Some in a tavern, baudihouse, or worse,
Some waiting in by-places for a purse,
Some in the streets, some sitting at their doors,
Some in a pockie-alehouse with their whores,
For pleasure some, who little conscience make,
Journeies on purpose on this day will take;
Yea some bold vassalls of this hellish breed,
Will say the better day, the better deed:
O foolish man, how dare thou thus profane
That day which God did purposely ordain
For his own use and service? do thou think,
Because the Lord seems for a while to wink
At this, and such foul sins, that therefore he
Unto a reckning will not (b) summon thee;
Thy self delude not with such vain conceits,
God is most just in promises and threats,
Thou and the remnant of this hellish crew,
Shall to your torments one day find it true:
Some scoff at good men, and slight true devotion,
As if it were a hindrance to promotion; Scoffing at religion.

If in a town there shall be found a man
Strict in his life, he is termed a puritan:
If he so loath his sins, as to enforce
Himself unto a more religious course,
Then most men will or do, he shall be blamed,
Hated of most, contemned, reviled, misnam'd.

There is a sect too (a) pure in their own eyes:

Yet dare you then condemn all for a few?
Because some overshoot the mark, shall we
Shoot half the way? because that from a tree
Some evil and superfluous branches shoot,
Shall we in anger cut it up by th'root?
There ever was, is, and for time to come,
In church and common weal there will be some
Of this and other sects, yet we are sure,
That toward God we cannot be too pure:
Where shall our wicked (b) Michols then appear,
Who never would Christ's wedding garment wear?
How can or dare they look him in the face,
Whom in his Saints they sought thus to disgrace;
The throne of God is pure, needs must it then
A torment be to all ungodly men.
(c) show,
What Is in their hearts, the Lord above does know.

Presume to judge, you sinful sons of men?

Because they play the cheater, play the whore?
Shall we Religion and our God forsake,
Because some men no better conscience make?
Because that some do from their first love fall,
Shall we condemn and rashly censure all?
We should be like to God our heavenly Father,
Who out of love and tenderness had rather
Spare many that are (a) faulty many ways,
Then one condemn which his decree obeyes:
Because the Doctor follows not the way
Which he prescribes for others, shall we say
That physic is not good? or that because
Some Lawyers are corrupt, think ill of Laws?
Because some hel-hounds in excess will drink,
Shall we the worse of Gods good creatures think?
Because like beasts some make themselves with wine,
Shall we despise the sweetness of the vine?
Because (b) through folly some will go astray,
Shall we the fault upon Religion lay?
Indeed this is the folly of our times,
The father of a many wicked crimes;
For were not godliness so out of da^e,
We should not prize vice at so high a rate:
But some perhaps may say, it matters not
What bablers say, a fools bolt is soon shot:
Soon shot, say ye? I could speak more at large,
But loath I am to give the other charge;
For fear my Canons should recoile, or hurt
Your sense of hearing at her loud report;
But upon this we will not long dispute,
But rather to the throne of grace make suit,
That such disorders as have brought disgrace
Upon our Church, and Commonweals sweet face
May be reformed; and that each man and woman
Unto more holy lives themselves may summon,
And not so ready be to lay the fault
On other men, when they themselves do halt;
For this I say, and dare affirm the same,
(Though great ones for the most part bear the blame,
As they are rods and scourges in Gods hand)
It is our sins for which he plagues our land;
For had our hearts been pious toward God,
And loyal to the King, had that been trod
Under our feet that rules both heart and head,
No such disorders could have ever bred
In Church and Commonweal; well, since we know
Our sickness and our cure, to God let us go
With humble hearts, and crave his help and aid,
Who of a Chaos earth and heaven made;
Yea let us go, and that without delay
Unto his throne, and in this manner pray:
Thou great Jehovah that do all things frame,
And by thy providence do rule the same;
Create in us new hearts, new thoughts and ways,
And bring in order these disordered days:
With grief of heart we cannot, Lord, but speak,
We are in every part both sick and weak,
And whither should we go but unto thee, Hosea 6.1, 2, 3. Deuteronomy. 32.39. 1 Kings
2.6 7, 8, 9.

Who have a salve for every malady?
Lord hear and heal us for thy mercy sake,
For unto thee alone our moan we make;
Lord give us grace to loath and leave our errors,
Left in thy wrath thou multiply our terrors:
God as a loving father has we know,
Anno, 1588.
Gi'vn warnings to us many years ago,
We fairly warned were in (a) eighty eight,
When we were brought int' such a narrow strait,
That had not Gods right hand found out a way
For us to escape, we had without delay
And mercy, been destroyed, since this his hand
Has mightily upheld our sinful land,
For had not God of his preventing grace,
And goodness toward us, our stock and race,
That hellish plot of Gowries brought to light,
That feasting day had wrought a dolesome night:
Anno, 1605.
Another warning we may well remember;
Was given to us the fifth day of November,
When those blood-thirsty Papists did conspire,
The house of Parliament to set on fire,
And that at such a time, in such an hour,
As they without all mercy might devour
The royal King, and Nobles of the land,
To give themselves a sovereign command,
And to effect this hellish plot, great care
And pains they took, the great ones did not spare
Purses, nor persons, but as slaves fast bound
To do the devil service, they were found
To work at under-rates, to take what pay
Might follow this most execrable way:
The pit was dig'd, and we brought to the brim
Ready to fall, they aloft to swim,
Supported with bulrushes of vain hope,
What great applause they should gain from the Pope,
The devils Vicar, and how much it might
Enlarge their freedom, but God that gives light
In midst of darkness did their plots disclose,
Unto the admiration of all those
That were then present, or should after hear
By their forefathers, how once England were
So undermined, that had not Gods right hand
Upheld the props and pillars of the land, Psalm. 124.

False hearted Papists, had soon brought us all
Into great bondage, servitude, and thrall;
But blessed be the Lord, may England say,
Which no time has us given as a prey
Unto their bloody teeth; yea, blessed be
His holy name to all eternity;
We as a bird escaped the fowlers grin,
And they themselves were (a) justly caught therein, Job. 4.8. Psalm. 27.2.

And yet we have not turned to him aright,
Nor done the thing that is pleasing in his sight:
His bow against us has (b) been lately bent, Anno, 1602.

Into our chiefest Cities he has sent
The plague and pestilence, and fears of dearth,
Of late strange inundations of the earth, Anno, 1640.

Great threats of civil wars, which God above
Prevent for his great mercy sake and love: Anno, 1641. 1642.

I cannot tell what some wish, think, or say,
But I am sure this is the ready way
To mangle, overthrow and ruinate,
The good and welfare both of church and state;
For should such bloody times in England come,
We might well fear a dreadful day of doom;
To us has God his faithful Prophets sent,
To give us warning of the punishment,
For which our bloody sins aloud do cry,
For our offending of his Majesty;
But we not liking of their heavy news,
Have not refrained them strangely to abuse;
Unto our shames we cannot but confess
We have been often convinced of wickedness,
As how our sins if we did not repent,
And turn in time, would not alone prevent
All hope of mercy and of future grace,
But bring our souls to that infernal place,
Where we should evermore tormented be
In everlasting chains of misery;
And yet the Lord we have not truly sought,
Nor hereby been instructed as we ought;
We therefore justly may expect the sword,
Amos 8.11.
A famine not of bread, but of the word:
Let it be our chief wisdom then betimes
To meet the Lord, let us confess our crimes;
Unto his throne let us appeal this day
With contrite hearts, and in this manner pray:
Thou mighty God of Gods, thou King of Kings,
The maker and disposer of all things,
Dispose so of our hearts, minds, thoughts and ways,
That we may evermore set forth thy praise;
We must confess, O Lord, unto our shame,
But to the glory of thy dreadful name,
That we too often have provoked thine ire,
And caused thy wrath to burn as hot as fire,
By our abuse of mercy and of grace,
That thou migthst justly make our dwelling place
And chiefest Cities desolate and void,
And without mercy let us be destroi'd
From off the earth; yea thou might justly take
Thy blessed Candlestick away, and make
Us live in darkness, because thou have sent
The light into the world, with this intent
That we the path and way might clearly see
That lead to life eternal; but still we
In ignorance have taken more delight
Then in beholding of thy blessed light;
All things which thou have made do stand in awe
Of thee their Maker, and by natures law
Observe their course and order, yea and praise
Thy holy name according to their ways:
But man whom thou have made all things to rule
Knows not his Maker, as the ox or mule
Their owner, or their Masters crib; therefore
Thou might even in thy fury give us over
To our own ways; and cause us to become
Like stocks and stones which are both deaf and dumb;
We have received such mercies at thy hands
As thou have not bestowed on other lands;
With Angels food we have been daily fed,
Unto thy self, O Lord, thou have us wed;
But we like harlots have thee quite forsaken,
And for our guides our own devices taken;
So that should thou us suddenly divorce,
We must confess thy justice upon force:
Great plenty thou have given us many years,
And freed our hearts from terrifying fears
Of foreign and domestic enemies,
Yea thou have slain our foes before our eyes;
But we hereby thinking our selves cock-sure
Have grown so careless, wanton and secure,
That we have quite forgotten thee our God,
So that should thou now scourge us with the rod
Of war and want we could not but confess,
That we by reason of our wickedness
Have justly this deserved; yea ten times more,
Should thou in justice Lord with us quit score;
So that our mouths are stopped in our defense,
We cannot speak a word of consequence;
But to thy mercy we our selves betake,
And humbly thee beseech for Christ his sake,
Thy people whom thou have redeemed to spare,
That so thou may unto the world declare
That thou art good to Israel, thy dear
And faithful Spouse, and to all such as fear
And worship thee; let not wild boares destroy
Thine heritage, let not the fox annoy
Thy pasture-sheep, let not the vineyard fade,
Or be laid waste, which thy right hand has made;
Let not fat Bulls of Basan with their horns,
Nor ramping Lions, Tigers, Unicornes,
Have any leave from thee to hurt the same,
For honor of thy great and dreadful name;
Refresh it with the dewes of thy good grace,
That it may fructify, and grow apace;
So underprop it by thy mighty hand,
That in the greatest storms it firm may stand;
Let thine own arm so fence it round about,
That it may flourish all the world throughout;
That Cedars strong and tall, and mountains high,
And such small shrubs which in the valleys lie;
In time of scorching heat, when as the sun
In Leo shall begin his course to run,
May shade themselves under thy well spread vine,
Till he to Virgo pass, a milder sign;
Thou that upon the heavens high do ride,
Thou that sits at the stern our ship to guide,
Now in these last, these worst, and evil days,
Guide thou our sliding feet into the ways
Of peace and; truth thou that in safety keeps
Thy chosen flock, O thou that never sleeps,
Nor slumbers, now with speed thy truth defend,
And from thy holy hill some succor send;
All power is in thy hand, declare the same,
That heathen men may magnify thy name,
Let not O Lord, those that seek to betray
Thy holy ones, have any cause to say
Where is the God become that should you save,
Who will deliver you now from the grave?
O thou that causest hills like wax to melt,
Defend thy Sion wherein thou have dwelt
So many years, thou that do dwell on high,
Against thy foes thy self now magnify;
Let not the tares and weeds destroy the wheat,
Let not devouring catterpillars eat
Thy pleasant fruit, we cannot but confess,
With grief of heart, thy crops grow less and less;
But stinking weeds increase and flourish so,
That shortly they thy crop will overgrow,
Unless for honor of thy name, with speed
Thou will vouchsafe O Lord, the same to weed;
O deal not with us after our deserts,
Nor after the uprightness of our hearts:
What would become of sinful, mortal man,
If thou his sinful life should strictly scan?
If thou should mark what we have done amiss,
Who could expect to reap eternal bliss?
Psalm. 78.13, 14.
Thou that in Zoan by thy mighty hand
Could so divide the seas, that on dry land
Our forefathers might pass, can also heal
The breaches of our Church and Commonweal;
Our land's divided, and divided so,
That we amongst our selves can hardly know
Whom we may safely trust, which makes all those
Which do thee and thy word of truth oppose,
As chiefly Papists, to rejoice and say,
Ha, ha; so, so; there goes the game away:
Thou might in justice, Lord, we do confess
Us of our lives and livings dispossess;
Thou might deprive us of the means of grace,
And from beholding of thy blessed face;
And give us up into such Heathens hands,
For ever to remain in cruel bands
Of slavery and thraldom, because we
Have broke our covenant so often with thee:
Yet Lord, now in our need some pity take,
Even for thy mercy, truth and promise sake;
Thou have (we know) been merciful indeed
To Israel, yea thou have Jacobs seed
Restored from thraldom; yea, O God, we find
In holy Writ, thou blott'st out of thy mind
All their misdeeds, and heinous wickedness,
Whereby they did thy holy Laws transgress;
Thou did assuage thy wrath, and mitigate
Thine anger toward them; yea in a state
Of happiness did seat them, so that they
Might be a people unto thee for aye;
O let thy people in this sinful land
Such mercies find, O Lord, now at thy hand:
Turn us, O God o^ saving health from all
Our evil ways, which unto heaven call
For vengeance on us, let thine anger cease,
And from all hellish thraldom so release
Our bodies and our souls, that still we may
With freedom magnify thee day by day;
Vengeance, O Lord, does properly belong
Unto thy Majesty; revenge the wrong
That has been, and now is done unto thee
By such as hate thy truth in sanctity;
O judge of all the world, thy self exalt
Against all such as would thy truth assault!
Let not the wicked, and the worldly wise
Over thy faithful people tyrannize;
Let not false-hearted Papists, who conspire
The ruin of thy Church, have their desire;
Let Superstition and Idolatry
Like to a rotten hedge for ever be
Trod underfoot, let merit-mongers all
Be like a rotten house, and tottering wall;
Give not the soul, Lord, of thy Turtle Dove
Unto the Beast, remember in thy love
And tender mercies, such as are oppressed
By wicked men, or any way distressed;
Thy faithful covenant consider well,
For they are cruel that on earth now dwell;
The shepherd seeks to fleece his flock, the lamb
Grows ravenous and woolvish to her dam;
The bird the nest where she was hatched bewraies,
Judas his Master cunningly betraies;
Behold but how the wicked thee defame,
And how the foolish folk blaspheme thy name;
Arise, arise, and thine own cause maintain,
For thou have said the help of man is vain;
Why do thou sit as one that is fast asleep?
Why is thy wrath so hot against thy sheep?
Think on thy congregations, and behold
Those places which thou have possessed of old;
But above all the rest, remember well
Mount Sion, wherein thou was wont to dwell;
Let not the foolish laugh thy Saints to scorn,
Nor let the wicked man lift up his horn,
In sunder break their horns, but raise on high
The horns of such as serve thee faithfully.
Confound them in their wicked plots with shame,
That daily labor to obscure thy name;
Cast down those mighty mountains, which oppose
Thee in thy ways, but let O Lord, all those
That wish well unto Sion, firmly stand
As Cedar trees in this our realm and land;
O let thy Gospel flourish in despite
Of such, as most abhor thy sacred light,
And for this end, we humbly thee desire,
The hearts of all our rulers to inspire
With so much wisdom, and soule-saving grace,
That they may daily labor to deface
All superstitious worship, and advance
Thy blessed word and sacred ordinance;
Thy jugdement Lord upon the King bestow,
Thy righteousness upon the Prince, that so
He may his loyal subjects rule aright,
And eke defend the poor against the might
Of such as would them wrong without a cause,
Yea many times against his, and thy laws;
Let those high mountains under him increase,
In this his realm true zeal, and godly peace,
And let the little hills their minds apply,
To punish vice, and manage equity;
Lord let thy Priests be clothed with thy truth,
And righteousness, as Naomi and Ruth,
Make them to live in love, that there may be,
In life and doctine a sweet harmony:
Let Moses now and Aron Lord appeal
Unto thy throne, let Phineas with zeal,
True judgment execute without delay,
That they in time thine irefull hand may stay,
That so our God thou may continue still,
And we a people ready to fulfill
Thy holy laws, and all our sinful days
Show forth thy noble acts, and worthy praise;
Thy whole and holy Church, O Lord, preserve
In unity and peace, let not them swerve,
Or be misled with errors, that desire
To worship thee, with hearts and minds entire:
Those that are simple, ignorant, and blind,
And earnestly desire the way to find
That leads to life eternal, by thy grace
Illuminate O Lord, that they thy face
And blessed countenance may clearly see,
And with this fight so much delighted be,
That they may dally labor to obtain
More knowledge of thy word, and thereby gain
Assurance of thy goodness to the just,
And faithfulness to those that put their trust
In thy sure promises; those that are weak,
And yet through godly zeal desire to speak
In behalf of thy truth, yea if need be
To seal the truth thereof and sanctity
Even with their blood; enable with thy hand
In midst of flames of fire upright to stand;
O strengthen them by thy al-working might
Courageously to fight the Lambs great fight;
Those that are borne of thine immortal seed,
And as newborn babes much desire to feed
Upon the sincere milk of thy pure word,
Full streaming breasts, O Lord, to them afford:
Lastly, give peace in these unquiet days
Wherein pride, guile and malice so much swayes;
For now, O Lord, great dangers are at hand,
As by thy frowns we clearly understand;
Thy ever-over and all ruling hand
Has brought astonishment upon our land;
Thou have declared heavy things to thine,
And caused some of us to drink the wine
Of giddiness, so that we scarce can tell
When we do evil, or when we do well:
O give a banner unto such as fear,
And worship thee with hearts and minds sincere,
That it may now and ever be displaid
Against all such as shall thy truth invade:
Return, O God, let not thy wrath proceed,
Show us some favor, help us in our need;
So fill our hearts with mercy that thy praise
We may extol with gladness all our days;
O let that peace of thine which passes all
Our understandings, keep our souls from thrall;
Yea souls and bodies both let it preserve
So in thy fear, that we may never swerve
From thee our only God, but through thy grace
In godliness may finish this our race,
That when we yield up this life transitory,
We evermore may dwell with thee in glory;
These and what else, O Lord, thou know best
In thy great wisdom for us, we request
Not as desert, for nothing's due but shame,
And hel-fire unto us; but in the name
And for the sake of that Son of thy love,
Who for our sakes alone came from above:
To whom with thee, O God, of saving grace,
And to thy holy Spirit in the next place;
We give all honor, and desire to adore
Thy holy Name, both now and evermore.
Amen.
PARTICVLAR REMEDIES AGAINST DESPAIR. COLLECTED Out of DAVID his PSALMS, And
applied to the several Conditions of men in this vale of Misery.

By F: T.

Psalm. 107.43. Hosea 14.10. He that is wise to record well in mind
These things, shall understand how kind
And good God is to such as meekly bear
His rod, and thereby learn his Name to fear.
Psalm. 34.8. Taste then and see how good God is and just,
Blessed are they which in his mercy trust.
LONDON, Printed by THO: HARPER. MDCXLIII.

Remedies against despair in times of war.
THe Lord of hosts does take our part, his eye
Prevents all harm, on him our hope does lie;
He causes wars to cease, he breaks the bow,
He cuts the spear, and charrets burns also;
Be still, and know that I am God, and I
Throughout the earth my self will magnify.
Psalm. 46.7.9.10.
God breaks the arrows of the bow, the shield,
The sword, the spear, the battle in the field;
Thou art more bright, and shall remain for aye,
More puissant then mountains high of prey;
Stout-harted men, yea mountains strong and steep
Through thee are spoiled, and have slept their sleep
The mighty men of war, great men of might,
Have found both hearts and hands unfit to fight:
At thy rebuke thou that do Jacob keep,
The charret and the horse are cast a sleep;
Thou, even thou art to be dred, and who
Shall able be thy wrath to undergo?
When thou to judgment shall, O God, arise
To help the meek, and hear their doleful cries;
Surely unto thy praise, man's might and rage
Shall turn, and thou the remnant shall assuage.
Psalm. 76.3.4.5.6.7 8.9.10.
The speare-mens ranks, the calves, and bulls of might,
God will destroy: and all that love to fight:
This is our God that saves us from all wrong,
Issues of life and death to him belong.
Psalm. 63.30.20.
Ungodly men consult against the good,
And plot how to condemn the guiltless blood;
But still my refuge is the Lord most just,
Yea, my God is the rock in whom I trust.
Psalm. 94.21.22.
The arrows of the Lord are sharp, to sting
The hearts of those that fight against the King.
Psalm. 45.5.
Our ears have heard, our fathers have us told
The mighty works which thou have done of old:
How by thy might thou cast the heathen out,
And did subdue such as were strong and stout,
And in their place did plant them by thy hand,
That they in safety might possess the land:
They did not conquer by the sword, their arm,
Their strength could not (O Lord) them save from harm;
But thy right hand, thine arm, thy strength and might,
Because in them thou tookest great delight;
Through thee alone we have thrust back our foes,
And troad those down that up against us rose;
Unto my bow no confidence I gave,
Neither from danger could my sword me save;
Thou have us saved for honor of thy name,
Thou have our foes put to reproach and shame.
Psalm. 44.1.2.3.5.6.7.
As we have heard of old, and often have been
Told of thy goodness, we have also seen
Even in the city of our God, that he,
Will it establish to eternity.
Psalm. 48.8.
God is our hope and strength, our rock and aid,
Ready to help when we are much dismayed;
Then though the earth be moved, and mountains fall
Into the sea, we will not fear at all;
Though waters rage and troubled be, though waves
Beat down high mountains, God his people saves:
For there a river is, whose streams will cheer
The City of the Lord, his Saints most dear;
God in the midst thereof does dwell for aye,
Therefore it shall not perish or decay.
Psalm. 46.1.2.3.4.5.
An host of men (Lord) I discomfite shall
In thee, through thee I shall leap over the wall.
Psalm. 18.29.
Let God arise and manifest his might,
And then his foes shall put themselves to flight,
But godly men before him shall rejoice,
Yea leap for joy, and sing with pleasant voice.
Psalm. 68.1.3.
God is my rock, shall man make me dismayed?
God is my strength, why should I be afraid?
Psalm. 27.1.
O sing unto the Lord new songs of praise,
For he has wrought great wonders in our days;
His own right hand and holy arm alone,
With great renown his foes has overthrown;
The Lord declares his saving health and might,
His justice eke in all the heathens sight;
He calls to mind his mercy, truth, and grace,
To Israel, and all his faithful race,
That all the world might see, and know right well
The goodness of the Lord to Israel.
Remedies against despair in case of want and poverty.
THe poor shall eat and be sufficed, and they
That seek God, praise him, and shall live for aye,
The poor and needy he will not despise,
Nor hide his face from their complaints and cries.
Psalm. 22.24.26.
Although I be of mean degree and poor,
The Lord is mindful of me evermore.
Psalm. 40.17.
Delight your selves in God with hearts entire,
And he will give to you your hearts desire.
Psalm. 37.4.
All wait on thee, yea things void of all reason,
That thou their food may give them in due season.
Psalm. 104.27.
The needy God will raise out of the dust,
Out of the dung, the poor that in him trust.
Psalm. 113.7.
For want of food the lions may be pined,
But such as fear the Lord shall succor find.
Psalm. 34.9.10.
I have been young and now a^ wa^ed old
And in this case to speak I dare be bold,
That I the godly man did never see
Forsaken quite, nor his posterity
Through want constrained for to beg their bread,
But ever have been by Gods goodness fed.
Psalm. 37.25.
Cast thou thy burden on the Lord, and he
In times of dearth and want will nourish thee.
Psalm. 56.24.
Trust in the Lord, to do good give thy mind,
Dwell in the land, and thou shall succor find.
Psalm. 37.3. Comfort for the godly when vengeance is powered down upon the
wicked.
THe just and upright man shall joyful be,
When he the vengeance of the Lord shall see,
For they shall wash their feet with triumph then,
Even in the blood of bloody minded men;
And men shall say, as cause they shall have just,
There is great fruit for such as in him trust,
Doubtless upon the earth a God there dwells,
That both in truth and righteousness excels.
Psalm. 58.10.11.
As sheep go to the fold, they to the grave,
And in that day the just shall Lordship have;
Their beauty shall consume when they shall go,
From their own dwellings to eternal woe;
But God will me preserve from endless pain,
Because he will receive my soul again.
Psalm. 94.14.15.
The just shall this behold and praise the Lord,
And laugh at him, and say with one accord,
Behold the man that made not God his stay,
But trusted in his strength, his mire and clay;
But I shall be like to an olive green,
For in the Lord my trust has ever been.
Psalm. 52.7.8.9. Comfort for the godly in evil and dangerous times.
IN evil days why should I fear though those
That seek my life me cunningly enclose?
For they that put their trust in riches most,
And in the multitude thereof will boast;
Their brothers soul from hell can no way save,
Nor pay a price to free him from the grave.
Psalm. 49.5, 6, 7. Comfort for the godly against the conspiracy of the wicked.
AGainst the just the wicked may conspire,
And grash their teeth in madness and in ire;
But God shall laugh to scorn them and their way,
For why, he sees the coming of his day:
They may draw out their swords and bend their bow,
The poor and needy man to overthrow;
But their own swords shall pierce their wicked hearts,
Their bows shall broken be in sundry parts:
He knows the just man's days and sees his way
And his inheritance shall not decay.
Psalm. 37.12, 13, 14, 15, 18.
The Lord will break their counsels, and disclose
The plots wherein they do most trust repose.
Psalm. 33.10.
Thou have my table richly decked, although
Mine enemies have sought my overthrow.
Psalm. 23.5. Comfort for captives, strangers, fatherless children, and widows.
THe Lord relieves the poor and fatherless,
The stranger and the widow in distress,
He makes the solitary man to live
In houses, freedom he to slaves does give.
Psalm. 146.9. Psalm. 68.5, 6.
Though godly men by tyrants are brought low
And wanting harbor wander too and fro;
God raises them out of their troubles deep,
And makes them households like a flock of sheep.
Psalm. 107.39.
When they did wander in the desert wide,
And found no place wherein they might abide:
Yea, when their thirst and hunger was so great,
That, death, the faintness of their souls did threat:
Then did they cry to God in their distress,
And he their grievances did soon redress.
Psalm. 107.4, 5, 6.
Though they were few their foes then to withstand,
Yea very few and strangers in the land;
And when they found no place for their abode,
But wandered too and fro the world abroad;
He suffered them no wrong at all to take,
But mighty Kings reproved for their sake.
Psalm. 105.12, 13, 14. Comfort for the godly in times of oppression.
OVer our heads thou have made tyrants ride,
And us the raging fury to abide
Of fire and water, yet thou through thy grace
Did bring us forth unto a wealthy place.
Psalm. 66.12, 13.
The Lord's with me, I need not fear or doubt
What man can do though he be strong and stout.
Psalm. 118.6.
Now for the great oppressures and the cries
Of poor distressed men, I will arise
Says God the living Lord, and them restore
Unto the liberties they had before.
Psalm. 12.5.
I sought the Lord, and he my suit did hear,
Yea he did free my soul from all my fear;
They shall both look and run unto his name,
Their faces shall not be abashed with shame;
But say this poor man to the Lord did call,
And he both heard and rid him out of thrall.
Psalm. 34.4, 5, 6.
O praise the Lord, his praise abroad display,
For he is good, his mercy lasts for aye;
He thought on us, yea in our base degree,
And from oppressors safely set us free.
Psalm. 136.1.23.
I with my mouth will laud the Lord, him I
Amongst the multitude will magnify;
For at the right hand of the poor he stands
To save them from the bloody tyrants hands.
Psalm. 109.30, 31.
God will avenge the afflicted, and the poor,
The just shall fear and praise him evermore.
Psalm. 140.12.
Incline thine ears to me (Lord) when I pray,
And hearken to the words which I shall say;
For strangers up against me rise, and they
That pleasure take in blood seek to betray
My soul with all the plots they can devise,
For God they have no time before their eyes:
Behold God is my helper straight at hand,
With them that stay my soul the Lord does stand.
Psalm. 54.2, 3, 4. Comfort for the godly in long affliction.
HIs chosen flock he will not always chide,
For ever they shall not his wrath abide;
For he knows well our molde and fashion just,
Our natures frail and how we are but dust.
Psalm. 103.9.14.
Though it for many years have been your lots
To lie concealed amongst defiled pots;
Ye shall be like a dove, whose wings like gold,
And silver shine when once she waxes old.
Psalm. 63.13.
For though the wicked ofttentimes by God
To prove his Saints, are used as his rod;
Yet shall it not their lot for ever be,
Lest they their hand put to iniquity.
Psalm. 125, 3.
The Lord himself has chast'ned me full sore,
But never has to death me given over.
Psalm. 118.18. Comfort for the godly in any strait.
BLessed is he whom Jacobs God does aid,
And he whose hope upon the Lord is staid;
Which did of nothing earth and heaven frame,
The sea and all pertaining to the same;
Which keeps his word and promises most sure
From age to age, for ever to endure;
Which does proceed in justice to relieve
His poor oppressed servants when they grieve;
Which gives bread to the hungry, and sets free
Such as are bound in chains of misery;
Which does the blind to sight, and lame restore
To limbs, and loves the just man evermore;
Which helps the stranger in his great distress,
And keeps the widow and the fatherless.
Psalm. 146.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
When as my parents dear did me forsake,
The Lord did me into his favor take.
Psalm. 27.12.
When I in trouble am and heaviness
I Will think on God, my grief I will express;
I will consider well the things of old,
And what in former times I have been told;
I will regard the workings of the Lord,
What he has done long since, I will record;
Yea, whilst I live, my tongue shall no time spare
His counsels deep and wonders to declare.
Psalm. 77.3, 5, 11, 12.
The Lord has mindful been of our distress,
And in his tender mercies will us bless;
To Aarons house his blessings he will show,
And to the house of Israel also;
Yea such as fear the Lord shall blessed be,
Both small and great, of high and low degree;
To them the Lord will multiply his grace,
Yea unto them, and to their stock and race.
Psalm. 115.12, 13.
Our fathers have put confidence in thee,
And thou in mercy, Lord, have set them free:
They were delivered when upon the name
Of God they called, they were not put to shame
That trusted in him.
Psalm. 22.4, 5.
God's just in all his ways, his works are all
Most pure, he is nigh to such as on him call.
Psalm. 145.17, 18.
Doubtless, that man is blessed whom God corrects,
And thereby in his holy law directs,
That he in evil days may give him rest
When sinners shall for ever be suppressed:
For sure God will no time the just forsake
Nor shun his chosen heritage to take.
Psalm. 95.12, 13, 14. Comfort for the godly in time of sickness.
When we lie languishing upon our beds
Of sorrow and of sickness, God our heads
And hearts does hold, he heals our griefs and sores,
And us at length to perfect health restores.
Pal. 41.5.
When snares of Death me round about beset,
And pains of hell me caught as in a net;
Then on the name of God thus did I call,
Deliver thou my soul, O Lord, from thrall;
The Lord is merciful unto the just,
And faithful to all those that in him trust:
I was in woeful pain and misery,
And in his mercy he relieved me.
Psalm. 116.3, 4, 5, 6.
The foolish for by reason of their crimes,
Upon their heads great plagues heap oftentimes;
Their souls did loath all meats they wont before
To hunger for, they were brought to deaths door;
Than (...) they cry to God for help and aid,
And he them heard according as they praid.
Psalm. 107.17, 18, 19, 20.
Though in the vale of death I walk, I will
No evil fear, for thou art with me still.
Psalm. 23.4. Comfort for the weak.
ALL ye that trust in God be strong and bold,
Though ye be weak, God will your hearts uphold.
Psalm. 31.24.
The Lord your strength and courage will increase,
The Lord will bless you with eternal peace.
Psalm. 30.11.
Hope in the Lord, be strong and no way start,
And he will comfort and confirm thine heart.
Psalm. 27.16.
My heart would faint, should I not hope to see
In life eternal thy felicity.
Psalm. 27.15.
The fatness of the house the just shall feed,
To them thy pleasant rivers shall exceed;
Because the Well of life remains with thee,
And in thy perfect light, we light shall see.
Psalm. 36.8, 9.
The Lord has bought the souls of all the just,
And none shall perish that in him do trust.
Psalm. 34.22.
The Lord does reign, then let the earth rejoice,
And let his Saints triumph with pleasant voice.
Psalm. 97.1
I waited long and did with meekness bear,
And God at length to me inclined his ear;
He brought my feet out of the mire and clay
Unto a rock, he led me in his way.
Psalm. 40.1, 2.
The Lord upon the just does fix his eyes,
His ears are always open to their cries;
The godly cry, and God in mercy hears,
And frees their souls from troubles, pains, and fears:
Unto the meek the Lord is near and kind
To save such as afflicted be in mind;
Great are the troubles which the good befall,
But God in mercy rids them out of all.
Psalm. 34.15, 17, 18, 19.
According to thy promises most just
Think on thy servant, for therein I trust;
In midst of troubles this my heart does cheer,
This me revives when pains of death draw near;
The proud of me have often made a scorn,
Yet shrink I not from thee as one forlorn^,
For I thy lasting judgments call to mind,
Therein, O Lord, I joy and comfort find.
Psalm. 119.49, 50, 51, 52.
Such as trust in the Lord shall stand as sure
As Sions mount for ever to endure;
And as the mighty mountains are about
Jerusalem, even so without all doubt,
From henceforth, and for ever, God will those
That trust in him with mercies great enclose.
Psalm. 125.1, 2. Comfort for the penitent.
THe Lord is just and merciful also,
Apt to forgive, to wrath and anger slow.
Psalm. 103.8.
We with our fathers, Lord, we must confess
Against thee have committed wickedness!
The wonders thou did work in Egypts land,
Our fathers did not rightly understand;
They did not call to mind the multitude
Of thy great mercies to them, but more rude
And stubborn were, yea in rebellion they
Did rise, and that at sea, yea the red sea;
Yet did thou save them for thine own names sake,
That thou thy power to be known might make;
Still they provoked God to wrath and ire
By their fond and inordinate desire;
Yet when he did behold their misery,
He heard in mercy their complaint and cry.
Psalm. 106.6, 7, 44.
Thou have, O Lord, been merciful indeed
To Israel, yea thou have Jacobs seed
Restored from thraldom; and, O God, we find
In holy Writ thou blott'st out of thy mind
All their misdeeds and heinous wickedness,
Whereby they did thy holy Laws transgress;
My sins Lord I confess with grief of heart,
In this thy mercy let me have a part.
Psalm. 85.1, 2.
Of joy and gladness thou shall make me hear,
That thou my broken bones, O Lord, may cheer.
Psalm. 51.8.
Give laud unto the Lord my soul, let not
The leaft of all his mercies be forgot,
That gave thee pardon, and will give all times
Pardon to such as will forsake their crimes:
After our sins with us he has not dealt,
Nor forour sins have we his fury felt.
Psalm. 103.2.3.10. Comfort for the godly in time of dearth.
IN evil times they shall not danted be,
In times of dearth they shall Gods goodness see.
Psalm. 37.19.
Behold the eyes of God, behold the just,
To help all such as in his mercy trust,
To free their souls while here they live on earth,
From the devouring jaws of death and dearth.
Psalm. 33.18.19. Comfort for the mariner in danger of shipwreck.
THey that in ships into great waters go
For, and with merchandise both to and fro
Observe and daily have Gods works in mind,
His wonders deep they in the deep do find,
For at his word the stormy winds arise,
Whereby the surges seem to threat the skies,
They mount aloft, and plunge the depth again,
So that their souls consume with fear and pain
They stagger like a drunkard to and fro,
Their skill is gone, they know not what to do;
Then did they cry to God for help and aid,
And he them heard according as they prayed,
The boisterous storms he makes to cease, the rage
Of roaring waves his hand does soon assuage,
Then are they glad, then do they shout and sing,
When God does them unto their haven bring.
Psalm. 107. from 23. to 30. A few short Meditations and ejaculations upon the
ATTRIBVTES of God, the Lords PRAYER, and the ten COMMANDMENTS.
Of the goodness and greatness of God.

Happy commixture is the ground of bliss,
What comfort would it be to us, if thou,
O great Jehovah, should the heavens bow,
And come in majesty? alas, thy might
Without thy goodness would but us affright;
If thou were only good and had not might,
When we were wronged, where should we go for right?
If thou had only might, and were not good,
Thy very name would frighten flesh and blood:
But blessed be thy name, O Lord of hosts,
Thy goodness is declared through all our coasts;
Yea, we thy greatness, and thy goodness find
In Church and State, in body, soul, and mind;
But we the greater often the worser grow,
In doing ill we often our greatness show:
Lord rather make us good then great, what will
Greatness avail us if our ways be ill?
Greatness without goodness, Lord we know
Will but procure our greater overthrow;
Therefore great God thy goodness we entreat,
To make us good, how ere thou make us great;
If thou will grace us, gracious God, with might,
Give us grace with it for to use it right.
Amen.
Of the wisdom of God.

What man thinks strange with ease thou bringst about,
But we are fools, and neither understand
The words, nor works of thy almighty hand:
O blessed God, we humbly thee desire,
Into our hearts true wisdom to inspire,
Make us to know thee and our selves aright,
Then shall our ways be pleasing in thy sight.
Amen.
Of the holiness of God.

Thy holiness to cleanse us more and more;
Each good and perfect gift must come from thee,
Lord make us such as thou would have us be.
Amen.
Of the justice and wrath of God.

Which being kindled burns as hot as fire?
O make us fearful to offend thy Law,
Lest we before thee be as hay or straw
Before a furnace, grant that we may praise
Thy holy name, and serve thee all our days.
Amen.
Of the truth of God.

Justice and equity thy Scepter swayes;
We should be like thee, but alas we find
Our hearts too much to fraud and guile inclined:
Lord breathe thy Spirit of truth into our hearts,
And write thy Laws within our inward parts,
Then shall our hearts be upright toward thee,
And eke our lives from foul offenses free.
Amen.
Of the mercy of God.

Or else what would become of sinful dust?
We should be like thee, but our hearts are evil,
In cruelty we imitate the devil;
Lord make us kind and pitiful, that so
In time of need thou may us mercy show.
Amen.
Of the love and kindness of God.

Upon good grounds we can (with reverence) say
Thou seem for to dote on man, for when
He went astray, thou broughtst him home again;
When he had from thy holy Precepts swerved,
And thereby thy displeasure had deserved,
The penalty of death, then did thou give
Thy Son to suffer death, that he might live:
O that our hearts could understand aright
The greatness of this love! that so we might
With body, soul and mind strive to adore
Thy holy name, both now and evermore.
Amen.
Short Meditations and Ejaculations upon the Lords Prayer.

Much pride, hypocrisy and evil lurks,
We cannot hallow thee it is our shame
That we may; in us Hallowed be thy name.
Amen.

My heart, my mind, my body and my soul
Have been slaves to the world, the flesh and devil,
Nimble and prompt to run into all evil;
But in thy service lame, dead, deaf and dumb,
My soul release, Lord, Let thy Kingdom come.
Amen.

We know, Lord, is wel-pleasing in thine eyes;
Quicken our hearts that are of life bereaven,
And let thy will be done here, as in heaven.
Amen.
Our Father, where then should we go
But unto thee for what we want below?
All creatures by thy providence are fed
Give us good God, this day our daily bread.
Amen.

Loath to destroy the meanest Town or City
If they repent; O help us to confess
And leave our sins, forgive our wickedness;
Remit our faults, unlose our chains and fetters,
Forgive our debts, as we forgive our debtors.
Amen.

Able to put our greatest foes to flight;
Subdue those lusts that tend to reprobation,
And let us not be led into temptation.
Amen.

And have command within thee of all things;
Let not the world, the flesh, nor yet the devil
Reign over us: Deliver us from evil.
Amen.
A few short Meditations or Eiaculations upon the ten Comm^ndements.

Our souls and bodies thou have brought from thral;
Grant we in word and deed may all agree
To have no other God, but only thee.
Amen.
2. Precept.

To us and ours, when we have been distressed;
Yet we like fools have aid and succor sought
From Idols vain, which our own hands have wrought:
Open our eyes, O blessed God, that we
May leave our folly, and return to thee.
Amen.
3. Precept.

Fully set for^h in sacred Writ we find;
Thou would no^ have us take thy name in vain,
We of our selves cannot, O Lord, refrain:
O give us grace thy name for to adore
In word and deed, both now and evermore;
And if we call thee witness for to bear,
Lord make us careful that the truth we swear.
Amen.
4. Precept.

To keep the day which thou apart have set
For thy own self and service we may find
A memorandum to put us in mind;
Yet we must needs confess unto our shame,
We are too prone to violate the same:
Incline our hearts to keep this Law, that so
We may escape thy wrath and endless woe;
And in thy holy place may ever sing
Sweet songs of praise to thee our worthy King.
Amen.
5. Precept.

Our Parents, Pastors, and such as bear sway;
O grant we may withhold no honor due,
That happy days for ever may ensue.
Amen.
6. Precept.

To have our hearts and hands from murder free;
Keep us from bloodshed, lest with cursed Cain,
Our souls for ever burn in endless pain.
Amen.
7. Precept.

With joy shall see the glory of thy face;
To filthy lusts, Lord, we are much inclined,
O sanctify both body soul and mind;
As we have faulty been herein, so grant
We may repent, and leave this filthy haunt.
Amen.
8. Precept.

Yet we both rob thy Church and Commonweal
In both we are but drones, we live to spend
What others get, and for no other end;
We in thy vineyard idle stand* yea we
Even in our private callings sloathfull be;
Nay Lord, we as if of all grace bereft,
Against thy majesty use fraud and theft:
Our conscience knows it to be very true,
Our practice shows that we withhold thy due,
Thy due is honor, glory, laud, and praise,
But we blaspheme thee by our evil ways;
Yea we might see, were we not like blind moles,
Our theft toward our rulers, bodies, souls;
O Lord bow down the heavens and behold,
Us in thy Son with mercies manifold;
Unto thy justice we dare not appeal,
Nor to our merits, for if thou should deal
With us, as we have dealt with thee, we might
Justly expect that thou should us requite
With everlasting woe; O blessed God,
Rather correct us with thy tender rod;
Use us like children, though we must confess
We have been rebels, ready to transgress
Upon the least enticements of the devil,
The world, the flesh, to ought that has been evil;
Make us in word and deed more just and true,
That we may give to God and man their due.
Amen.
9. Precept.
THou love truth Lord in the inward parts,
But we have both deceitful tongues and hearts;
Grant we may not for envy, fear, or gain,
False witness bear, dissemble, lie, or faigne.
Amen.
10. Precept.
IT is thy will that we should be content,
With what in mercy thou to us have sent;
But we are apt to murmur and repine,
And to accuse thy providence divine,
As if thou were unjust, or did not know
How upon men thy blessings to bestow:
We think some have too little, some too much,
When others prosper we are apt to grutch,
To covet and desire those things, which we
In conscience know another right to be:
Lord make us for be content with what
Thou have appointed for to be our lot:
Have mercy Lord upon us, and incline
Our hearts to keep all these thy laws divine.
Amen.
A few other short Ejaculations.
1. Ejaculation.
WE cannot pray nor praise thee as we would,
Indeed we can do nothing as we should,
For when our minds are bent to do thy will,
Our adversaries tempt us most to ill;
O that our ways were so direct that we
Might keep they statutes. O that we could be
What thou would have us be! Lord we desire
To worship thee with hearts and minds entire;
Lord let our sighs and groans acceptance find,
For perfect deeds accept our willing mind.
Amen.
2. Ejaculation.
OUr many slips our weakness do proclaim,
Yet we desire to love and fear thy name;
We have not faith, we speak it Lord with grief,
Yet we believe, Lord, help our unbelief.
Amen.
3. Ejaculation.
LOrd we are Pilgrims apt to go astray,
To lose our selves or faulter by the way.
O let thy holy word and spirit guide
And strengthen us that we may never slide!
Amen.
4. Ejaculation.
LOrd in the world I am a silly sheep,
Thou art the shepeheard of my soul, oh keep
Me safely in thy sheepefold, let me not
Wander in by-waies as one quite forgot;
Rather then I should in such ways remain,
Use any means to fetch me home again.
Amen.
5 Ejaculation.
LOrd I am deaf and dumb, yea lame and blind,
O by thy word illuminate my mind,
Make me the tidings of true joy to hear,
That thou again my broken bones may cheer:
Guide and direct my feet into thy ways,
Open my mouth and I shall show thy praise:
My heart is hard I cannot turn to thee,
For Christ his sake in mercy turn to me.
Amen.
6. Ejaculation.
MY foes are many, mighty, of great power,
Subtle, and such as would my soul devour;
But I am weak, not able to withstand
The least of them, without thy helping hand;
O help thy servant, Lord, my God most just,
For in thee wholly do I put my trust;
Unless thou be my buckler and my shield,
I know my false and fainting heart will yield;
Me with thy holy armor arm, that I
May never shrink, nor from my colors fly.
Amen.
7. Ejaculation.
HOw long, O Lord, how long will thou withhold
Thy favor from me? is thy love grown cold?
How long will thou reject me? I am thine,
Unto my suite, O Lord, thine ear incline;
I sue for mercy, let thy mercy save
Me from the power of sin, hell, and the grave,
Then shall I sing thy praises, and rejoice
Amongst thy Saints, with heart and cheerful voice.
Amen.
8. Ejaculation.
I Was conceived, brought forth, and borne in sin,
And all my life and days have spent therein,
And by this means that image quite defaced,
Which through thy mercy once in me was placed;
Sin as a leprosy has overspred
Both soul and body, so that from the head
Unto the foot, there is no part that we
(Knowing our selves aright) can say is free:
Lord wash us in the blood of Christ, and so
We shall be whiter then the driven snow.
Renew thy image in us once again,
We are thy creatures, do not us disdain,
Of all faults past wipe out the total sum,
And give us grace, that for the time to come
We may resist the world, flesh, and the devil,
Learn to do well by ceasing to do evil.
Amen.
9. Ejaculation.
THou all my life have been my tender father,
Leave me not now, but show me mercy rather
In my distress, the sorrows of the grave
Lay hold on me, O for thy Sons sake save
Me from her jaws, receive me to thy glory,
When thou shall call me from things transitory.
Amen.
Epilogus sive conclusio ad lectorem.
Lectores,
LIbrum hunc (cui titulus est, The Souls Solace in time of trouble, or
Sovereign Remedies against Despair) in manus vestras humillime commendo,
aequo cum animo eum perlegite, and quamvis curtas, and abreviatas hasce in
venietis meditationes, de utilitate tamen (his vobiscum been digestis) ne
dubitetis, obsecro Deum consolationis ut sint mihi vobisque omnibus, solamen,
and vita and articulo mortis.

FINIS.

