The Life of Mother Shipton.

A NEW Comedy.

As it was Acted Nineteen days together with great Applause.

Folia Ampla Sybillae Virg. Written by T. T.

LONDON, Printed by and for Peter Lillicrap, and are to be sold by T. Passenger
the three Bibles on London Bridge. 1610.

The Actors Names.
Pluto The King of Hell Radamon A chief Spirit Four other Devils The Ab. of
Beverly Hairbrain A wild Gallant Swagger His Companion A Captain Mr. Shiftwell
A Pander Mr. Moneylack His Companion Sr. Oliver VVhorehound An old Leacher
David His man Roger His wifes man Sir. Ol. VVhorehounds wife going by the name
of Lovefree Mr. Scrape a Userer Mother Shipton Abigail her Maid Maria Shiftwels
sister Priscilla a Whore Prue a Bawd Shiftwels wife And two whores
The Scenes.

The City of York. OR Nasebrough Grove in Yorkshire.

The Prologue.
PRologues are grown so plenty, yet so dear
Our author choos'd to have no prologue here,
His is an invitation to a feast
He hopes your stomachs will not ill digest,
Yet be not over curious, since he has spent
As much as on his Credit could be lent;
He Is not a Poet yet upon his blessing
Has charged the Cooks be careful in the dressing.
Expect no choice of dainties of the prime;
As at the Temple at a reading time,
Or that our young Cooks are experienced so
They can please every pallat: this we know
They may in time, then in the mean while
Grace their endeavors with a courteous smile,
To the Author and the Actors too prove free,
Spare not for claps and first begin with me.
Exeunt.

The Life of Mother Shipton.
Act the First,
Scene the First.
Shipton sitting by a Rivers side, and Radamon a Devil a part. Ship. MIserable
Shipton in what a poor condition has it pleased the powers to place thee! sure
all the Eyes of Happiness did look a Squint at my Nativity, and all the
Destinies combined to wrap me up in endless poverty.


Di. This is excellent her low condition does lay the foundation for my siege,
i will listen to what follows.


Ship. How pleasant and thrice happy is the fortune of other Mortals, how
bravely do they live and enjoy themselves and their estates! How like petty
dieties are they seated in their palaces! and to such poor Cottage bred
Creatures as my self extend their generous Hospitality! how nobly do they pass
over their lives and with odours and perfumes enter their earthly graves, whose
fame is still surviving by their Princely Pedigree? why was not this my lot
poor miserable Shipton*


Di. Better, better yet, she is ambitious, and I am half confident she is my
own.


Ship. What pleasant life have I? forlorn desolation? What estate or
subsistence? The Alms of the Parish? What Grave but a Ditch? And for my
pedigree can only boast of poverty? I was wretched by my Parents indigency, and
by their death in my Minority, thrice, thrice more Miserable! Am I not flesh
and blood? Has not Nature bestowed on me the like perfections, each Mortal now
can boast off? Why am I so low then when others are so high? Why do I court the
ground when others in their glorious pinacles grasp the sky? Well hence forth
will I scorn their Alms and gifts of Charity.

Directly or indirectly I will find a way,
To make me rich in Pride and Money too, but stay.
pauses.
Di. Do, do mount higher in ambition yet and then,
Thou Wilt fall so low, thou never shall rise again.

Ship. I am too presumptuous and do offend these powers we are bound in the
strictest obligations to obey: No be content in time thou will see Heaven will
give thee more felicity.


Di. Ha! This startles me does her ambition thaw, I Will to her e're she too much
repents.

Fair Maid, nay startle not, pardon me that I have been a gentle auditor to
your sorry tale, yet think of me, as I seem to be; a Gentleman well descended,
and not of so mean a spirit to divulge the least Syllable of what I have heard,
but be as secret as the silent Air.


Ship. Sir your Carriage and discourse confirm you a Gentleman; and since you
have over heard what I never intended to declare to any: My hope is in your
promise: You will be Privy.


Di. I Will be thy bosom Cabinet, and since at first sight I see thou art
meritorious: It Is in my power and I am willing to bring thee to advancement:
Nay such honor as shall touch the height of those to whom thou have been
subservient, and spurn at those that hitherto have slighted thee.


Ship. Sir you promise fair.


Di. I Will perform fairer, Therefore to morrow morn at sun rising, under the
broad Beech-tree, in Naes-borough Grove fail not to meet me.


Ship. Upon my Life I will not,


Di. Then thou shall see, i will find a means to

Work thy content, and thereby,
Transform thy sorrow to felicity

Ship. I thank you sir.


Di. Till then fair Maid farewell,
This will be good news to the King of Hell.

Exit Radamon. Ship. This promise makes me proud, perform it and thou art noble

The Parish Alms gifts and Cottages i will scorn
And no more walk in places so forlorn,
To this Event ye powers grant success,
The Sun must usher in my Happiness.

Exit. Scene the Second.
Enter Shiftwell and Moneylack. Mo. It Is a mad life thou leadst.


Shift. A merry life, the only life? I am like a man finding a Table furnished
to his hand, as mine is still to me, prayers for the sounder, I thank him he
has maintained my house this six years, not only keeps my wife, but me and all
my family: I am at his Table, he puts me to nothing, no rent, nor Church
duties, no not so much as the scavenger, the happiest state that ever man was
born to: I walk out in a morning, come to breakfast, find excellent cheer, a
good fire in winter, look in my coal house about Midsomer eve* five or six
chaldrone new laid up* look in my back yard, I shall find a pile of fagots that
over look the Church steeple, I say nothing to all this, but smile and gently
pin the door again, when my wife lies Inn, as even now she is on the point of
grunting, a Lady lies not like her, she has her Embossings, Embroiderings,
Spanglings, and I know not what, her Sugar by whole loaves, her wine by
Rundlets: I see these things but like a haypy man.

I pay for none at all, yet fools think^t mine,
I have the name, and in his Gold I shine.
This charge the Knight has whilst I without any fear,
Lie soft, sleep hard, drink wine, and eat good cheer.
And then for want of my wife, have I a legion of Mistresses.


Mo. But prithee when do exspect Sir Oliver?


Shift. Why to morrow so his last letter said.


Mo. So then we may hope for a recruite.


Shift. Hope, we will command it, he must be liberal to me, but mum here comes
David.

Enter David. How now David any news for me from Sir Oliver


Da. Yes, I have a Letter for you Sir.


Shift. He is in good health I hope.


Da. I hear nothing to the contrary, but I must bid you farewell Sir, business
calls me away, otherwise Mr. Shiftwel you and I would not part so driely.


Shift. Farewell honest David

Exit David So now I Will open thee.

Reads. My dear Shiftwel.


Mo. That Is lovingly.


Shift. O it is flattery I fear

In the last you received from me, I told thee how speedy I would be in my
return, both for the love I bear to my Lady and thy self, but since several
businesses prohibit my intent, so that now I cannot be in town till the latter
end of next week, but then I will be most liberal

Sir Oliver Whorehound.
Mo. This does not make the old Proverb good, short and sweet, for this is short


Shift. But damnable sower.


Mo. Well poverty parts good company, so for the present farewell, next time we
meet, I hope we shall be in a condition too fare better.


Exit Moneylack. Shif. Fear not for I do live without regard,
The pander needs must have a free reward,

Scen. III.
Enter Mrs. Lovefree and Roger her man with a portmantle* Io. ROger earry the
Portmantle to my Lodging, I Will follow presently.


To. I will forsooth.

Exit Roger. Ha Noll, is it so in faith has a young Mrs, restored a new fire
into your decayed parts, I thought 'twas impossible for nature to broach
another vessel of strength into thy whithered veins, well if it be so, so let
it be: when I lay by thy side thou tookest no care in the night but to mumble
out thy prayer and Pater noster: many times when I have endeavored to force a
motion in thee, to give life to thy dead spirits alas! I was answered wiith
hollow groans, and excuses of age? and to imagine the truth, I believe it is
rather thy money then thy fortitude that quenches the appetite of that woman
thou frequents for otherwise by experience I can tell her thirst would rather
increase then her desire be satisfied: well I Will pay thee in thy Coin, I have
not a face altogether contemptible, nor money for properties to preserve it
from wrinckles, and I hope ere long this City will afford me a Gallant.

Whore-hound revenge is counted no disgrace.
Cuckold thy horns will quickly bud apace,

Scen IV.
Enter Pluto Proserpina and five Devils. Plu. MY brave spirits the world is now
in distraction, confusion meets in every place, and will ere long involve it
self into a second Chaos: now with all the hellish art you are masters of,
scout about and make the consciences of men as black as Hell it self: mean
while Alecto let it be your care to cherish our Traitors in the lower vault.
Massanello that proud fisher boy that durst usurp so much disloyalty against
his Prince, to raise forces against him and make his subjects most perfidious,
the like to Matchavile that wheadling Traitor, Synon that betrayed the noble
Trojans, also to Hanibal the noblest Hellhound Hell can boast of, but who comes
here.


Enter Radamon. Al. Great Prince it is Radamon.


Plu. Now Radamon the news with thee.


Ra. Great prince the news I bring,
Will make your Queen and all our Furies sing.

Plu. Declare it.


Ra. I have been with Shipton a poor Alms wench to whom as she was deploring
her sad condition, I appeared apparelled like a very handsome Gentleman, gave
her large promises, to make good which early this Morn, at Sunrising I am to
meet her under the broad Beech tree in Na^sborough Grove.

Then I do not doubt
To make effectual what I have been about.

Plu. Well done Radamon thou art a providing Devil and does much for the
Interest of our Kingdom, we thank thee for thy care and diligence.

Come now lets revel and with such delight
We Will spend the tedious minutes of this night.

[They Dance, dance ended] Plu. Now we will go visit our Helveechans that have
been
Inrichers of our Kingdom by their sin.

Exeunt. Scene the Fifth.
Enter Shiftwell and Mr. Scrape severally. Shift. NOw for Moneylack he will behold
and bless himself, and with confidence swear i am a limb of a Devil. How Scrape
one of my old Usurers! Pox on his picture! Now do I quake as if I had had the
standing Ague these seven years! yet perforce I must be courageous and speak to
him: Mr. Scrape your obleiged Servant Sir.


Scra. Mr. Shiftwel how have you done this long while, I can never have the
happiness to see you at our end of the town.


Shift. No faith nor never shall Aside as long as I can keep at this.

Why Sir, so and so, I make a heard shift to keep head and shouldders together.


Scra. Well but to put off this discourse, you and I must be a little more
serious.


Shift. Now it begins to work.


Scra. You know Mr. Shiftwell, the times expired my money due, and your bond
forfeited, and now what would you have me do? when I lent my money I appear an
Angel, but now I call for it again I Will warrant you a very devil.


Shift. 'Flesh! what shall I do with him? there is no way to set him going but
Hectoring. Why Sir I cannot help it, you must stay till I have it, you know like
a Gentleman I pawned you my Land for the tenth part of the value, and now times
are dead, no money stirring, it is a bard case, you must forbear longer or I
shall grow very angry.


Scrap. Fret and spare not, I know no obligation lies upon me with my honey to
feed drones, but in short my money I want, and my money i will have, or it shall
go hard with you.


Shif. Flesh how the Rogue railes Aside sure he has got some Baliffes nigh; I
see none: Looks out yet its well, he knows not of my being a Pander, therefore
I Will plead poverty, and my former trade of Merchandise, and see if I can move
the Rogue to pity: alas! at present Sir I cannot, my wife and family then will
starve for want of bread.


Scrap. More too blame thou in not providing better to support them, your debt
is an estate for a good man pray acquaint me how were my thousand pounds
employed?


Enter Moneylack. Mo. How a Dun upon Shiftwel, I am come to my wish, here Il^
keep out of sight and hear all, I know no object that could more content me. Ha
my Uncle Scrape, better and better, but I Will be silenced till the future.


Shift. I^su^t not on my Calamity good Sir, though being a Debtor and a slave
to him that lends, I must endure it, yet hear me speak thus much in my own
defense, losses at sea, and those Sir, great and many by storms and tempest,
not domestical Riot in soothihg of my wifes humor, or my own has brought me to
this low ebb.


Mo. Sure it is an old debt, he pleads his former trade of Merchandise, it is well
the old Rogue knows it to be no otherwise.


Scrap. Suppose this true.


Shif. Nay it is a real truth without supposals Sir, besides can you think in
your unquestioned wisdom that the ruin of me, (once an able Merchant) can
raise your reputation with good men!


Mo. No if it thrive with him, hang me as 'twill damn him if he be not
converted, for all he is my Uncle.


Shif. Suppose this Sir, if you permit me a month more, it wi l not be your
loss nor prejudice, and there was never yet but shame and scandal in a victory
when Rebels unto reasons passion fought it.


Mo. Our Divines cannot speak more effectually.


Scrap. Shall I be talked out of my Money.


Shif. No Sir, but entreated to do your self a benefit and preserve that you
possess entire.


Scrap. How Friend?


Shif. By making me your beadsman, when I eat my thanks, next Heaven, will be
paid to your mercy, when your ships are at sea, my prayers will swell the
sails with prosperous winds and guard them from tempests and Pirates: keep
your ware houses from fire, or quench them with my tears.


Scrap. If this could be.


Shift. It must or my devotion lies: Aside. come Sir, I see a gentle promise in
your eye, make it a happy act and me rich in being the instrument.


Scrap. Well you have prevailed, take a month longer, but see you fail not,
if you do I Will protest you first, and that done, have the Statute made for
Bankrupts served upon you.


Shif. If I do it is in your power, but not in mine to shun it.


Scrap. But do you hear: no talk of it, should this arrive at twelve on the
exchange, I should be laughed at for my foolish pity, which money men hate, so
farewell.


Exit. Shif. So he is gone. Looks out. I bless the Counter where I learnt this
Rhetoric, now I Will shake again.

shakes his Pockets.
Mo. Ha! so full faith and plead poverty, I Will out and scorn him: Ha, ha, ha.


Shif. Well I Will abide your jears for once, and hope it may be your turn
another time.


Mo. In troth very likely, but I have seen and heard all, excuse my manners.


Shif. I think I worked him pretty well for all he was your Uncle,


Mo. Nay and with such Devotion too.


Shif. Never did I pray so, so heartily before,

But come now lets to the next Tavern steer,
And there my hoarse pipes with Canary clear;

Exeunt. Sceen the sixth,
Enter Shipton. Puffed up with pride I am grown ambitious, can I forget to give,
a bow to the humble Milkmaids: can I forget a cursie making to my liberal
Almes-givers? can I forget every Sundaies going to the Church porch to beg a
loaf? yes I can forget all,

Shipton no more now shall be,
Beholding to their liberallity.
But ha! I see my happiness, the Sun shines clear: come, come my worthy
Gallant, if thou do fail to effect what thou have promised me, all my
expectations are but Air! but why do I doubt thy gratitude, I am confident in
thy nobleness, and will vaunt upon it: soar high Shipton, higher yet, and
think thou never wast, what too sure thou have been! Ha, ha, ha, me thinks I
shall laugh to see a poor wench beging for an Alms, though I have don't my
self, ha! for that very word I could correct my insolence! I will avouch I
near was poor: hang all beggarry, for my expected happiness assures me I was
born to know endless felicity, not the fruits of woe. But stranger things I yet
conceive! This Gentleman could not having no ground of acquaintance promise me
this preferment without a cause? no my youth and beauty stirred him to it! I am
in my teens and that alone must be the motive! this I conjecture, and this
effect ye powers for my future bliss.

Enter Radamant with two other Devils like Gentlemen. Rad. My pretty Damsel I
must confess I have been somewhat tardy, but now come to perform my promise
beyond thy expectation, guess at my meaning.


Ship. Alas! I cannot prophecy Sir.


Ra. Then know I intend to marry thee, and have brought these my attendants to
witness it


Ship. Are you real Sir?


Ra. By all that is real I am: behind this Grove I have a horse and pillion for
my Spouse, these my attendants are nobly mounted too, we have not Jades that
need the switch and spur, but will run with all speed to perform the rights
that to our marriage shall be appurtenant, bestow thy self upon me and all my
Fortunes and Estate are thine.


Ship. Now I see I prophesied rightly: I am ever happy, Thee and thy estate, a
noble Husband.


Ra. A match lets go,

But first join hands that nothing may our he arts devide.
I am thy bridegroom. Ship. And I am thy Bride.

Exeunt, Finis Actus Primi.
Actus secundus.
Scena prima.
Enter Greg. Hodge. Jug. and Bab. Beggars. Hod. COme, come devide the spoil,
share and share like*


Greg. Withal my heart: there Hodge there is for thee.


Hod. Very right.


Greg. And there Jug there is for thee.


Jug. True to a farthing.


Greg. And there Bab's for thee, and here is for my self, and the odd overplus
lets give to the Fiddler.


Hod. A very good Motion, for now after our long puritanical praying lets spend
a little of what we got in meriment.


Jug. Prithee Greg. what is it thou starest at so?


Greg. Why at yonder thach't cottage, me thinks it would make a pretty palace
for us Princes of the ragged Regiment to in habit in.


Hod. O that was old Shipton the ditch diggers.


Jug. I but he is dead, Hodge, and has left it to his daughter a poor Alms
wench.


Bab. And yet as proud as the Devil.


Jug. I wonder what is become of her, I have not seen her at Alms giving a
pretty while, and she did not use to hang an Arse.


Hod. Pish let her be where she will, we keep the Fiddler here to no purpose.


Greg. Well strike up Fiddler we will take a dance, and then make enquiry after
Agatha Shipton for the purchase of her cottage.


A Song. A Beggars a Prince, we gather from hence
We are not confined as some Princes be,
Though we are not so rich,
VVee've as princely an Itch,
And my mind, my mind is a Kingdom to me,
We loose no grate purses,
Nor have not the Curses,
Of Orphans: of Widows, or poor Caveliers,
And before that I shall, from a Dignity fall,
'Till be eight times, nine times ten hundred years.
We scorn all their fears,
And live not in fears,
Of being imprisoned by black rod or Tower,
And as for the stocks, of it self it unlocks
Within the space of a merry short hour,
Dance and Exeunt. Act second, Scen. second.
Enter the Captain Solus. I that have lead a life until of late in spite of
death, passed through the dangers of it without regard, am now won and
vanquished: There is an heroic Amazon hard by, whose eyes have darted fire
intomy breast, which nothing but her kindness can extinguish, but if she should
prove cruel I shall soon be ashes I Must I thus yield? shall I forget the sound
of Martial drums, the warlike noise of Trumpets, to list to the inticeing
harmony of instruments touched by P^ikellas hand? shall I forget the ordering
of a camp? to ride great horses to besiedgs a City? to undermine a Castle, to
raise Bulwarks, and all for the love of a simple woman? it must be so: these
legs that were wont to lead armed men to battle, I now must use in dances:
this hair that used to be covered with a Helm cloggy with sweat and blood, I
now must daily powder: these hands that were used to wave a dreadful sword
instead of iron gauntlets, now must wear perfumed gloves: I that was wont to be
constantly under a Chyrurgeons hands, must have a Barber now to keep me neat: O
Love thou art divine, and can transform,

A man from that he was, it is in vain,
Tn think to shun the thieg thou do constrain.
O heaven if I can but win my love, it will be a conquest deserves a trophee
far above,

My best of victories: I Will go and try her,
'Twas love that kindled, love must quench my fire.


Enter Roger. Cap. Who art thou,


To. I Sir.


Cap. I you, what are you to good to be spoke too?


To. I am Roger.


Cap. By that I know thee not, is Roger in a Captains Roll? ist't writ?


To. Yes Sir in the Parsons book; the day thereof my baptism is set down.


Cap. And in that honor, how often have thou ere fought with Infidels and killed
a score or two.


To, Not I, a score or two said you Captain, nay then I should never escape,
for i will promise you many one is hanged for killing of one.


Cap. Fie what an ignorance is this have thou a mind to become a soldier?


To. Indeed I cannot resolve you, I am with a Mistress, i will ask her whether
she will turn soldier too, and then if I like it there is an end, but pray
Captain what is a soldier?


Cap. A soldier is a man that ventures his life a hundred times a day, and in
his Princes and his Countries cause stands Canons shot, and when his bodies
full of wounds, lies all night in the field, and sleeps upon his Helm.


To. Good Captain pardon me, neither I nor my Mistress will be soldiers then,
venture my life so many times a day, there is more safety in turning Theif, marry
I thought a soldier had not been such a fool, but now I think on it good
Captain persuade my Father, Mother, Brothers, Sisters, and all the kindred I
have to become soldiers, that they may all be killed quickly, I swear Captain
you should loose nothing by it.


Cap. Base Coward.


To. Good Sir what is the meaning of that word Coward?


Cap. A Coward is a fellow as base as thou, one that does spend his precious
time in sloth, cares not what alterations Kingdoms have, so be at home may
welter in his pleasures, a fellow that had rather sit all day smoking Tobaco
and carouseing cups, then dye his sword in blood of Enemies.


To. Why then Sir indeed I am a very Coward, it is better by half then a
soldier, I know there is far more pleasure in a glass of good wine then in
bullets whizing about ones ears, and Pikes and Halberts beating out ones teeth.


Cap. Thou dungil wretch.


To. Nay pray Sir be not angry, for I vow I should never digest the soldiers
life.


Cap. Thou earthen minded slave it is pity thou should eat or drink thou
have no better thoughts.


To, Good Sir give me leave to be of my own mind and a Coward, I am sure
there is no wise man but won'd say as I do, what have I to do with souldery,
let those follow wars that at are weary of their lives.


Cap. Thou art as dungil a minded Rascal as ever I heard, and deservest to be
hanged, and so I leave thee.


Exit Captain. To. Go hang your self my Hufting Captain, what have I to do with
your wars two, I should never endure to hear a gun shot off, for hearing the
report of our Stewards pistol, does many times make me endanger my breeches.


Exit Scen. Third.
Enter Shipton with Attendants. Ship. Stand at a distance, me thinks this state
becomes me.


Enter a Crier. HA! what Bell is that?

Cry. O Yes, if any man or woman, in City, Town, or Country can tell me tidings
of Agatha Shipton, the daughter of Solomon Shipton Ditch digger lately
deceased, let them bring word to the Crier of the Village, and they shall be
well rewarded for their pains.


Ship. Curse on that tongue what makes this cry after me? can they not bestow
the Alms that came to my share to some other poor wretch that wants it more
then I do now? no it is not that! upon my life some canting Beggars covetuous of
my cottage have made this way of inquiry for me to purchase it. And if my noble
Lord should have divulged it to these my attendants what I first was, and they
now declare it I should again be wretched for all these delicates: I cannot in
my proud thought be rich if any but himself should know I ever was poor.


Cry. Pray ean any here tell me tidings of the party I cry off?


At. No truly honest man.


Cry. Then farewell Gentlemen.


Ship. This answer does again prop up my spirit.

My worthy servants know me or know me not*
This present kindness never shall be forgot.

Enter Radamon. Welcome Noble Sir.

Ra. I hankes my fair Spouse, I see I am come most opertunely, lets sit and
taste of all the varieties this board is furnished with.

-- Attendants in the mean while
Let your dancing make our Lady smile.

(Sit at a banquet) They dance, Ra. Now begone, we must confer in private.
Now I am thy Husband and thou art my Wife, yet know I am no mortal! I am a
Devil! these my attendants Devils too! I can pierce through the air, ransack
its Treasures! I can raise thunder and lightning, stir up Storms, quell
Tempests, do or undo any thing to please me! I Will give thee power too! the
winds shall be at thy command, and every thing else at thy dispose!


Ship. How matried to an Imaterial Spirit this starteles me, how sweetly could
I now desire my former poverty! but Pride assures me I am happy still, and on
that staff i will lean. Then Fortune turn thy wheel,

I am in now and must through,
And to all virtuous acts I bid adiev.
Well having cunningly wone me to you, I must obey and be what you are pleased
to make me.


Ra. Then after me repeat these following words.

Raziel, Ziragia, Phonthonfancia.
Ship, Repeats.


Both Exeunt with Thunder and Ligtning, Scene the Fourth
Enter Shiftwel and Roger. To. I Shall study to be your humble servant.


Shift. Thou art a noble Minister of words: but will thou be my Cabinet, my
friend Roger?


To. I will obey you Sir.


Shift. Liberally spoken, when I have opened me, will thou be privy?


To. Very secret and officious, it is manners in me, your commands shall wedge
my tongue, hedge my heart, and tie a true Lovers knot with the strings of it.


Shift. Thou art an honest clad of earth, it is pity the malicious Sunshine
warmed thee not into a Diamond.


To. You speak above my brain Sir.


Shift. I am marvellously in love with your Lady, Roger.


To. Wonderful! is my Lady your sweet heart?


Shift. Yes but ignorant of my affection yet.


To. I would be drunk if you were my Master Sir.


Shift. I Roger, I would have a Wine cellar to the purpose Man, but do know
any possible way to win her?


To. Sir I am passing empty of invention: but an't please you would you marry
her?


Shift. No you may swear it, but I must counterfeit yes, why do wonder at it?


To. She does nothing all day but read merry Comedies, and every night spend
two or three hours on a Tragedy of a merry fellow Dametas, and a company of
strange named Lovers, she is no more a huswife then you or I Sir, on my own
proper knowledge I vow and protest it.


Shift. Thou art too earnest my old faced Saturn, I like her near the worse,
huswifery is the superficies of a gentle Female, and the parenthesis of a Lady
which may be well left out.


To. You are a scholar Sir, and your bookship shall direct me,


Shift. I should be glad to cope with your Lady Sir, me thinks I am of a
prompter expression then usal: Ha! your Lady said I? faith see where she comes.


Enter Mrs. Lovefree. To. I vanish in a mist then.


Exit Roger. Shift. He out with a Poetical Solique for my Praeludium. The gaudy
stars are not more full of glee, when golden Phoebus sets in the West, nor
do the cheerful Birds with more delight rejoice at the new livery of the
spring, then I to have this Miracle of Beauty enter into the knowledge of my
Eyes.


Mrs Love. He speaks well, I would he meant in earnest, the gentleman seems
very deserving, but he is somewhat wild I imagine.


Shift. She shall be stoutly accosted, impudence is a very happy quality in a
wooer I perceive.


Mrs Love. He comes.


Shift. Lady I credit you are not a puny in the Court of Cupid, and therefore I
hope need not the tedious circumstances of an Annual service: I am bold to tell
you plainly I love you, and if I find occasion I will maintain it boldly.


Mrs Love. Pray Sir Desist.


Shift. Never, sweet Lady, my descent I know you doubt not, and my love you
need not, for while I live I shall love you, and when you dye your memory.


Mrs Love. Your carriage and discourses Sir, show you are a Traveller.


Shift. My boldness she means: Madam I have been one and can declare the
Habits, Conditions and Scituations of diverse Countries; nay more my fornights
observation of the Antipodes, this will make her wonder.


Mrs Love. O strange have you been there Sir? I admire how you ever came
thither!


Shift. Madam I can tell you, but should I tell you, I should afright you more
then the doleful groans of a dying Creature in the hideous night.


Mrs Love. Nay if it be so terrible, pray sir forbear.


Shift. Well put off.


Mrs Love. Yet, pray resolve me one thing.


Shift. No sooner asked but granted.


Mrs Love. Whether the Antipodes have a King.


Shift. Yes but he is no man.


Mrs Love. I believe so, for I could never credit that any man inhabited there.


Shift, There they have no houses neither but the Kings palace, where Sir
Francis Drake was entertained after he had shot the gulf.


Mrs Love. Possible! I wonder at it.


Shift. Nay more they at the Antipodes hear with their noses, smell with their
ears, but taste withal their senses, for they are the most insatiablest
gluttons in the whole world.


Mrs Love. But I cannot imagine how their senses are so contrary to ours,


Shift. Nay and they are opposite to us too.


Mrs Love. That indeed I have heard. But you frequent plays, do ye not sir?


Shift. Plays they are most commonly my every afternoons recreation.


Mrs Love. And you have red many Histories?


Shift. Many Lady.


Mrs Love. This pleases me too, farewell sir.


Shift. Admired Lady leave me not so.


Mrs Love. What would you have sir?


Shift. Your consent Lady


Mrs Love. O expect that hereafter.


Shift. Nay dear Lady.


Mrs Love. You are too importunate sir farewell.


Exit. Shift. No matter, I am sure to have thee: how some women are taken with
strange tales? quest onless she is a Widow, but no matter, plenty of money will
weave contempt in a beauty at second hand.

Next time we meet I do not doubt to get her,
Hercules could not woo a Lady better.

Enter Monylack. Money-lack. Thou art well met.


Mo. Thanks good Shiftwel.


Shift. I have brave news to tell thee, but come let us to the Tavern, and by
the virtue of a glass of wine, 'twil slide off my tongue more sweet.


Mo. Agreed, but I should call upon a friend about this hour according to
engagement.


Shift. Nay i will not stay for it is full noon, and I have promised to be Sir
Olivers guess.


Mo. He Is come to town then.


Shift. Yes he came last night, and has commanded noble preparations for the
gossiping to day. Ha! see where he comes.


Enter Sir Oliver, Mo. I Will leave you then.


Shift. Protest but you shall not, Sir Oliver the humblest of your servants.


Sir Oliver. Nephew Shiftwel. the only one I wished for.


Shift You are welcome to town Sir, I expected you long before this, till your
last Letter showed good cause to the contray.


Sir Oliver, Indeed I could not possible come till now, nor now neither well,
for in the interim several concerns of mine lies in the trust and confidence of
some persons which I doubt.


Shift. Your Lady Sir is delivered of a fine plump boy, he will be as notable a
wag as the Father I Will watrant him.


Sir Oliver. I have seen it and blessed it, but to make my promise good, there
Nephew there is ten pieces for you, and come you must be my principal guess to
day.


Shift. It grieves me that I must be forced against my will, I hate the company
of such a crew of Women (as there to be sure I shall find enough) nay and honest
women too: yet for this moneys sake I must, and so good patience guide me, Sir
I cannot deny you, but this Gentleman is my intimate friend and in leaving him
so abruptly, I make a breach of our friendship,


Sir Oliver. Not for the world, with this Gentleman your friend, I invite you
for my guess to day, and will promise you Sir a hearty welcome.


Mo. Sir I thank you, but would willingly beg your pardon and my excuse, for
probablely my strangeness may be some part of hindrance to mirth in some of
your scotiable guess,


Sir Oliver. Not in the least Sir, I have a Neice that loves to entertain such
handsome Gentlemen as you are.


Shift. He means my Sister Maria, faith for that words sake go Money-lack.


Sir Oliver. Nay pray Sir come, no more delays.
My Guess by this are sat and dinner stays!

Exeunt. Scen. fifth.
Enter Pluto Proserpina, and five Devils. Pluto. NOw declare,


1 Div. Infernal King, I have been my circuit, but each christians heart was so
fortyfied against my attempts, that I was dubious of bringing any news
acceptable to your ear, till at last creeping into a strong water shop amongst
a crew of topers, I partly divided my self and stuck upon each man's tongue, who
presently within the space of a poor moment, warpt out such a number of
ignominous lies, that Hell it self would quake to hear them.


2 Di. I was his second, for in a puff of smoke I crep up their noistrils into
their very brain, and their played a tyrants part in converting their lies into
execrable Oaths: damnation was their constant wish, and so wish I and hope ere
long to make them Charons customers.


3 Di. I have been amongst a crew of Cobblers and Broom-men and have raised an
endless discord, that I dare promise upon penalty of your powerful displeasure,
diversity of murders will be between them committed.


4 Di. I have not been idle neither: I have been scouting among the Lawyers in
their pleading hall, where a cause coming to be heard between a rich Userer and
an Heir, I skipt into the hearts of six affidavit men, who swore point blanck
for the Userers interest, against what was either truth or equity which makes
for the interest of our Kingdom.


Pluto. Well 'twas bravely done, and for this your care and diligence kiss our
Proserpines hand, then run to your several stations to perfect what you have
partly i^tangled: if you meet any of your,

Other to brethren, bid them make haste to bring
A fraught of souls to Hells fiery King.

Exeunt. Finis Actus Secundi.
Act Third,
Scen the First.
Shipton deformed in her Cottage. AM I awake or in a dream? Ha! What dingy
Hayloft am I left in now? Am I once more become the miserable Inhabitant of my
poor paternal Cottage: Alas! it is too true! Is this the end of all my pride to
be again reduced to my pristine poverty! How vain is seeming glory! How
momentary are all the pleasures that airy spirits boast off! Decitful Devil am
I thy Spouse and so a witch and have no other habitation but where derision
daily laughs me in the face, Why do thou not build me Castles in the Air that
I might throw down Thunder bolts upon the heads of those that durst up braid
me? But ha! what is this! O hellish Cruelty! Am I Agatha Shipton, surely no!
Where Is thy captivating beauty did inchant insinuating Devils! Here Is nothing
left but the bare bones of a decayed face of four-score years of Age which
verifies the Proverb she looks as if the Hag had red her: Then farewell all
future expectation of true felicity I must,

Perforce conform my self now to embrace
The spells of utter darkness and disgrace.
Enter. Enter Beggars. Greg. How now runaway are you once more come to light
again?


Ship. Yes Hellibore.


Greg. Bore me no Bores do you see you are a Sow for boring of me for all your
crooked Nose.


Jug. Bless me she is strangely altered!


Bab. Sure it is not she!


Hodge Sure my Name is not Hodge: Come we come to bid you Money for the
purchase of your Cottage.


Ship. Keep your Money I want it not, nor any thing else.


Jug. Marry come up Potters are you grown so proud, I have known the time you
would have leapt at a crust.


Ship. Tormentors be gone and trouble me not.


Greg. Be gone, we will not or if we do we will send a whole Legion of Admirators
to perplex thee, all the Country shall know of thy Divilish deformity.


Ship. Are you presumptuous villainies.

stamps
Enter Radamon with Thunder and Lightning and scares away the Beggars. Rad. Now
am I come to supply the Company of those thou wise'y have dismissed and in
recompense of my love thou must practice Murder, Witchcraft, fatal Prophesies
and what not that Hell can boast off.


Ship. My former vows enforce me to enact what you desire.


Ra. Then i will promise thee: Henceforward thou shall be
Admired by Nations for thy Prophecy.

Exeunt with horrid Music, Scene the Second.
Enter Sir Oliver and Shiftwell severally, as in a Garden. Sir. Ol. NO more of
these costly feasts nor go ssipings.


Shift. Ha! Sir Oliver alone i will stand here and lissen.


Sir. Ol. No, no, I have a Plot to reassume my former an ancient way of living.


Shift, How will he leave us? O penurious curre!


Sir Ol. I Will repose my trust and Confidence in none but in my self.


Shif. Yes i will share with thee villain and put a stop to all thy cunning.


[Sir Oliver pulls out a Letter.] Sir Ol. This Letter does prepare the Physic
I shortly intend to administer to Shiftwel and his Wife.


Shift. Does the plot lie there, then be attentive ears!


Sir Ol. This Letter is an Imploration to regain my good wifes favor, with
numberless protestations never so disgracefully to live from her.


Shift. More Knave thou, but for my own ends i will prevent thee.


Sir Ol. But I loose time,

-- I must away,
In Plots there is no danger like delay.

Exit. [Going out drops a Letter!] Shift. Damned Imposture! but i will not rave
nor rage but smoothly put a bar to his conspiracy, and see he has left me
further instructions to proceed, i will read it.

[Reads the Letter.] My Dear.

Prithee pardon what I have done amiss, and though I have been a prodigal
wanderer once more receive me home into thy favor: It Is but Justice in me to
be submissive since I am so much guilty of ingratitude to the embraces of so
kind a Wife. I protest religiously never to go back into that path of folly
wherein I have been so long hedged, but post to come to thee, Embrace, Enjoy,
Live, and never again to live apart from thee till death seperates me from
being

Thy endeared Husband Sir Oliver.


Shift. Very good now I Will go place my Engine, and quickly quench thy new
desires.

We both have laid our plots and his design,
Which he think's sure's prevented thus by mine.

Exit. Scen. Third.
Moneylack Solus. HOw easy was I tempted to my ruin! I have a Niece said he,
now I know thou have a fair one two, whose amorus eyes have charmed my heart
and made me subject, to loves Deity! Maria! lovely Maria! to thy beauty I am a
Captive and ever dedicate my self to thy service. How the rushing waves of love
do tumble and beat upon my tender heart. My eyes are very dimne or almost out
with gazing on the Sun whose light is celestial, Me thinks I am in a dream.

All things to nature contrary go.
I needs must sleep and love commands it so!
[Sleeps and soft music plays and this Song.] MUses express in every line
A Phaenix virtues all divine!
Richest of Nature in whose Eye
You Gods may see Divinity!
O what a charm in her does dwell
None but the Gods themselves can tell?
Her beams the Sun at Noon displayes,
Unable to extend his Rays,
Did all but veiw her right they would say,
She is light and darkness Night and Day,
O what a charm in her does dwell,
None but the Gods themselves can tell!
[He awakes] Ha! me thought I heard a heavenly voice singing in the praise of
my Maria,

Blessed be that voice, for she is all divine!
And I Am but mortal then she cannot be mine!
Enter Shiftwel. But I mast cease.

Shift. My dear friend well met, have I not got a noble color.


Shift. Faith I have been hard at it, but why so melancholy? thoulookest ill
too, prithe the cause?


Mo. Truly I am ill, very ill and yet the cause --


Shift. What is it prithe tell me?


Mo. He is my friend I cannot well deny him, it is love.


Shift. Love! in what kind


Mo. In the best kind, the worthiest kind! A Cordial Honorable and Honest love.


Shift. Honest Love! Ha, ha, ha, Pox on such love, and all the Generation of
it. Hang honest love, hate honest Women, stick to a Cup of good Sack and live
as I do, and thou will never do amiss i will warrant thee. Good Money lack go
sleep upon it, so good night, to morrow morn i will see you again and hope to find
you in another mood. Honestly in love, Ha, ha, ha!


Mo. But ere you go a word: why d' you pretend
You have a friendship when you slight your friend?
By this ill temper all your love's destroyed
Neglect of kindness makes a kindness void,

Shift. Pardon what is past: permit me to implore
Your love to think I loved you as before.
And though my humor ushered out a jest,
It was no spark of falsehood from my breast.
Declare your mind your pleasure i will attend,
Damnation's due to him that fools his Friend.

Mo. Then as I go the story I Will relate

Shift. May heaven in all things make thee fortunate.

Exeunt. Scen. fourth.
Enter Hairbrain and Swagger. Hair. THis is the only life my brave Belswagger.


Swag. True, to spend a life musing at home, Pox on such sotts^ness.


Hair. No, no thank my stars I have thought of better things.


Swag. I but what shall we think of to get us a little more money, I have a
great fancy to take a ramble to London, and your Fathers name wont gain us
credit every where.


Hair. Not every where, but in some part of London i will engage it shall, but
however being so nigh home I Will make a s^ep to him, perhaps he may be orejoy'd
to see me and prove liberal.


Swag. Provided you will stay at home and grow reformed.


Hair. I Will turn Puritan first.


Swag. Nay I cant Imagine thou will leave me


Hair. No faith to leave thee in misery would to my conscience be

-- a trouble without end,
He Is no true Christian, that proves false to his Frind.

Swag. Enough I Am confident.


Hair. Well i will to my Father and return with all speed possible, the mean time
let no thoughts discontent thee, for as I have vowed

I Will prove thy Friend and thou shall see
I Will find a plot to make the Miser free.

Exeunt. Scen. Fifth.
Enter Shiftwell. WEll little does Moneylack think Maria's my Sister, in the
end he shall not doubt of his enterprise, I have left him in good hopes and am
stolen to have the other trial of my Amorous Dame, this is [ knocks the door,
and now good luck on my side.

Enter Roger. Whoe's there.

Shift. A friend.


To. What is your Name.


Shift. As you say that is to be thought on: I must pick-out some strange name.
Frank heart.


To. O Sir cry your mercy I remember you and your suit and will be very
serviceable to you, if now and then you will suffer me to be blithe and full of
merry moods.


Shift. Roger where have been prithee?


To. At the spiget Sir is it not a very rainy day?


Shift. Thou art well washed within I perceive, but Roger is your Lady at
leisure to discourse, your Lady said I see where she comes!


Enter Mrs Lovefree. To. Then it is time for me to be gone.


Exit Roger. Mrs Love. Ha! see where my Gallant is, I shall be courted
certainly and perhaps shall yield.


Shift. Madam your humble servant; let your lilly white hand enrich my lips.


[Kisses her hand] Mrs Love. You are very complemental Sir.


Shift. Faith Madam I love you for millions of causes and you shall find it so
if you p'ease in troth dear Lady.


Mrs Love. I Will try him a little.


Shift. And I Will try thee I Will hold thee a wager ere I have done with thee.


Mrs Love. But Sir, you have been a very deboist Gentleman I hear.


Shift. By what name pray Madam.


Mrs Love. Truly Sir my memory is none of the best I have forgotten.


Shift. So I believe: pray withal forget what you have heard and you shall
hear no more of it, and upon that promise, come shall we agree.


Mrs Love. To what?


Shift. To do as we would be done unto.


Mrs Love. How Is that.


Shift. I could show you Madam, with your good likeing.


Mrs Love. Some other time I presume Sir will serve.


Shift. Nay no more Courtship if you love me Madam.

Sings. O Cupid the Bow-man, I am not thy foe man,
For I love this woman as well as I know man,
And therefore I pray thee with mischief to stay me,
And quickly to lay me in bed with this Lady.

Mrs Love. What call you this pray*


Shift. It Is my imploration Madam.


Mrs Love. You are very fluent, it is mere flattery, they are most childish will
believe all that their Suitors say my most Poetical servant!


Shift. Most obdurate Lady, was ever widow so hard to win, sure her late
Husband got not her Maidenhead she is so backward.


Mrs Love. Adeiu Sir.


Shift. Not yet sweet Lady.


Mrs Love. Pray trouble me no more with your speeches,


Shift. O cruel reply to a Lovers suit!

Aside. how to dissemble a little if ever you felt this passions pain, if ever
you would pitied be your self, or if you know that love has power to kill,
commiserate a heart so swelled with love for you, that it will quickly break if
you deny the justice of my request, and if you are resolved to remain
Inexbrable, I wish my Fortune yours, and if ever you love you may be served so!


Mrs Love. I am but a Woman and these words would move a stupid rock to pity,
Sir I can resist no longer, your tongue has magic in it, you have overcome me
and enjoy your Conquest. But first your Name.


Shift. Frankheart.


Mrs Love. And mine Lovefree: then thou Frankheart takes mes Lovefree, without
any farther Ceremony.


Shift. A match, and one thing more I Will promise

My love to thee shall constant be and pure,


Mrs Love. Let us to bed then and the bargains sure.

Shift. So this plot has hit right and I shall find,

Riches enough to poise a troubled mind.
Aside. Exit. Scene the sixth.
Enter Shipton. NOw both in mind and form I am a perfect Witch, what hitherto I
have done has spread my fame far wider then it is, so that those who before
looked upon me as a crack brained woman, now begin to admire me, and esteem my
words as Oracles, especially our English who only come to be resolved of what I
know will come to pass of which here comes a great one.

Enter Abbot of Beverley. A B. Reverend Matron whose all knowing skill our
Country admires, part of which for my own interest I humbly come to crave.


Ship. Come near Abbot of Beverley, you are not so much disguised but the Fox
may be seen through the sheeps skin.


A. B. She knows me upon my life a witch!


Ship. It Is not those Clothes makes you a Lay person, no more then a long gown
makes any man a Lawyer, please you to sit you shall not go away unsatisfied of
what you desire.


A. B. I fear the downfall of our Abbeys, but ere I know my doom, accept this
sacred Relic lately come from Rome, a sure preservative against all troubles
and temptations.


Ship. O your Testimony is needless to the wise, of which I thus prophecy.

When the Cow does ride the Bull
Then Priest beware thy skull!
And when the lower shrubs do fall,
The great tree quickly follow shall.
The Mitred Peacoks lofty pride,
Shall to his master be a guide.
The poor shall grive to see that day
And who did feast must fast and pray.
Fate so decrees their overthrow,
Riches bring Pride and Pride brings woe?

A. B. This is omminous and touches State, thy insolence must be corrected.


Ship. There Is none that's wise will say so
They that a Prophecy of me require
Shall know the Truth though not to their desire
Construe it how you please, so I leave you.

exit. A. B. I fear she does presage too true, but ere I harbor such a thought
of my own downfall I Will cry vindicte on the witch that first induced me to it.

Then prophesing Shipton know
Beverleys great Abbot is thy Foe
And does protest as he renounces sin,
To null thy witchcraft ere sun set again.

Act fourth.
Scene the First.
Enter Abbot of Beverley and Beggars at one door, A Justice of peace Shipton
and Radamon at the other. A. B. BUt you must be sure to swear point blanck.


Greg. O through an inch board Sir, lie and swear to it, it is the least thing of
an hundred, besides what is it Beggars wont do for Money?


A. B. Very good but Mum, here comes the Justice and the witch.


Just. Here our Officer has brought the party our warrant did command, Now say
what you can aleadge against her and let her answer for her self.


Ra. Which shall be nothing


Aside A. B. I say Sir she is a witch, and hope to prove it here by testimony.


Just. Well declare what can any of you testify against her.


Jug. Sir an't please your Worship I have known her ever since she was a
Totterdas slut of fifteen, and she always threatened desperate things.


Just. Pish this is but talk, can any of you prove what you surmised for the
ground of your warrant that she is a witch?


Ra. I now to the probat, speak what you can.


Greg. Ant please your worship I can safely take my corporal oath that she is a
--


[Snezes.] A. B. Out Rustic are you not ashamed to sneze in the Justices face?


Hod. Ant please your Worship I dare take my oath too that she is a --


[snezes.] A. B. More impudence! this will ruin me.


Jug. and Bab. Ant please your good Worship to take our oaths, and we will
confidently swear she is a --


[snezes.] A. B. Divilish conspiracy! an Oath sticks in each throat and none
can gulp it out.


Just. Pray Sir what was your meaning to bring these Mechanics here to deride
me?


A. B. No Sir but --


Just. But what? know Sir I take it for an affront put upon me, for which these
your Testimonials shall all find severe punishment thus to upbraid justice, but
first say woman are you guilty of what they accuse you off or no?


Ship. No right worshipful Sir, and here I do defy what all of them out of
malice have most disgracefully termed me.


Just. Once more speak you, or any, or all of you, can you contradict her, can
you prove her a Witch?


Omnes. Yes an't please we can all swear she is a


[sneze.] Just. Out impudent Cattle: Clark drive them in, and then make each
persons Min^^mus to the County Goal, to answer to two Indictments. The one for
upbraiding and derideing me a Justice of Peace in Goram, the other for fasly
accusing Mother Shipton a woeman of good repute and conversation.


A. B. O I am undone! pray Sir be merciful.


Just. Reprobates away.
I shall be more severe to you if you stay.

Exeunt, A Beverley. Beggars, and Clark. Shift. A thousand thanks to your
worship for being just to innocence,


Just. It Is thy desert farewell.


Exit Justice. Ra. Now have I not played a true Lovers part*


Ship. Thou have.


Ra. Fear not these by blows

Dread not to meddle with concerns of State,
Guarded by Fins thou needst not fear thy Fate.

Exeunt with horrid Music. Scene second.
Enter Shiftwel Solus. I Am sorry and yet I cannot choose to laugh at my poor
friend Moneylacks misfortune: he loves, he loves honesty, nay my Sister too,
and yet I blame him: O that men in this world should be wrapped up in such dotage
and stupidity to what end? where is their aim? would any man be an Epicure?
can he boast himself so without the sense of variety! would he be a
Philosopher? can he imagine to find the stone by beating on one experiment?
would he be a Scholar and never turn over a new leaf: O ignorance
inexpressible! of which I thank my stars I am but little guilty off: the best
of knowledge is experience. A man may guess at many things, but when he has
found them experimentally he is confident, so say I, I thought my new provided
widow was much enriched, and now I have found it true, nay my pocket does
pronounce it is verity it self.

[shakes his pockets.] And now having got a second to my Knight, I hope I shall
cross the Proverb And between two stools sit sure:

The next plot, Moneylack's contrived for thee!
Then thou must play the cunning man for me.
Old crafty Whore-hound look well to thy hits
When friends are faulty Shiftwel finds his wits.
Exit. Scene third.
Enter Hairbraine Solus. Well was ever Heart so just with Avarice as is the
old dotard my Father, who at the approaching of winter must undauntedly expect
to kick up his heels, and yet to want the charity of crossing my hand with one
small mite of Silver, this is cold comfort to carry to my friend, and yet I
must return to him: but now I think on it Father since thou art so unkind to
give me nothing, i will be so civil to find a means to know when I shall have all,
i am Heir though a wild one: hereabouts lives the good old Mother Shipton,
she is wise they say and can presage prittily: this is the door sure i will knock.

(knocks.) Enter Abigal. Shiptons Maid. Abi. Your business Sir.


Hair. Sweetheart is the good Mother Shipton within.


Abi. But not at leisure as yet, you impart the occasion of your coming to me
Sir, I am her secret servant.


Hair. Why then prithe do know Sir Habbakuk Holdfast of this County.


Abi. Yes an ancient Gentleman, much diseased and lives nere Pomfret.


Hair. The very same.


Abi. And what of him?


Hair. Why prithe ask thy Mistress how long she thinks it is possible for him to
live.


Abi. See where she comes.


Enter Shipton. Ship. Sir I know the party you enqui e off, and concerning whom
I thus Prophecy.

The Grave provided has a room
For his old age: His hour is come.
So I leave you.


Exit Shipton. Hair. So sweet heart thank thy Mistress.


Abi. Nay but pray Sir stay, if you forget to open your purse, I shall not forget
to open my mouth: do you think I can live with thanks? the Belly requires meat,
and the back clothing, thank you quoth he, marry come up.


Hair. Prithee be not so hot, there is for thee.


Abi. Well I hope thanks will suffice you Sir, though it would not me, so
farewell Sir.


Exit Abigal. Hair. Flesh I have given her half my stock, I am poor and yet if
I have nere so little I cannot forbear to be liberal: well Gentillity spiced
with Poverty is the worst accomplishment a Gallant of this Age, can be invested
with: but to the repetition of the Prophecy.

The Grave provided has a Room,
For his old Age, his hour is come.
Heaven send the time: now with a heart fraughted with joy.

I Will to my Swagger and to him express,
The election of my future happiness.

Exit. Scen fourth.
Enter Shiftwell and Moneylack. Shift FAith her disposition is most strange.


Mo. 'Twas easier for to spurn the Cyclops Anvil down, and kick it into Attomes
in the Air then to obtain her love.


Shift. O think not so.


Mo. Have I not cause?


Shift. At last after a constant and heard pursuit she may be wone.


Mo. Could I but hope so much, did all the Stars malignant Influences threaten
Fate opposite to my happiness, I would not deem them worthy of my observation,
but persevere till I obtained or fell.


Shift. Conjecture still the best.


Mo. It Is easier to advice then to perform.


Shift. In these times young Ladies for a while do mantle their affection in
dislike, let not an ignorance of Virgins wills disturb thy breast with weak
despair.


Enter Maria and her maid alone. Shift. See and exalt your eyes to happiness.


Mo. Maria and her Maid, I see a Lute: let us escape the light and it is likely
we shall hear her sing.


Maria. Now give it me, is it in tune?


Maid. Yes Madam.


Mo. Forbear a while to play upon the spheers ye servants to the Deities, the
Gods will blame you if you keep the air of her all ravishing Harmony from their
ears.


[ Maria sings this song.] O sweet Diana virtuous Queen
That do affect the meadows green!
By heavens edict the guide of night
And do in fresh leave's woods delight!
Like to the Nymphs so suffer me
To conseerate my self to thee.
Thou that for lust did transform
Acteon to a Heart so charm
With virtuous spells each Virgins heart
That men may never them divert
From purity: or else pray make
Them other hearts for Virgins sake.
Exit Maria and her Maid. Mo. Now have you heard her resolution.


Shift. That she disguizes, not her love you mean.


Mo. True and I am most miserable!


Shift. But see here she is all alone: now speak to her I Will withdraw and pray
for your success.


Mo. Thanks good friend: hail Natures most perfect work, and the continual Idea
of my admyring Soul! however your poor Adorer Lady with a gracious look of your
beloved eyes.


Mo. Alas your smile Sir is in vain, for in short, if you will give me leave, I
call to witness every particular instance, and tends to any Christians
happiness, that I will never enter into Marriage: and for your saying you must
dye for me, I hold it but a common complement of idle Lovers, and therefore
wish you so much happiness to live without me.


Mo. O be not so unmerciful! had your Mother fairest Lady, Inexorable been, you
had not been, nor those crimson Roses ever spread upon your lovely cheeks: has
Nature liberally heaped the rairest perfections she could give Mortality to no
end? surely no; as you are a daughter of a beauteous Mother, she being dead,
you enrich the world unto you by your issue. Be not so cruel then, my fair
Maria, let not your tongue degenerate from your form.


Ma. Sir you have heard me speak what I intend.


Mo. Be not a Tygress Lady.


Ma. Sir I must leave you, and leave you this humor, I respect you as you are
a Gentleman of my acquaintance, but if any more you trouble me with your Court
ship I shall utterly have you: so farewell.


Exit Maria. Mo. Does a fair face presage a cruel heart! Nature is grown
decrepit sure, and all things sublunary err against her rule of order.

This is my fate, the fates I cannot prevent.
And till the end I know not their intent.

Shift. What is she still obdurate?


Mo. Beyond expression!


Shift. Yet let not these doubt puzzle you, you will be happy, and enjoy her, I
am confident you will: this is a common custom in young hearts.


Mo. But this is a fixed Star.


Shift. Fixed in your heart it seems, but otherwise I doubt it, herefore in the
end doubt not you of your desire.


Mo. You have stirred a feeble releif within me, friend that my dear Maria may
be warm and I will nourish it to some height,


Shift. A necessa^y none must want which do
Desire fruition of those whom they woe.

Exeunt. Scen. Fifth.
Enter Captain, Priscilla, and Mother Prue. Pris. CAptain you promised me a new
Gown and have broke your word I desire therefore to be acquitted your company.


Cap. Pretty Pris. my Tennants are slow in paying their Rents I had not failed
thee else, but thou art very fine as you are.


Pris. That Is without thanks to you, it is no cost of yours: I am beholding to a
better friend for it.


Pru. But in truth Captain you must become more liberal to my Daughter for the
future.


Pris. What do you think I Will venture my reputation for your Oaths, flattering
words and a little foolish pleasure?


Pru. No indeed she must be maintained with other Materials: If she goes not
fine and gallant, she must bid farewell for ever to all hollidayes: the
Honorable and right Worshipful will not care for her embraces then.


Cap. Are you against me too Mother? I thought you had had a greater kindness
for me then so.


Pru. Indeed Captain you know I have much respected you: but you must think of
providing better for my Girl.


Cap. Pris. I love thee, give me thy hand, and though I never made use of my
Credit in that kind, i will vow before my Mother i will take thee up a new Gown to
morrow,


Pris. Perform't and then you see Priscilla wi'l requite your kindness.


Cap. Then we are agreed, i will do it, now will I joak with my reverend Bawd a
little. My wonderful old Mother methinks you are grown merry of the sudden,
well is there any woman in Europe that can remember the building of the
Capitol, I dare pronounce it is you: would I had as much money as you have spent
in Almanacks since you could make use of them, I should be as rich as the grand
Govenour of a province.


Pru. Well well Captain though you make a mock of my age, you would be glad to
live so long your self.


Pris. There is but small hopes to imagine he will ever arrive to that Antiquity,
his debauchness will shorten his days, besides he is so quarrelsome I wonder he
has lived till now.


Cap. Pish you prate, but is supper ready Mother.


Pru. Yes but we must stay for Esquire Hairbrain.


Cap. Will he be here?


Pru. Yes, and his friend Mr, Swagger.


Enter Hairbrain and Swagger Pris. Long looked for comes at last, Mr. Hairbrain
your welcome


Hair. Thanks my dear Pris.


Pru. Mr. Swaggar you are welcome too.


Hair. Mother your daughter looks exceeding well methinks.


Pru. Venus be praised she needs no art of painting, her face always wears its
native colors.


Pris. Paint out upon it, I should be loath to dawb my face with ointment.


Cap. But many of as good features, have not so nice a stomach.


Pris. I credit you, and have heard many rail against it as if they scorned to
adulterate their faces.


Cap. You women no dissemblers are, but he that can live without you is a happy
man.


Hair. But we trifle time, Mother lead way we will follow come Swagger within we
shall find a Mistress for thee.


Pris. My Mother has a score or two at your service.


Swag. Thanks my fair Priscilla.


Exeunt Hairbrain Swagger and Pris and Prue. Cap. Well I must expect little
enjoyment of dear Pris. while Hairbrain's here, would I could win her affection
to my self I would carry her far enough out of all their reaches. She is
Proxrots only child and she is rich.

She may turn honest after she is a wife.
However money makes a happy life.

Exit. Finis Actus Quarti.
Act fifth,
Scen first,
Enter Shiftwell with a Letter in his hand. SEe this Letter will ease the heat
of my troubled friend, and with more spirit make him enact what I must desire
him to perform to the life: It Is now high time to place my Engine, and indeed
to work it, Sir Oliver keeps close to his study -- it is to no good intent.

And I must watch his cunning to prevent

I Will strait to Moneylack and put my design in execution.

Enter Moneylack. But see ye how fortunately he comes, my dear friend read that
and then judge of my prevalency with Maria.

Opens and reads the Letter. Sir having received a particular account of your
worth and quality I am sorry I have so long repaid your affection to me with
disdain. I would not have you triumph that I have so recollected my self, nor
yet despair in any thing to the contrary, for at present I can only satisfy
you that I esteem you as an accomplished Gentleman.

Maria.

Is this her own hand.

Shift. Is this mine? I am sorry you guess my friendships to be flattery.


Mo. No more, I credit you, and by this means inspired a second breath into a
heartless Lover, it is beyond the reach of Oratory to declare thy gratitude. Nay
the well wishes of your friend have the same power to implore the like success
in all your own concerns.


Shift. You are very bountiful, but now I must make bold to employ you in a
business wherein if you fail to be either secret or diligent 'twill be my utter
ruin.


Mo. Then if I be may the destruction fall upon my head, declare.


Shift. This it is, when the gossiping was, after dinner steping into the
garden I espied Sir Oliver murmuring to himself, and thinking it to be no
goodness; squatted under a bush and heard the Rogues design, very speedily of
leaving my wife and returning to his own and with her to remain till death them
depart, after he was gone I found (...) Letter (which he had dropped) which was
to be sent to his wife with (...) great imploration for pardon for former
errors, and protestations of ^n^ire love upon a favorable acceptance. Now to
put an obstacle to his intent, I would have you in a Sergeants habit, go and
arrest him at my suit upon two actions, one of Trespass, and the other of
Battery, (for I Am sure he has battered my wife) then threaten to carry him to
the Counter, and in the interim i will come and make up the business; and assure
thee Maria in the bargain. Time and place to meet with him you shall receive in
a note from me this even.


Mo. Then if I fail to do it to the life call me Hypocrite.


Shift. Enough, farewell for the present.

exit Moneylack. Now for my widow.


exit. Scene second.
The Scene draws, Swagger making a pass at Hairbrain, Hairbrain having his eye
fixed on a letter, the Captain keeping of Swagger, Priscilla, two other whores
and Mother Prue. Swag. REfuse my Mistress health, it is a crime which nothing
but his death shall expiate have I been ever his continual friend, and am I
slighted thus, i will raise all the dreadful furies from the infernal shades to
stigmatize him full of my revenge.


Pru. Come, come, I Will have no quarrels in my house.


Hair. Mum Impudence! I Will meet his fury.


Swag. How now Hag, can you hinder quarrels in a Bawdy House.


Cap. If you can, you have more power then a Constable, but let my entreaties
beg a reconcilement.


Swag. They are in vain and do but exasperate the prosecution of my just
revenge advance Sir.


Hair. Stay beast unworthy of the name of man, much less unworthy thy of the
name of Friend, first peruse this letter and then I shall allay the seeming
confidence you have in your own valor.


Gives Swagger the Letter. Of what moment is extravagancy, or to what end
serves a riotus life, seeing both the one and the other are subject to
vicissitude and ready to yield at the least puff of wind that blows from a
conatry shore! O my disobedience! To forsake the intern love of a Parent for
the fruition of thy lascivious company! where is my fathers golden Crop, I
should have reaped? given to my Uncle whose love is (...) cold to me as death
it self. Now hell hound do thou sec unto what distress by thy allusions I am
now driven too, read there how my misery is characted; revenge is sweet.
Advance therefore for I am resolved to send thy base polluted soul into the
flames of Phlegeton.

Pris. Nay Hairbrain prithee let me persuade thee.


2. W. And Swagger let me persuade thee.

3. And Gentlemen pray let me persuade you both.


Pris. I expected a more familiar way of scuffling then this.


2. W. I thought each man with his mate would fight
Battails not full of danger but delight.

3. W. Soft kisses, sweet embraces, and such sport
As often's used in the Venerial Court.

Hair. Out Whores trouble me not.


Cap. Methinks I find a sudden alteration within me, affection tha^ even now
was so powerful, is of the sudden turned to utter hate, and my heart for
bringing forth any fruits of love to Priscilla is as barren a

The sand that lies on the sea shore.
I will embrace that love that hates a whore.

Pru. Well Gentlemen if you are so mute or mad I know not which nor I don't
care whether, we will be so civil to leave you, my Lady will find other Gallants
to be more gently embraced by, so farewell ha, ha, ha.


Exit Pru. and all the whores laughing. Manent Ha. Swag and Cap. Swag. Now Sir
here take my sword and make a passage for my so^ that it may leave so vile a
habitation as this body.


Hair. No here take mine and do me that courtesy,

-- For length of life to me,
Is but the product of more mirsery.

Cap. Pray Gentlemen without being thought too rude, may I desire to know the
cause of your Agrieveance.


Swag. Then know Sir, to this Gentleman my friend bey on expression

-- I have been too rude,
I Am guilty of the sin ingratitude.
By my persuasions to lead an Extravagant life, he has lately lo^ a fair
estate, and on his fathers death bed merited his curses: for which I thus fall
his sacrifice.

offers to fall on his sword
Hair. For heaven sake forbear: so much a fresh is my love kindle that I have
both forgotten nay and forgiven all, your confession to me, since all is past
recovery, is a sufficient satisfaction.


Swag. Is this not policy to delay my death?


Hair. By all that's good it is not if you dare credit me.


Swag. You may be confident I will.


Hair. Then let all pass, we must now join prudence to our poverty, and by a
serious life regain the loss of virtue.


Swag. With a heart as full of holy ardencie as those that devoutly implore
zealous mercies from their Saints, or as votaries from their Goddesses.


Cap. Pray may a third man intervene that has not over virtuously inclined
himself and make a joint resolution with you for repentance.


Hair, and Swag. With all our hearts, but what is this.


Enter Despair. I am Despair and come to tell you, late
Repentance nere can make you fortunate:
Of all your pleasures take a second view,
And let Despair your comfort be: adeiu.
Exit. Hair. Hell take Despair it shall never enter into my breast.


Swag. Nor mine.


Cap. Nor mine but see another apparition!


Enter Hope. I am that virtue which does underprop
The fainting heart of man with comfort: Hope
And to you discontented now appear
To bid you sl^ght Despair and not to fear,
That if you do confide: your Hope will be
The anchor of your true Fidelity.
Exit. Ha. Hope thee I embrace, and friends let join hand and hearts in the
height of sorrow to have the greatest Hope, by some learned Authors

-- We Will take advice
To embrace all virtue, and avoid all vice.

Exeunt. Scen third:
Enter Shipton. NOw am I experienced in the Magical Sciences, as much as ever
was the famed Medea or Circe. whose cuning has left a wonder to the world, so
shall Shiptons too! but to what end? what will the applausive clamor of the
world benefit me, when endless torments are my only comfort. But why do I suffer
this consideration? ha^ not my deeds merited the fruit of Hell? but how? Is it
a sin to covet riches when one suffers the contempt of the world by reason of
poverty? yes coveting ambitiously is execrable, but having a heart open to
embrace the delusions of the Devil, that, that alore is damnable! then
detestable Shipton look into the glass of thy infirmities, which are so many
they almost work a despair in me to cry peccavi^ yet have we not powers above
that, over hels prevalency are predominant? then will I cleave to them! but is
it not too late? sooner I confess would have been better! but surely a heart
penitentially inclined is not contemptible! then Devil look to thy self, thou
think I am thine, but thou shall find ere long thou art deceived. From thee

And all thy Hellish Sciences I now regret,
Heaven will forgive if Hell I do forget.
Exit Scen fourth.
Enter Radamon. HA, ha, ha, how I laugh at a poor crew of simple sinners who
pursue temptation more then it does them: who will scruple to swear dam me,
since it is Allamode? and who will avoid living vitiously admirable in this
world though they purchase Hell in the next? witness poor Shipton whose Name
echoes out admiration, to whom I have been a small attendant, but for no small
wages, I serve for souls but here she comes.

Enter Shipton. Ship. Ha! here is my soul catcher! now all goodness be my
assistance we'ome my Radamon, thou art come just in the nick to accomplish an
earnest request I have too thee?


Ra. Name it and it is granted.


Ship. Do It and i will confirm thou art a miraculous Devil! by all the Hellish
conspiracy thou ere wast master of, I do conjure thee to empty the Sea and make
me sole commandress of all the riches therein lie expanded!


Ra. Impudent Witch! what has in joined thee to that arrogance to desire that
which all the power Hell could ever boast off never was able yet to grant.


Ship. So his nonperformance of

Aside This shall be my plea: why Radamon go to the sum of our contract art
thou not my servant.


Ra. Yes I have been but now come in my Masters name to command thy soul.


Ship. My soul, ha, ha, ha!


Ra. Yes thy Soul witch do laugh.


Ship. Yes and does defy thee, know vaunting Devil by hells instigation I have
hitherto lead a vicious life I have now found out the way to virtue, which to
follow I am so undeterminably inclined, that no temptations shall withdraw me
from the perseverance of so good a resolution.


Ra. Conceited woman how do thou flatter thy self with impossibilities:
consider thy innumerable frailties, consider thy daily practice of Murder,
Witchcraft, fatal Prophesies and what not that has merited hells endless
torments: consider these rightly, and thou will find they are so pondrous they
will weigh down the thoughts of any true felicity.


Ship. Delude me no more, begone and tell thy Master, Shipton walks in a path
will make her truly happy by avoiding Hell.


Ra. Thou lie, thou art mine, resign thy self to me and that presently or i will
raise hels fiery King himself withal his dreadful furies to drag thee to his
ever burning palace!


Ship. Do, I dread them not.


Ra. Junx elke tu tenon Emon potidoma on Andra.


[Pluto with other devils with rakes enters] Plu. The cause of this great help
thou craves?


Ra. See where she stands with such audacity Hell cannot show the like
precedent.


Plu. Have you expressed our commands.


Ra. Yes and she scorns them.


Plu. Shipton thou art mine.


Ship. Yes and you can take me.


Plu. Seize on her straight.


[The Devils poke with their rakes and cannot touch her] Plu. What are you
grown feeble? i will join my strength!


[All cannot touch her.] Plu. What preservative has she got against our power?


Ra. Too sure she is sheilded by those powers above, to which ours is impotent!


Plu. We must use other means Shipton farewell,
Pluto still hopes to see thee hang in Hell.

Exit all Devils with horrid music. Ship. I must now then conclude this to be
the last attempt, still, still, protect me ye

-- Powers Celestial and i will impart,
Your glorious Mercy with a thankful heart.

Exit Shipton. Scen. Fifth.
Enter Sir Oliver and his man David. Sir Ol. Now David how think thou of my
cunning.


Dav. Very well truly Sir, you have a brain i will, say that for you.


Sir Ol. Poor Shiftwel it troubles me though. O me what a brave man he was, no
meeting at the Horse race, Cocking, Hunting, Shooting or Fowling at which
Shiftwel was not a principal Gamester, and companion for the Nobility.


Da. I Sir he has paid deer for those follies, and it is but justice that such
as soar above their pitch, and will not be warned by his example should like
him share in the miseries that wait upon it.


Sir Ol. Thou say right David, and I in pity have for these few years lent
him a helping hand to raise his fortunes, but now for my own self interest sake
I must leave him, therefore David run and fetch my boots and bring them to the
Inn, i will haste before.


Da. I am gone Sir.


Exit David. [ Sir Oliver goes off. and comes on again presently.] Mrs. Love
free looking out at her Belcony. Mrs. Lovefree. Bless me, sure that is my old
Knight that creeps along so or my eyesight fails me!


Enter Money lack in a Sergeants habit. Mo. I arrest you Sir, by the name of
Sir Oliver Whorehound.


Mrs. Love. Ha! it is he and arrested. I must down and know the event.

[descends and stands within the Arras.]
Sir Ol. Arrest me Sir at whose suit?


Mo. At Mr. Shiftwells suit upon two actions, with two or three executions
which shall grind you to powder when I have you in the Counter.


Sir Ol. At Mr. Shiftwells suite, thou do belie him Varlet, he I dare lay
will weep when he here is on it.


Mo. Yes like a Millstone.


Enter Shiftwel. See where he comes you had best tell him so.

Sir Ol. Nephew Shiftwel you are come most opportunely to free me from this
Band^g. I know you gave no way to it nor had you any reason so to do.


Mrs. L^. Bless me who do I see; Shiftwell is thy Name? O deceitful man!


Shift. Are you a Sergeant acquainted with the danger of a rescue, yet stand
here prating in the open streets, the Counters sure a safer place to parley in.


Sir Ol. Your reason for this disgrace to me?


Shift. It Is but justice in me. The reason you shall know hereafter.


Sir Ol. Pray here me speak.


Shift. Whilst I like the adder stop my ears, or did I listen, though you spoke
with the tongue of Angels I am not to be altered.


Sir Ol. Pray make me sensible of the offense I have done, if it be any, and I
will make the best of my estate to end the difference.


Mrs. Love. How does my heart now pant bewteen Hope and fear, to know the
period of this business,


Shift. He show you some mercy which is this. That I will not torure you with
false hopes, but make you know what you shall trust too: I have seized upon
your estate already, yet that shall not suff^ therefore Sergeant do your duty:
yet stay Sir Oliver, I have conditions to propose, upon which I Will free you.


Enter David. Da. Sir I have been at the Inn and finding you not there came
back to look you.


Sir Ol. My journies stopped now David, Mr Shiftwell you may propose but I
imagine the next Tavern, or some other place might be more convenient.


Shift. With all my heart lets to the next Tavern, go send for two or three
friends and discourse of it there at large.


Exit Sir Ol. Mo. and Shift. Da. Ha! a Sergeant on my masters back, Shiftwel
has napt him, now all will out as i will go hear.

Exit.
Mrs Love. Now is my shame as evident as day light, O unfortunate woman! that I
should have the ill-luck above all other men to meet with him, that I fear I
shall find more then an honest man: but come what will, I must follow and in my
Knights cause outlook the world with confidence.

Exit.
The Scene a Tavern. Sir Oliver. Shiftwel. Moneylack David and a Scrivener,
Shiftwelis wife Maria and Sir Olivers wife apart as in another room. Shifs. Now
Scrievener read the propositions.


Scriev. That for the injury designed to Mr. Shiftwell you will freely give him
a hundred pounds yearly during his life, and after his decease to Maria.


Mo. Ha! to Maria, I cannot conceive the reason, but i will be silenced till the
future.


Scriev. Secondly to make Mr. Shiftwels wife jointure a hundred pounds per
annum more during her life, and lastly to keep his wife and family twelve
years, and if at the twelve years end you intend to leave them fairly to give a
quarters warning.


( Sir Olivers wife steps out) Here Is one says no to that but the rest for your
freedom Sir Oliver I must consent too.

pu^ o^ her ma^k and scarf Sir Oliver. Ha! my dear wife.


Sir Ol. W. You have been a hopeful husband, but blame me not if I have paid
you in your coin.


Shift. I am amazed.


Sir Ol. W. Nay stare not Mr Frankfort that was pretended, you and I have been
a little better acquainted, but not with a thought that your wife and my
husband were such sure bedfellowes


Sir Ol. Well then wife I hope you will pardon me.


Sir Ol. W. I do and expect the same from you.


Shift. Well I have lost a good generous customer by the bargain, and (...) be
contented, but Sir Oliver you freely seal to these articles the last only
omitted by your wives in junction.


Sir Ol. Withal my heart, upon the giving me a bond for redelivery of my
estate.


Shift. That I will, only one thing more remayns: that upon Maria's acceptance
of the person she affects for her husband, you will pay down the marriage
portion in your hands remaining.


Sir Ol. Most freely.


Shift. Then pray witness the sealing and delivery.


They seal and deliver. Now Sir Oliver what were have done we cannot undo,
therefore Mr. Moneylace: discover your self and accept my Sister Maria for your
wife.

Ma. And I accept him as my only happiness.


Mo. Dearest Lady you have raised me to a joy beyond my thoughts may heaven
requite you for your kindness, and I wear out my life to do you service.


Sir Ol. Bless me here are wonders in ridles.


Mo. Sir Oliver I must crave your pardon for my rudeness.


Shift. There is a general pardon granted, and now good wife lets see how our
ends will meet again.


Sh. W. I accept thee freely.


Shift. Then we are all friends.


Enter Sergeant. Ser. I arrest you Sir.

arrests Shiftwel.
Mo. Arrest him Villain?

offers to draw.
Shift. Pray Brother with bold a little, at whose suit?


Enter Mr Scrape. At this Gentleman's.

Mo. Then I Will end all. My noble Uncle!


Scra. I have a request to take my security for this Gentleman's debt, he is
become my brother.


Scra. Your Brother?


Mo. Even so sir, to morrow I Am to marry this Gentlewoman his sister: release
him therefore pray sir for your nephews sake.


Scra. That I will Sergeant be gone I have satisfied you.


Exit Sergeant. And pray Gentlemen pardon my ignorance of all these proceedings
and Nephew I wish you much happiness.

Mo. I thank you Sir, come brother now to make all friends.

a dance
They dance. Ship. Now lets in and drink each others health in

Sack which the Gods did Nectar call,
So end our mirth in a high Festival.

Exeunt Scene Ult.
Enter Radamon apparelled like a Gentleman and Shiptons Maid with a pu^se of
Gold in her hand. Ma. TO be sure sir the next Nap she takes if I get not the
jewel ab^ut her Neck from her: I dare promise to give you your purse of gold
again, and that would go a little against my conscience.


Ra. Be very vigilant and fail not, then i will make thee Mistres of all I have
promised thee.


Ma. Especially for my having you sir for my Husband.


Ra. O I cannot avoid that, I love thee too well my pretty smug face,


Ma. I thank you sir.


Ra. But I may stay thee too long, thou may miss an oppotunity: fail not to
meet at the place I Have appointed thee.


Ma. Truly sir I will not,


Ra. Sure this plot cannot fail, which that it may not

Aside. I Will to all my charming conspiraces Will bend,
Shipton thou will hardly shun Hell in the end.

Exit Radamon. Ma. Now let me consider of the preferment that will quickly fall
upon me, must I that have been obeysive to an old woman's humor become a
Mistress of command: must I that have scoulded, nay many times scufled for a
penny, become Mistress of a purse of Gold? must I that have many times stole out
in an even to kiss an Hostler, be embraced by a Gentleman, a handsome
Gentleman; with a fine head of hair, neat body, straight leg, nay and another
pretty property worth all the rest, and then thou art fitted for a Husband
Abigal i will warrant thee. But I have heard our next neighbor goody Belch often
complain of her Husbands beating her, but I says i will pummel my Gentleman if he
beats me, but let me see, I must find out a gate to carry out my Gentility,
will this Gate do?

wa^ks abou No it sents too much of the serving maid, well then so

walks again No I stretch out my belly too much and that needs not, for my
Husband does promise to get me with child quickly, and then e'faith my belly
will stretch out it self.

O this then will serve

walks again.
Enter Shipton. Ship. Ha! huswife is this your making haste when I send you of
an errand, what purse have you got there? and what fine Gentleman are you to
have for your Husband?


Ma. Pray Mistress be not angry and on my bended knees I will relate the story.


Ship. Cease that Ceremony and begin.


Ma. Why truly forsooth at the Corner of this field I met with a very Gallant
Gentleman who gave me this purse of gold, and promised to morrow morn to marry
me, if I would but steal that jewel about your Neck from you.


Ship. Indeed forsooth, well open your purse and tell your gold.


Ma. O heaven Mistress it is all stones and dirt,


Ship. Yes and he that gave it thee a Devil, for none else would insinuate thee
to rob me of this jemne of my true happiness.


Ma. A Devil! O how I find my fears increase.


Ship. Go in Girl i will follow and protect thee.


Exit Maid. Ship. This was Radamons device: but arm me still ye powers devine
that no Devils instigation does betray me: protect me even now for I find a
sudden slumber seizes me.


[Soft Music and in Angel descends with a Book.] Shipton despair not but in
hope grow strong.
Thou shall find Mercy though thou have done wrong!
Read ore this book and in it thou shall find
The sum of thy desire to free thy mind.
From fear, thy soul secure from harm
Of any Devils! it is a happy charm!
[ The Angels ascends and Shipton wakes.] Ha! what is this a book? the cover
bears the type of innocence, i will ok in it.

Shipton

In thy sorrows be not drowned
From above thou have mercy found:
Think not repentance comes too late
If it is unfeigned thou art fortunate!
And though the Devil does endeavor
To entrap thy sinful soul, yet never
Yield, but his attempt resist,
And he his suit will soon desist.
O endless comfort! now attempt what you can proud Devils, but ^s! what noise
is this?

Enter Pluto and all the Devils. Well your business now? you see I do not quake
That ere while made you and your Furies shake.
Plu. We know thy power and thy magic skill, and for the entrease of the
same, we present thee with this paper wherein is a spell of Prophecy to fore
tell of what was, what is, and what is to come. In his paper there is another
spell powerful to command any spirit of w at nature soever,


Skip. Well I accept your presents but spurn at your society, all your
emptations are airy and too weak to besiedge my fortyfied soul.


Plu. Was ever Devil gull d so:

Well lets descend and all Hell shall howl
This full fortnight for loss of Shiptons soul.

[ Exeunt with horrid Music.] Ship. So let them roar.

Whilst I do all their Hellish Acts despise
The higher powers make me truly wise.

The Epilogue.
NOw you have tasted of our homely cheer,
Pray tell us how you like it: was it dear?
Or else where lay the fault? pray gallants tell,
If It did displease it was ill, if not 'twas well,
But may the Ladies smile on it i am sure then,
'Twill be approved off by the Gentlemen!
So pleasing both we are in hopes we may
Expect your company another day.
An after Epilogue spoken by Shipton.
IV'e escaped the Devil but I fear you most,
If your frowns appear poor Shiptons lost*
But now I look again, methinks I spy
A gentle pardon in each gracious eye.
Visit me oftener and in time you will see
Poor Shipton may deserve your plaudite.
FINIS.

