THE ENGLISH ROGUE A NEW Comedy. As it was acted before several Persons of
Honor with great Applause.

Written by T. T.

Licensed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for William Thackeray at the Golden Sugar Loaf and William
Whitwood at the Golden Lion in Duck-Lane, 1668.

The Actors Names.
Plot-thrift The English Rogue. Cozen His Companion. Gonzetto A great Lord of
Venice. Avaritius A Userer. Cornelio A Citizen of Venice and a Coffee-man Don
Aquinto A Mountebank. Eusames A young decayed Gentleman. Florentio His friend.
A Captain Pego. Gonzetto's Man.
Women.
Lucibella and Clara Daughters to Avaritius. Priscilla Their Maid. Ermenia A
young Lady contracted to Eusames and beloved of Gonzetto.
The Scene Venice; To my worthily honored friend and Patroness. MRS. ALICE
BARRET.
Madam,
SO many already have assumed it as a privilege, that it is now become a
current custom to prefix a Dedication to some one, whose Judgment and
ingenuity may both grace the ambitious Author, and protect his weakness,
otherwise you had escaped the trouble of being Guardian to this Brat, whose
Parent was unable to maintain it. To be plain; I have cast it at your Door,
neither better nor worse to expect its fate: yet with some confidence of a
favorable reception, since your Generosity and Nobleness were ever wont to
correspond with Charity: whereof my self am sufficiently sensible. I beg your
pardon for this offense, but cannot promise to do so no more. However I submit
to your worthy self, whose intimate goodness and serenity have hitherto so far
obleiged me, that I must ever (as most due) subscribe myself (as really I am)

Madam. Your most humbly devoted servant to command. Tho. Thompson.

The Prologue.
AT a New Play all Poets must tell news.
Ye'r welcome to the labor of a Muse;
Who does implore (and it is your pity worth
Your helping hands to bring her firstling forth,
And let me tell ye, it is most necessary
Since it is her first you act more kind and wary,
Should you be rough and harsh in what you do,
The brat might prove defective long of you.
S'lid then all is spoiled, your expectation crossed
The Muse discouraged and her labor lost.
Come, come, for once be kind and ruled by me
And let your smiles crown its Nativity.
We question not Lucina's help, if you
Vouchsafe her safe delivery 'twill do,
And that with Pomp and State, whilst ye are by
Your presence makes it a solemnity.
The beautys present blazing starr's appear
As good Omens to this our hemisphear.
Nor can we, whilst such luster they dispense,
Doubt of a favorable influence.
But I digress, the gravid Muse I left
Of all succor except bare hopes bereft.
She Is in the Midwives hands and much endures
And cannot be relieved; except by yours.
Exit.
A NEW COMEDY Called the English Rogue.
Act the First
Scene the First.
Enter Plot-thrift and Cozen. Plot. I See I Am Fortunes Favorite to the End
In a strange place to meet my dearest Friend!
But prithee tell me Ben. how has thy pollitick pate maintained thy Nobleness?
I am sure you needs must thrive, Since by your last Letter to me at Madrid I
was informed you have banished the Conceit of Marriage.


Coz. O yes, I thank my Fate that fancy flew quickly, and ever since in your
Art I have been no small practitioner.


Plot. But how did your Mistress Selina relish it? That Admirable Doxie!


Coz. Doxie indeed! whose lascivious life, had it been concealed till I had
married her, had ruined me for ever!


Plot. What Man, the chaste, the virtuous Selina!


Coz. No the unchaste, vicious Selina! whom (after my Annual services of
Adoration to her Shrine, and unfeigned vows of being hers constant for ever) I
found to be as foul within, as I esteemed her fair without.


Plot. Why this is fine ^ faith. By Jove Ben: I Will tell thee these women are
just like weather Cocks, that turn too and fro at every puff of wind: So they
are as fickle in settling their Love on any one man, as a Phanatick Parson's
unwilling to alter his Religion when he is forced to Conform or loose his
Benefice.


Coz. I have found it so.


Plot. It Is a remarkable observation, that any man that has eyes and ears must
of necessity credit it: but there are some such Buffs in this land, that will not
believe what their ears have heard, or eyes have seen: but take their Wives as
we do Conies to pen up, whilst every Dame to requite the kindness, will find a
convenience to tempt the next young Gallant that passes into her Chamber, and
there discharge the burden of her desire without the least consideration of
making her Husband a Cuckold.


Coz. That Is most certain.


Plot. Most certain and you so certainly besotted as resolve to marry; I
thought the little practice you had made in my Art might have been a sufficient
Emblem to demonstrate all women's levity.


Coz. Prithe no more often: I am as far from having a good thought of women's
constancy, as ever I was, and once you know I was your only scholar, had your
cunning ad ungues, (and if without boasting) can say I still retain it.


Plot. Then let us plot and practice: this is a City affords good faces, we will
instantly go view it, you one way, I another: but be sure before you strike
search out the nature of the creature.


Coz. Never sear it, I Will warrant thee boy I hit right.


Plot. That done you cannot miss entrance into any Venetian Dame, for my part I
doubt not my rogury will never fail getting me a Mistres, though it were in
the Land of Chastity.


Coz. I confide something too in mine.


Plot. Come then lets to our Inn, there we will sever:
As thou have begun, good Fortune, help us ever!
exeunt.
Act first, Scen second.
Enter Gonzetto solus. WHat sudden alteration do I find,
That does so please and yet torment my mind!
I know no reason for it: there was nothing in the Masque last night but what
was pure and splendid.

-- Ladies as fair
And beautiful as is the morning star!
Now I have pri d into secret Art,
That Ladies glittering Eyes can wound a heart!
I must to fair Ermenia a captive be,
I Am her Adorer, she my Deity!
Enter Ermenia and Florentio. But here she comes: she'es Beauties Paragon!

Erm. You have your answer Sir and may be gone. To Florentio.

Flo. Since Madam. I Am dismis'd so scornfully,
To move a change I must presumptious be,
Think on the good Eusames mis'ries, he
Who like a careful penitentiary,
Bedewes his bed with tears, as they are due
To discontent, and all for love of you!

Erm. Why Sir for me? he knows it is in vain
To hope Ermenias love to reobtain.
First let him change his coat of poverty,
To wealth and honor: and then think of me.

Flo. Let not your height contemn his humble state
But Saint like pity the unfortunate!
He once was high too, but in each degree
Where he did love, he loved with constancy!
Since first he loved you, to that love he is true,
Yet suffers Martyr-like for love of you.

Erm. I believe once he loved me well indeed,
And mine did equal his (if not exceed) aside and sighing.
But I considred not the miseries
Of marriage then, which now I do despise,
A maiden life all others does excel:
Pray tell Eusames this, and so farewell. offers to go out.

Flo. Pray Ladystay: one request does remain.
He ask no more,

Erm. Then that you shall obtain.

Gone. She turns again, I doubt be will in the end
Make a deep interest in her for his friend! aside.
But be it how it will, I Will overhear:
I am too lofty to be touched by fear.

Flo. Are you resolved always to live amaid?

Erm. I mentioned not how long but thus I said
A Maidens life excels all other lives:

Flo. But Maids contracted are as good as wives! (spoken whisperingly)

Ermenia swounds. Flo. O me! she sounds!

Gone. That story in the ear
Has made her pride fall, and my spirit fear.

Ermenia breaths. Gone. She breathes again,

Flo. Madam how are you now?

Erm. Well, but better had I made no vow
To poor Eusames: Florentio we will withdraw.

Flo. I Will follow Madam, your will is my law.
exit Ermenia. Ye powers of love and friendship crown the end
Of this design with comfort for my friend!
exit Florentio.
Manet Gonzetto. Great God of love, what mighty power unknown
Have thou now used to me, more then thy own?
It was thy conduct sure and thy design,
And not thy power alone that vanquished mine:
As a great Captain in the wars to his Name
Of every conquest gained, joins all the Fame,
Though 'twas not only by his power got
But by the Armies by his Conduct brought:
So when thy power could not do it alone
Thou then did lead her troops of virtues on?
And now too soon I feel by my surprise
Thou have not only darts but peircing eyes!
Then as thou art great and powerful be Just!
I am enforced to love, and love I must.
Enter Captain. The news Captain, any Letters from the Army yet to his Highness?


Cap. Yes Sir last night.


Gone. Are the contents divulged?


Cap. Yes some two days since half our army was besmeared with blood, the
other half took flight, and the famed Carionil with some number of chief
Commanders were surrounded with a multitude of Enemies, and almost hopeless of
ever seeing Venice again: yet when they heard our noble General cry, fight,
fight for Venice till you dye, they with such vigor redoubled their blows,
adding wounds to wounds, blood to blood, dead to the dead, till by the favor
of that potent God, with whom it is to give the victory, they through the
Multitude quickly run their way, and after for that night sounded a retreat

And in the interim receiving a supply
Early next morn refac'd the enemy,
Whose Army in number doubled ours, but at the first onset with manly courage

-- We dispersed them quite,
Part we took prisoners, part we put to flight.
The rest lay gasping on the ground frustrate of future hope or remedy,

-- Few escaped alive.
Of lasts nights news this is a Narrative.

Gone. I joy we were so succesful in the end, though to our loss at first.


Cap. I could have gladly wished my self there, but that I was commanded to the
contrary.


Gone. I credit you Captain, you have done your Country good service.


Cap. My Lord I must retire.


Gone. Farewell good Captain.

exit Captain. I know not what to think much less to do!
I am in the flames and now I must go through?
Why should I dote on one that is so mean?
But she that is lovely to love is a Queen!
Ermenia thee I love, thy love I crave
Which if my wealth and fame can gain I Will have!
I fear no rivals, i have a double fate,
Too wealthy for contempt, too high for hate!
exit.
Scen third.
Enter Florentio and Ermenia. Erm. Florentio what iv'e said i will do, provided he
Without contempt a constant Lover be.

Flo. Madam!
Be you as kind as he will constant prove
And make his joys as perfect as his love.
I dare protest by 'very Deity,
He Will never be guilty of inconstancy!

Erm. Then whi le I live i will love him: tell him this
Though many court me, yet my heart is his.
exit Ermenia
Flo. So I have prevailed and for joy could fly
To tell Eusames of my victory!
O may the god of love, as he is begun,
Unite these too contracted hearts in one!
Enter Eusames. See here he comes: i will stand aside
-- To know how his thoughts fixed are
Whether to hope or fear or to despair,
Or whether he will into a passion fall,
For i have a double joy to banish all.

Eus. How joyfully the birds with warbling notes
Salute the morning through their gentle throats!
But day no sooner does appear to me,
But I complain a fresh of misery
In love! imperious love!
Assist a wretched youth thou caused all this
And it is thy power alone can work my bliss!
I cannot, dare not hope my friend can be
So prevalent to regain her love to me.
She is grown high, and yet must higher grow,
While I, for love of her, must fall too low! offers to go out

( Eusames turns back and falls into a trance.) Flo. Stay, stay Eusames!
What struck dum with fear
Of the sad news you do expect to hear
From me?

Eus. (...) fear
It is too (...) for me to hear!

Flo. For love I moved, but she her love denied,
And having so resolved, she thus replied:
A Maiden-life all other lives excel,
Pray tell Eusames this, and so farewell:

Eus. Then love farewell for ever!
And though from all my joys I am betrayed
By thy resolve to live and dye a maid,
I will not wish that thou may live and dye
Such an unpittied, martyred one as I! offers to go out.

Flo. Be not so hasty: there remains behind
Asentence from her, you will esteem more kind
Then was the other Cruel!
-- While I live i will love him: tell him this
Though many court me, yet my heart is his.

Eus. O tantalize me not with hopes so vain!
Can she so hate, so quickly love again
As if she had her former scorn forgot?

Flo. If you can think me false, believe me not.

Eus. Then I must credit it, O how the joy
Of thy success my miseries destroy:
My heart's enlivened with a fresh relief,
And double Comforts do arise from grief!
So Palms pressed down, do ever rise the more,
And spices bruised smell sweeter then before.

Flo. There Is nothing now remains but your adress
To complete hers and your own happiness,
For if a Maidens vow was ever true
No doubt she loves as fervently as you.
You need no (...) since you know the way
Haste too her then, it is dangerous to delay.

Eus. I will, yet ere I go must recommend
A parcel of poor thanks to you my friend.

Flo. Spend no more time in complementing me,
My recompense is thy felicity.
Could thou enjoy Ermenia for thy Bride
I for my worthless pains was satisfied
But you loose time.

Eus. He that a loyal friendship does regard
Heaven with hapiness will him reward.
exeunt severally.
Scen fourth.
Enter Plot-thrift and Cozen. Plot. ANd how and how? prithee begin, how are all
things at Court?


Coz. O right to a hair, as I could wish or desire, the Ladies very pleasant
and free, the Gallants very complacent and simple, out of which I have picked
out one to play upon, he is in quality and ability one of the chief, and as I
take it a very fine fool for our purpose.


Plot. His Name?


Coz. Don Gonzetto, and for mirth to make up your Roguery, there is one Pego
his man is reported for the prittiest dreaming Puppy that Venice can boast off.


Plot. Why then I perceive the Master and man are like to be finely handled if
they come into our ^tches, but how have contri'd it?


Coz. O this great Don is very desperately in love with a young City Dame, and
I perceive by his clipped tongue he wants a good Orator.


Plot. With a young City Dame?


Coz. So I was informed.


Plot. Good luck send it be the same I heard off, for now i will tell thee Ben.
part of my progress, I was no sooner got into the body of the City, but I was
crep into a crowd of acquaintance: Ladies by whole sale, and Citizens by
Bakers dozens, amongst which I think I have picked out two of the most precious
Ningles that the whole City affords: Fellows as rich as they are simple, and
that I am sure is beyond expression; the one is S. Don Aquinto a high and
mighty Mountebank who swears he has done many wonderful and remarkable cures,
but if I don't catch his coxcomb into a trap, that all his medicines shall
never draw him out, let him report me no man of my trade. His whole discourse
be it where it will, so there be any body to hear him, is of his cramp stage
talk, of his great Cures of the Uvula, the Choliac a passio, the Polippus, with
the rest as Morbus Gallicus etc. which is enough to tire a crew of patient
Saints were they his companions, but that he has this good faculty, when the
reckoning is called, his purse shall be sure to pay fort; the second is one
Seignior Cornelio a very comical Coffee-man, and such another Ignoramus, but
that his tougue does not so much betray his simpleness. But here is the point,
these two Coxcombs, are very passionately taken with two young Ladies,
daughters to one Avaritius a rich reported Userer, and in short by my discourse
finding their own weakness and my efficacy in Art Amandi very nobly retained
me for their Agent.


Coz. There indeed you have got the start of me, but i will follow close.


Plot. Hark Ben. Let it be your care to bring Conzetto to our end of the Town
among my crew that we may tie them all of a not, and then we I so swing them!
this evening we shall be at Cornelioe I Coffee-house.


Coz. Then there i will be sure to meet you with my Don.


Plot. Do so for as I remember I was also informed Avaritius had a lovely Niece
too, courted by many high Persons of which perhaps he may be one, and then our
plot lies in a lump and must needs go current.


Coz. But have you yet seen any of these Ladies?


Plot. Yes, and they are as pretty Creatures as ever I see, fair and each has a
promising countenance of a very free disposition, the Mother of the two Sisters
was an English-woman. I have a plot for them both.


Coz. But when will you put it in practice?


Plot. Forthwith, lets go visit them instantly: our (...) are suitable to the
Mode, our Persons proper, and for our tongues they need no tipping; but one
thing always observed Ben. let not our Roguery extend to any criminal fact,
that may merit the halter or the like, but tend only to a self interest: then

None will endeavor to condemn his Fate,
That plays the Rogue, and injures not the State.
Exeunt.
Finis Actus Primi.
Act second,
Scen first.
Gonzetto. Cozen. Gone. SIR, I like you well, and be assured that all my powers
shall be employed to do you service.


Coz. Ye'are truly generous.
And it is my happiness I (...) could hope for
After so many storms of adverse fortune
To relish safety in so still an harbor
And meet the favor of so good a Patron
Just in the nick of my despair. But Sir,
My future diligence and industry
In whatso're you use me, shall declare
How I can love and serve so good a Master.

Gone. Nobly spoken: accept me as your faithful friend.
My house is yours pray Sir be bold and welcome.

Coz. I shall now take the confidence to think
That all past troubles of my youth, were of purpose by fortune meant, to make
me relish now
These sweets more tartly.

Gone. Very likely;
And I must further add, that all her former kindnesses,
Did less oblidge than this fingle one
Of making me the object of your friendship.
But come Sir, will it please you take a dish of Coffee to digest the news of
the Diurnal.


Coz. With all my heart! Sir I attend you: pray Sir --

Gone. 'Twere better be absurd than, trouble some.
Exeunt.
Scen second.
Plot-thrift, Cornelio, Aquinto at the Coffee-house. Plot. COrnelio.


Cor. (...) your word.


Plot. Here Is your Enemy Don Aquinto the Mountebank.


Cor. How!


Plot. Mum! take no notice till you meet occasion.


Cor, Enough,


Aquin. Here a dish of Chaclates.


Plot. Of your best spanish.


Cor. You shall sir.


Plot. Well, and how goes (...) packquets, do the remedies go roundly off,
ha'you good takings, ha?


Aquin. Troth well*

I find the people free and much inclined to do themselves and me good.


Cor. This is he that strives to dam my trade by making strange speeches
against Coffee -- but I shall have something to say to his balderdash
complication of hard words presently -- are you for Coffee sir?


Aquin. No sir, the Berry is much degenerated from its proper virtue here in
Venice by an absurd commixture which renders it very unwholesome.


Cor. Sir mine is as good as any's in Venice.


Aquin. That may very easily be when there is none good at all.


Cor. It Is the property of fools to condemn what they understand not.


Aquin. Of fools Sir?


Cor. Yes Sir of fools. He that is disgruntled at that Sir is a fool, -- I think
(...).


Aquin. (...) Sir. Aquin draws.


Coz. Now it works in faith.


Plot. Nay good Aquinto --


Cor. I, I, do kill me, you have no remedy against an hemp halter I hope: there
I ^pt him again.


Plot. Nay pray sir be p^ed -- see here comes strangers


Gonzetto, Cozen. Cor. Sir I have sold Coffee this twenty years and have lived a
man of reputation.


Aquin. What man of (...) would ben^ with such a Rascal, that has lived upon
parched beans, and boild water these twenty year by his own confession.


Gone. Come pray Gentlemen let us moderate the business.


Cor. A man of honor, a pitiful Mountebanck, a dull decoying Fortune Tellers,
an impudent close-bugete'd imposter, one that gets his living merely by
choking the multitude with hard words, and a little dirty dogs-turd compounded
with a strange conjuring charm, Hyperbolloticon-bombon or the like? a man of
honor? ha, ha, ha. That excellent in faith.


All: ha, ha, ha.


Cor. Ye shall but here, pray give me leave, this is he that cures all
diseases, and performs all Chyrurgical operations. He dexterously coucheth the
cataract or suffusion, helps all rheumes, specks, Oungula or the nail in the
eyes, dimness, pearls, weakness. He has the best remedies in the world for all
pains, sickness Megrum Vertigo or the dissiness of the head he cuts and cures
cancers, wens, sore-breasts noli me tangere, as also Morbus gallicus, or the
French POX, (in great letters) running o'th reins, and in a word all diseases
and distempers incident to the body of man woman or child be it boy or girl,


All, ha, ha, ha ha.


Plot. (...)


Co^. (...)


Gone. (...)


Co^. (...)


All ha, ha, ha.


(...). (...)


Aquin. (...) in some, but in you they are (...)


(...). (...), ha, ha, ha.


(...). (...) you and I have (...) a progress in your love with fair (...) a
plot to make ye happy.


Cor. With (...) shall we finish and come to the purpose?


Plot. We are not far off -- (...) [they whisper.


Gone. Well (...) must needs be time.


Cor. (...) stay.


Plot. I will.


Gone. (...) to pay, take money.


Coz. (...).


Aquin. (...) I shall be even with (...) incivilities.


Cor. (...)


(...). Farewell sir


Cor. A man of honor, farewell Dr. Distaff belonging to the wheel of Fortune.


Plot. I Will be with you (...) prefixed without fail.


Aquin. Your servant sir.

Exit Gonz: Coz: Aquin:
Cor. Welcome Gent^

So (...) no way you say but by this (...) and her fathers consent?


Plot. No, for put case she loves, as I dare warrant she does yet there must be
something closly acted, that may make it sure, and not when we have brought our
building to the height to be ruined with a puff.


Cor. Well I am resolved to spend all my estate in contrivances but I will have
my mind.


Plot. And I mine -- aside.

But come lets to the Tavern, and there we will plot to accomplish all.


Cor. Shall we, a match then come on,

Exeunt.
Scene third.
Avaritius, Lucibella, Clara. Ava. WHat stories are these I hear, Lucibella, ha
what are they Lucibella? speak Clara, concerning two Youngsters. that were
tampering to speak with you under the notion of business? what say you?


Clar. Only two young Gentlemen that desire your leave to try our wits by
spending an hour in discourse with us now and then.


Ava. S'lid i will h'none of that, if ye have a mind to husbands ye shall love and
like where I please or i will know why not.


Luci. That will be pretty in faith, so we shall couple with two old Citizens,
that are already grown out of fashion for want of the rudiments of Gentility in
their youth, together with two much brooding over their books and bags in their
counting house.


Ava. Come come I have a couple of Husbands for ye, grave and rich; and have
ordered them to come to day upon a likeing, in the mean time trick yourselves
up handsomely and prepare to entertain them with discretion.


Cozen. Plot-thrift Plot. S'lid lets baulk the old man, stand close


Ava. Well I must straight to the Exchange, where possibly I may meet them and
conduct 'em hither.

Exit.
Plot. Save ye Ladies! we are somewhat bold to interupt your privacies.


Coz. But we hope to find an easy pardon.


Luc. That Is easily granted Gentlemen.


Plot. No doubt on it.


Coz. I durst have thought as much ere I came in.


Cla. A very pretty humor; their both handsome men, pray heaven I misconster
not their errand.


Plot. Madam so strange a curiosity has urged me to this boldness, I found it
vain to resist: And to be plain we came with a resolution to love and serve
you; smile on me? Madam, I Am yours body and soul.


Luc. Very blunt and pathetical!


Cla. Troth I see I must be fain to put my self forward, Sir methinks you might
be doing.


Coz. Doing Madam?


Cla. Yes doing something.


Coz. Faith any thing with you Madam.


Cla. Ha ha ha, now he comes on two fast:


Plot: Now am I so mad with love, that by my virginity, I shall never be sober
till you quit me of that oath.


Luc. Then you may chance to dye raving.


Plot. Say you so? If I do, I am resolved my Ghost shall walk and haunt you
till it fright you into the same condition.


Cla. How shall I know that?


Coz. Now I think on it my affection's in expressable.


Cla. Well excused however.


Plot. Come what say ye, shall we make a mad match on it


Luc. As how I pray?


Plot. Why, make a resolution to love one another, reciprocally in spite of
Fate and the malice of the Devil.


Luc. Suppose I make this blind covenant, and you or I after we have feasted
our appetites with those delights, may chance to clog our stomachs, and then
turn to neglect, and fail in your appointed Articles, what shall be the forfeit
for every such default?


Plot. Why faith on your side to be tongue tied, and lie alone.


Luc. Good, and on yours -- Cuckoldome, or so.


Plot. Agreed in faith.


Luc. In faith agreed.


Coz. One denial more, and by the love I bear you, which is as safe and sound
as any roach, i will turn Astronomer and hate all women in general.


Cla. Well, hanged for once i will make a blind bargain on it and buy a pig in a
poke?


Plot. And how goes squares Ben.


Coz. Faith, very roundly! we have made a short cut on it.


Plot. So, so, then we will be merry, laugh and lie down, dance and sing in spite
of the old man's opposition, but first lets sing, what say ye Ladies?


Luc. What you please.


Cla. I, I, come come, we will help to make a Chorus.


Sung by Plot-thrift and Cozen. What need we use many beseeches
Or trouble our brain with long speeches.
If we love it is enough
Hang Poetical stuff
As the rule of Honesty teaches
Chor. If we love it is enough
Hang Poetical stuff
As the rule of honesty teaches.
2.
Why should we stand whining like fools
Or woe by platonical rules
If they love we will repay't
If not let 'em say it
What need they the help of the Schools.
Cho. If they love etc.
3.
But this must be won by Romances
And that by verse and fine dances
A third does delight
In a song yet at night.
You must crack a string which she fancies.
Cho. A third does delight, etc.
4.
This must be extolled to the sky;
That you can get, do but flatter and lie.
But that Ladi's for me
That loves fine and free
As real and ready as I.
Cho. But that Ladi's for me
That loves fine and free
As real and ready as I.

Luc. I protest a very pleasant one.


Cla. Of your own composure I suppose.


Plot. An abstract drawn from our humor and disposition, Madam.


Cla. It Is well ayr'd too.


Coz. You jeer Madam.


Cla. You mistake Sir.


Enter Priscilla. Pris. Madam Lucibella your Father's coming down street with
two Gentlemen homeward.


Plot, Upon my life Aquinto the Mountebank and Cornelio the Coffee-man, what
shall's do Ben.


Coz. Let 'm come weel not bauk them weel wheedle them into an opinion that we
were acting in their behalf aforehand that they might be entertained with more
familiarity and greater courtesy.


Plot. And for the old Man, Ladies with your leaves we will undertake to allay
his pettish humor.


Luc. Well Gentlemen use your own discretion.


Coz. And you yours with your new Suitors.


Cla. Sir, they enter.


Enter Avaritius. Ava. Come Daughters -- how? -- here is a new trick in faith --
Pray Gentlemen what acquaintance have you here.


Plot. O Sir,


Ava. O me no O's sir, ye owe me nothing sir.


Coz. But pray sir.


Ava. Pray me no prays sir, pray to God if -- ye'are so minded sir, Pray sir
quoth A --


Plot. S'lid sir ye are a man of the perversest humor, that ever I met since I
sucked milk; what are you sir, that you will neither be spoken too nor give an
Answer.


Coz. One would ha'thought your age and long experience should have taught you
more civility to strangers, then thus to tyrannize, though in your own house.


Ava. You say well sir.


Clar. However they come to know it, they have nick't his humor right, The old
man's chollar falls.


Plot. Now sir ye'are something more a man --


Ava. What then? speak.


Plot. Why pray sir.


Ava. Pray sir again?


Plot. -- Have but a little patience and i will tell you the whole story. --


Ava. Story? that were fine in faith, do I stand here to hear stories? Sir tell
me the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth.

quoth he.
Coz. Why so ye shall if you will but lend an ear --


Ava. No Sir i will lend neither of my ears.


Coz. Then keep 'em till the Pillory claims it own.


Luc. Nick, Nick.


Cla. Excellent!


Plot. I see he is incapable of any civil society, i will e'ne rant him, Ben.
observe my style.


Coz. Enough, proceed.


Plot. Venerable Sir, I shall take my leave -- hark ye sir, I shall have
something to say to ye in some other place, for extortion and bribery the two
damned sins 'oth age.


Coz. You may remember sir the defference between you and young Mr. Lavish
concerning a morgage, where you had like to have screwed him to part with one
half of his Estate to secure the other.


Plot. And then to stop his mouth compounded with him for half in half.


Ava. Gentlemen --


Coz. Nay this is not all.


Coz. Remember sir how ye abused his Higness bounty, which was to be
distributed amongst six Justice of Peace for their good service ith sickness
time, when you with your two comrades, got it into your own hands, you cast out
the other three Justices and proved your own carvers.


Ava. How --


Plot. Nay sir there is a Petition like to be exhibited by Justice Gizard and
the other two injured parties, 'twas a high indignity, and his Highness must
know it.


Cla. It Is fit he should by this light.


Ava. Well Gentlemen, I must withdraw, I beg your pardons -- O my sad heart,
what to do, what to do!

Exit
Luc. Is he gone?


Plot. I Will warrant you for ever returning till we are gone.


Coz. We netled his Justice-ship in faith.

Enter Pris. What news now.


Pris. Here Is Don Aquinto and Cornelio are very desirous to see you Ladies.


Plot. Prithee entertain 'em a while ith Hall and show them the fine pictures.
Ladies these are the men whose spokesmen we are to represent, and first Don
Aquinto the mountebank, is one who spends all his estate besides his little
brains in inventing hard words for sublime Courtship and employing others to
take presidents out of the greatest wits in Christendom for that purpose.


Coz. The other in his expression so low and blunt, that an hour with him is an
absolute divertisment.


Cla. Hark is not that their tread? -- noise of feet.


Plot. Doubtless, let us retire Ladies for fear of maring your pastime.


Luc. Pray do if you please, behind the Arras away, away,

They conceal themselves.
Luc. Clar. Aquin. Corn. Aquin. I have heard of Cherubins and Seraphins, but
never saw I Angels clothed in flesh before.


Luc. A high sublime conceit.


Plot. Pox 'twas a complement an Age ago made to two Persons of Honor by a
studient of Cajus Col. an intimate friend of mine.


Cor. Mrs. Clara, let me not live to fill one dish of Coffee more, but dye like
a fool suddenly without making my will if I don't love ye -- most heartily.


Cla. Thank ye, thank ye.


Aquin. All the Celestial beauties of the heavens, compounded in one only
object, could not more afflict and press these weaker optics which (as those
lesser lights called stars, do vanish and disappear at Phoebus rising glory)
are as it were obscured by your too glorious aspect.


Luc. Methinks you should have done well to have brought a preservative against
weakness of eyes along with you knowing what a powerful object they were to
encounter.


Aquin. True Madam, but men that are employed about affairs beyond the moon,
cannot stoop to consider matters subluminary; those men whose larger souls
still aim at things immortal, know not how to condescend to converse with
inferial mortality.


Cor. I Madam, you may say what you please, but I protest my heart is as full
of love, as a Church bucketfull of water.


Cla. Good, or as an empty oystershel's full of brains.


Cor. What you please Madam.


Luc. You much oblidge me Sir
And I could wish ye had spent your Ceraphick courtship.
On a more worthy and deserving object.

Aquin. Pardon me Madam,
I must not bear you set so low an estimate
On your high merit: I must be bold
To rectify your judgment, and inform you
Of a mistake; that none but your fair self
Durst have committed without apparent (...),
Namely that you should seem to intimate
Your matchless self, excelled by any she
How beauteous soever. I could (...) over
The various features of all foreign beauties
English, Italian, French and Dutch
Such vast experience has much travel taught me
With the Fashions, Customs, Laws, con^ions
Allowed and ratified to each of these:
And yet all these and many more famed places
Are destitute of half that excellency
And divinity you still bear about you.

Plot. What a plaguey company of lies the Rogue has wound upon one bottom.


Luc. Your language Sir has spoken you wordly, and withal I am so well
certified of your generosity and nobleness, that I must needs blush and own the
conquest you already gained over my affection and weakness. I heard your noble
Friend speak in your (...) as greedily as griping Misers listen to the wills of
of their deceased frinds wherein they are possessed of large reve^.


Aquin. He Is my dearest and most faithful friend whom I am proud to entrust
with the disposeing of my most nice affairs.


Luc. Sir, he shall be ever ^ceptable as from you.


Aquin. Immortal thanks, divinest Lady!


Cla. Well Seignior Cornelia; here is my hand, and as I love pi^y -- thou art a
pretty fellow, would I were a young wench for thy sake.


Cor. O Madam, I take you at your wish in faith. I Will en'e to the old Justice
immediately: slid i am so orejoy'd, -- I know not how ^y breeches hang, farewell
sweet Madam: I must straight to Plot-thrift and tell him this good news,
farewell sweet Mistress.


Luc. Sweet servant yours.

Exit Cor.
Aquin. Madam some extraordinary affairs exact my presence at Exchange, I
humbly take my leave and shall never be forgetful to employ my friend in my
own absence to commemorate my best services to your honored self, your servant
sweet Ladies.


Both Yours Sir.


Luc. We Will (...) you out.


Aquin. By no means Ladies, you shall excuse me.

exit.
Plot. Cuz. Luc. Cla. Both. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Luc. How now Gentlemen, could you hear all this while and not be realous.


Cla. Faith Coz. how did like it, did we not play our parts worthy your
applause.


Cor. O incomparably.


Plot. Faith I seared all had been spoiled, yea jeered them so home.


Luc. Nay thei'r less beholding to Nature for allowing them so many ounces of
beard, scearsly to one dram of apprehension.


Cla. Come what shall we do.


Luc. I what indeed.


Cla. Faith and troth lets take a walk together, and so with a littla fresh air
digest our late pleasant banquet.


Coz. With all our hearts, and then we will consider more leasurely about
accomplishing our desired ends.


Plot. Faith well adviz'd, come lets away we shall ore-reach their graveties.

-- As wisely said Lucullus
Old men are fools, when young men seek to gull us.

Explicit Act second.
Act third,
Scen first.
Enter Eusames about to throw himself upon the point of his sword and Florentio
putting it off with his foot: Eus. Pursue me not Florentio! let me dye,
Since she is guilty of inconstancy

Flo. Can you so much your Christian thoughts forsake
To murder life for a false woman's sake?

Eus. Could you endure so much misery
Still to be dying and yet never dye?

Flo. Can you so soon to misery bid farewell,
To meet with endless miseries in hell?
Suppress this passion or it will undo
Those noble arts which you have studied too,
Confound (what hitherto you have gaind) a Fame:
Destroy your parts and murder your good Name.

Eus. What friendly councel's given with what ease
By those who never felt the like disease!
But I (...) ^ower to perform what you give:
(...) afford me means to live!
(...) delay longer dispense
No (...) my patience,
(...) thoughts forthwith fulfill,
(...) pursue my suite and (...) my will. offers to kill himself.

Flo. Once more consider: that you run a course
against honor and virtue! nay what is worse
Offend those sacred. Deities, who preserve
Our lives that we their pious Laws observe.
It Is not your dying thus that can recover
Your lost content, for though a desperate lover.
Self murder makes you dye in flames for ever,
From whence there is no recovery! no never!

Eus. (...) and will forgive!

Flo. When you destroy that life which they did give^
(...) glorious a crime to commit
Out of presumption of a (...) for it.

Eus. These morals all are (...) away in me
Who (...) and misery!
I am past reason therefore (...) in^ain
(...) things again.
Since fair Ermenia does so inconstant prove,
(...) (offers again)

Flo. (...) forbear!
(...)
(...)
That (...) before my Eyes!
Or do you think Florentio (...)
One happy hour (...)
(...), which cease to do
Or else by your dying I Will dye too!

Eus. I live Florentio that thou may not dye.

Flo. Friends self murder's Friendships cruelty.

Eus. But how shall I Ermenia's love obtain,
To hope for favor now is but in vain?

Flo. Nothing impossible with the powers above.

Eus. O that they would but petty one in love!

Flo. Come fear it not: all things will work forth'best
Mean time to sleep, your passion wants some rest.
Exeunt.
Scen second.
Enter Plot-thrift. and Cozen. Plot. NOw what think you on it Ben?


Coz. Faith but indifferent.


Plot. I have a double fear: I feel a kind of an itch of honesty within me,
down right honesty to Lucibella.


Coz. And I to Clara as I am a Christian.


Plot, But I fear 'will never agree with us long.


Coz. As much fear I.


Plot. And then the small comfortable lives the poor wretches will have.


Coz. Nay I must confess they will be well hoped up with two staid husbands.


Plot. Yes like town bulls riding upon all they can leap. But hangh't handsome
English Girls and good fortunes may tie us close to their tails in time.


Coz. O fie banish the conceit of Marriage! (in a jeering way.) what loose all
the pleasures of a single life, to be constraned to the humor of one foolish
Woman? no visiting of the Taverns without a peal from home; no courting of a
handsome Lady without a score of scratches and the like; these were your own
words sir.


Plot. Well they were so, I deny it not, nor am I yet resolved to do it: yet I
am prompted much, Money and Beauty are two taking bates and must prevail.


Coz. Well conclude and i will join with you, either put forward or draw off: I
dare swear they are honest.


Plot. Of that lets make a sound trial.


Coz. Agreed.


Plot. To what an honest part my labors tend,
No roguery but has some honest end*
Lets to them.


Enter Lucibella and Clara. Coz. See here they are,


Plot. So, so, now Ben. follow my free fawning way directly and observe my
motions.


Coz. Enough.


Plot. O my dear Luci.


Coz. O my dear Clara.


Luc. O dear Gentlemen.


Cla. Well met.


Plot. Whither march you Ladies?


Luc. To visit sir.


Plot. Who Lady? Man, Woman, Boy or Girl or what?


Luc. You are very inquisitive.


Plot. It Is the nature of the Country Madam.


Luc. It Is not your Nature I hope.


Plot. Perhaps while I am here, no longer.


Luc. Pray heaven it be not. (aside)

Why to tell you true, we are going to neither man, woman, boy nor girl, but
yet may meet many.


Cla. We are going to the Physic Garden at the City gate end.


Coz. Please you Ladies we will wait upon you thither.


Plot. What say you Madam?


Luc. Pardon us fir, not for want of Love or respect but fear of our Fathers
meeting us, or some of his Acquaintance, we desire to be excused.


Cla. Besides it may be a means to obstruct our future appointment.


Coz. You council well Lady.


Plot. I must confess that love is ill grounded that destroys it self through
ignorance, yet Ladies ere we part lets beg the happiness of your company to
take a glass of wine, here is a private Tavern at hand, besides your Masks
blinds all discovery whatsoever.


Luc. Though Sir to grant your request is a thing as unusual with us, as those
that never did, yet to assure you of the good esteem I have of you and your
company, for my part I consent.


Cla. Then I must yield too.


Coz. You honor us.

Exeunt.
Enter presently again in a Tavern with a drawer. Plot. Please to name your wine
Ladies.


Luc. What you like best Sir.


Plot. Canary I esteem.


Luc. It Is granted.


Draw. Canary: you shall Sir,

Exit Drawer.
Plot. Now Lady we are blessed above the proudest of our former wishes, this
happiness was like a thing desired but far from expectation, as men forlorn and
wretched being content to dye and sure to suffer, wish to live, although they
fully (...)


Coz. (...)


Luc. and Cla. We (...)


Luc. And hope (...)


(...) (...)


(...) (...)


(...) (...)


(...) (...)


(...) (...)

(...)
Plot. Here Is the w^ and now (...) fill out drawer.


Dr. Here (...) i will (...) (...)


Plot. Well (...)


Dr. Yo^ (...) (...)


Plot. (...)


Luc. Nay (...)


Plot. (...) dishes full (...)


Luc. (...)


Coz. (...)


Cla. Thank (...)


Plot. What thinst you of an Air or two. (to Cozen


Coz. 'Twood not do much amiss.


Plot. Ho Drawer.


Enter Drawer. Dr. Your will Sir.


Plot. Are the old Musicians in the house?


Dr. Yes Sir.


Plot. Employed?


Dr. No Sir.


Plot. Send them in.


Dr. I shall sir.

exit Drawer.
Plot. Now Ladies are you for a melancholy Love story, or a merry Tavern catch?


Luc. O fie, Love in a Tavern is as ridiculous as wine in an Alehouse.


Enter Musicians. Plot. Then come musicians lets hear the Tavern catch I gave
you when I was here last.


Mu. Yes Sir.


The Song.
COme let us be frolic and call for our tipple,
Our pockets we will empty and our veins we will fill
For Sack we will not lack, nor will we be griple
But carouse in despite of the two Topped Hill
Chorus. Parnassus shall pass us
Nor will we enquire
For the front of the Musses
It Is Sack we desire.
Let the Frenchman delight in his white wine and red
His vinide paree is but pitiful geer
It Is the brave Spanish liquor that brings us to bed,
It charms all our senses and frees us from fear.
Cho. We Will banish the Rhenish,
White Metheglin and brown,
It Is Sack we do love, so let it go down.
they drink round.
Plot. How like you this?


Luc. and Cla. Very well.


Plot. There Is for your pains. gives money.


Coz. There Is something more. more money.


Mu. Thank you Gentlemen.


Plot. Farewell, Exeunt Musicians. my heart misgives me. softly to Cozen.


Coz. I am something startled too. softly again to Plot.


Plot. Hanged now we are in we must through.


Luc. Come, come Gentlemen, underfavour this whispering I fear portends no good.


Coz. No hurt I Will assure you.


They draw the Ladies severally into two back rooms. Luc. Whether tend you Sir.


Plot. Only into the inner room Madam for more air.


Cla. Your meaning.


Coz. Very harmless.

Exeunt.
Enter Drawer half drunk. Dr. Now while they are whispering may I civilly steal
a glass of wine of two: I have enough I confess: but the Proverb says enough
will have more, and I will not cross it, yet this Canary is such a parlous
liquor twill turn you a man's head so long round that at last it will set it
where his heels should be (drinks) as for example. reeles.

A Bell rings within. But stand up Zachary the Bell does ring,
I dare not stay delay does danger bring.
Exit.
Enter Plot. and Luci. Luc. For shame sir cease to prosecute a suit so beneath
your worth, and prejudicial to my reputation: I must not hear you.


Plo. What a misery is this to be forbiden to complain.


Enter Cozen and Clara. Cla. Fie as you are a Gentleman urge it no more.


Coz. Reflect upon my misery and imitate the Gods in mercy.


Cla. Rather the Fiends should it be so.


Luc. I can now think you no better then a counterfeit Atheist that would
desire thus to allure me from my purity.


Cla. The Gods see every thing: Nature nor Art can any thing conceal from them.


Luc. Should I be guilty of so foul a fault, I should impoverish my self to
nothing banckarupting my good Name and reputation, which who wants is a
companion for such wild people as never heard the Name of virtue, riches are
fortunes trifles, neither to be despised nor doted on, but well used.

Poor virtue is most rich, and virtue it self
Was by the Ancients held the greatest wealth.

Plot. In your discourse you are too much a Stoic.


Coz. Young Ladies should not be so utterly void of all compassion.


Luc. I must leave you.


Plot. Not without hope of comfort, let me but taste of that which Crowns you
famous, your Virginity.


Luc. I trespass on my Modesty to hear you, come sister. offers to go out.


Plot. Stay Ladies.


Luc. You have changed your countenance, your looks now promise you civil.


Cla. You are something altered too. to Coz.


Plot and Coz kneels. Plot. Ladies thus low we bend, and rather wish our knees
grafted to the ground, then rise without a double pardon: not only to forgive
but to forget.


Coz. Yet thus much we will say on our own behalfs, we had no end or aim to do as
we desired, but find away to search out your affections.


Luc. and Cla. Can this be true?


Plot. and Coz. As Oracle.


Luc. Then rise.

Here then does all our former love rejoyn.
Pray heaven yours may be as pure as mine.

Plot. If ere I move the like attempt-agen
Impute me not the base, but worst of men.

Cla. I love you now as well as ere I did
Pray heaven you love me so, heaven forbid.
But that I should.


Plot. Since now we have vowed a constant faith on all sides, I think it
requisite to work a means to complete our happiness.


Luc. That we must leave to you.


Plot. But we will plainly tell you, least hereafter you repent, we have no
worldly fortune but what our outsides promise: yet within you will find honest
hearts.


Luc. That Is sufficient.


Cla. My Father has Gold enough.


Coz. I and has the wit to keep it close enough.


Luc. Phew, have you no trick for that?


Plot. Troth I have a brain seldom empty of invention, I Will set my wheels a
working and make trial of one exploit.


Cla. Sister we shall be late home.


Luc. I go, Gentlemen farewell good fortune speed your study.


Coz. We shall attend you on the morrow.


Luc. We shall expect you.


Exeunt Lucibella and Clara. Coz. Now we are new men.


Plot. New married men that shall be shortly, well may we thrive no worse in
that state then we have in the Batchelors and are happy still.


Coz. But we waste time.


Plot. True we have deep chests to dive into, it requires a great deal of
cunning to contrive it honestly, or at least without the Bar plea Felony.

-- This once done
The fools are theated, and our loves are won.
Exeunt
Finis Actus Tertii.
Act fourth.
Act fourth. Scene the First.
Eus. COnvey this Letter Coz. unto my Lord Gonzetto, you know his lodgings,
deliver it into his own hands.


Boy. Uncle I shall.

exit Boy.
Eus What grudge in thee procures the new grown hate
Of thy Ermenia? what unhappy fate
Has fixed her heart against thee, O that she
Should violate her vows of Constancy,
To make me miserable: I see 'twere fit
That Lovers vows upon the sands were writ.
Enter Florentio Plotthrift and Cozen. What are these? I must be gone.

exit.
Flo. Your company Gentlemen does obleige me much.

Plot. Alas excuse us Sir, it is not such
Is worth your thanks, much less your obligation
Think it but worthy of your acceptance
And you will highly honor us since we know
For your favors many thanks we one.

Flo. Come lets not further complements commence
Your love to me extends all recompense.
I have a suit to you.


Plot. Name it and it is granted if it be
w'thin compass of my capacity.
Or my Friends.


Coz. Most willingly.


Flo. I doubt it not Sir.

I have a friend deeply engaged (indeed contracted) to the Lady Armenia, you
know her questionless.


Coz. The Lord Gonzett's Deity.


Flo. The same my question is whether you think her inclinable to Gonzetto or
any other?


Plot. Troth I think indifferent to any, but a little bending to Gonzetto by
reason of the weight of riches he throws on her.


Flo. Very probable.


Coz. But he is fire all over for her.


Flo. It Is hotly reported so sir.


Plot. Pardon me sir that I dive into your thoughts, the Gentleman you speak of
is as I presume your friend by name Eusames. I am bold in explaining, but
assure your self and him sir, i will be his friend and Agent and can do much with
Ermenia, and will.


Flo. In so doing you will obleidge two friends at once, the one sick of Love
and despair: the other of sorrow for his friends misfortunes. I was once his
poor Agent too, and then she promised faithfully to embrace him with all former
love and respect: but she had no sooner set her eye upon this glistring Lord
but she forgets her vows as if they were of no consequence.


Plot. I know all circumstances, I will be very serviceable and I hope
succesful, I shall loose opportunities, therefore for the present farewell.


Flo. To morrow sir i will wait on you, till then adieu.

exeunt severally.
Scen second.
Enter Eusames as in a field. HOw am I over press't'ween hope and fear!
It Is past the time and yet he is not here.
Would he would come.

-- Delays in misery and love.
Would breed impatience in Olymphick Jove.
Enter Gonzetto. O here he is: I joy you are come Sir.


Gone. Yes I am, draw


They fight Gonzetto stamps and enters a Guard. Eus. I am ready.


Gone. Secure him in Fetters till further order.


Guar. We shall my Lord.

exit Gonzetto.
Eus. Ha! is it so base Gonzetto.


Guard. You are bold Sir.


Eus. You are impudent Bandogs, how am I conquered with oppression! If you are
men of civility permit a Gentleman a minutes consideration, your reward shall
not be wanting and the limits I Am now confined in, is a sufficient security for
me your prisoner.


Guard. We will obleidge you so far Sir.


Fus. Do so and i will be grateful.

The guard withdraws. Unfortunate Eusames.

Who have endured the raging of the sea
To enjoy two blessings Love and Liberty
And art no sooner well arrived on shore
But both are lost as much as was before.
Arm me ye Gods, with patience and content.
Manly to undergo Imprisonment.
Enter Guard. Guard!
Now i will walk with you: my guard is strong
This is too sharp sure to continue long.
Exeunt.
Scene third.
Enter Plotthrift and Cozen. Coz. I have heard much of him.


Plot. He is our Countryman, and of rare endowments, genteel Parentage, and
heir to a good fortune, had it not been consumed by his Parents, for which poor
wretch he suffers.


Coz. She Is very cruel to slight him, and settle her affections elsewhere
considering the contract.


Plot. I shall plead Scripture and prick her conscience I fear ere she and I
part.


Coz. Do so, i will work the way cross on my Lords side farewell.


Plot. Adeiu Coz.

exit Cozen, enter Florentio:
Flo. Well met again Sir.


Plot. I was just a going to the Lady.


Flo. It Is too little purpose I fear.


Plot. The reason.


Flo. Why Eusames out of a mad vein this Even. challenged Gonzetto who met him
with a Guard and clapped him up.


Plot. Yet not a pin the worse: for you shall see.
To morrow Morn he is at liberty.

Flo. It will be welcome news.

Plot. Well fear it not.
If I Am deceived I Will never trust a plot.
Exeunt.
Scen fourth.
Enter Ermenia and Priscilla. Erm. It Is strange.


Pris. It Is true Madam.
We meet it in the vulgar mouth: besides
I had it from the Captain of the guard
Who by command sirprised Eusames prisoner.

Erm. Leave me. exit Pris.
So strange a boldness is familiar
With men of noble Births, that though they fall
So low, that others think 'em worthless; yet
They of themselves still hold the same esteem.
And (what this Age thinks most rediculous)
Behave themselves as high, though not so wealthy.
Such is Eusames fate: whose love at first,
I entertained, because 'twas as rich as great:
But now being fallen from his high estate,
Still thinks himself as worthy of my love
As er'e: yet something I fain would do --

Enter Plotthrift. Plot. Well met Madam.


Er. Thank you Sir.


Plot. I am come to chide you Madam, pardon me.


Erm. To chide me sir?


Plot. I you Madam, you once loved a Gentleman named Eusames.


Erm. O heavens! is my breach of sacred Covenants made common.


Plot. Nay and was contracted to him.


Erm. Too true indeed!


Plot. Too true! nay never repent: although his fortunes low, had you but given
him content he might have raised himself, indeed I needs must blame you.


Erm. Proceed no further good sir, I am touched to the quick, and heaven knows
I am something troubled.


Plot. Something, it must be altogether ere I leave you Madam, recall that love
you have settled on Gonzetto, and render it to Eusames as his due: he poor man
languishes in prison for love of you by base Gonzetto's means, spend no time in
recanting but use your utmost endeavor to gain his liberty.


Ermenia in a Maze wakes. Erm. I can hear no more.


Plot. S'lid but you shall! unnatural woman could you think the Gods had no
blessing in store for his great virtue? whose merit could purchase heaven it
self.

(Reverently spoke) aside


Erm. Pray leave and hear me.


Plot. O are you touched,

Hear me? what can you say; alas invention's barren in your cause, a double
fee could not procure one word to stand in your defense. Did you not vow,
protest and swear your self a real votaress to his desires. Did he not with a
true and faithful heart when he was in his height of happiness honor and serve
you. And do you think it now reason sufficient to slight and disaffect him
because fortune at presant frowns upon him! ha! do you think there is desert in
naught but money? O unworthy? your corrupt soul belyes your form and beauty,
and ere I go i will cleanse it, if that your breast be penetrable to ought that's
good.


Erm. O no more!

Why should you ring and twist that heart that is already broke, I love Eusames
and though orepour'd a while, I have not signified the force of passion as I
was wont, yet be shall soon apprehend a sudden thaw in that affection which he
presumed was totally another.


Plot. Noble maid.

Pardon the harsh conjecture that I made, i will use no more for fear my fond
conceit fall into relapse, I leave you, and with such a blessing as dying
Fathers give their only sons, or saints to their penetant votaries.

exit.
Erm. Worthy Eusames, unto whom I owe,
All that my utmost bounty can bestow!
I will be plain and real in my Love
Which may thy anger yet thy pardon move:
In holy writ, many did choose by art
Asarafice, but nothing like a broken heart.
Exit.
Scen fifth.
Enter Avaritius with a Letter Lucibella Clara. Ava. GOne to England.


Luc. It Is very true sir.


Ava. Her letter declares that discontent caused her sudden departure, I hope
neither of you were unkind to her.


Luc. I hope she speaks of no such thing.


Cla. Rightly she cannot.


Ava. I Am something troubled: but must wave it, this is a day appointed for
other considerations: a happy day for your Daughters, that must make your
fortunes: my great care has wrought it, and yours must be as great to entertain
it: they are gentlemen at all points, that when you are married will love,
embrace and chain themselves to your observance: nay a great part of their
Estates too are tied in a jointure which makes up the harmony, you are
contented girls are you not?


Luc. A Husbands welcome, and as an humble wife I Will entertain him (but not the
Him you mean) the gentleman I have well observed, and he may please too: It is
your pleasure I should make him mine, and it has been still my duty to observe
you.


Cla. I sir as obediently submit to your pleasure in embracing Cornelio.


Ava. Good girls, come lets go in then: I love your modesties to marrow I hope
you will look more womenly.

Exeunt.
Scen. Sixth.
Enter Gonzetto reading a Letter. My Lord!
Pardon me that I am a little retired, the cause shall be made evident to your
honor on the morrow being my Cozens wedding day: I have informed my Uncle by
letter that I am gone toward England, if he acquaint you therewith, pray
contradict it not, not yet fear but at his house to morrow I will meet your
embraces, I am and will be more

Your Honors at command Ermenia.

Well it is honestly done, but pish Ermenia cannot be false: so much beauty
cannot harbor a double heart, I see it is not wealth nor riches can purchase a
fair soul, nor had my presents of gold ere gained a smile, had not the
influence of my Agents eloquence worked it. O happy man am I that shall possess
that matchless beauty Venice can boast off, that honest heavenly heart that
cannot withdraw a while but must acquaint her love and Lord. Well Cozen thou
that have been the Author of my endless blis expect a high reward.

Enter Cozen. See here he is, welcome my noble friend, claim the performance of
that high promised reward I gave the, upon condition thou could any way win
Ermenia to marry me, see here her hand to confirm this same. shows the letter.


Coz. I hope by this my Lord you are assured she was not courted slightly.


Gone. No thou have been diligent and work's effectually, my hand and seal to
the Deputy of my Exchequer for five hundred Crowns shall be thy recompense.
within there Pego.


Enter Pego. Pe. My Lord.


Gone. Ink and paper.


Pe. It Is at hand my Lord.

A Table set forth with standish and paper.
Gone. writes a note and gives it to Cozen. Gone. Take that and with a promise
upon my honor to advance the upon any request.


Coz. Your Honors bountiful, and for my part I must make an humble
acknowledgment, such is my obligation to the merit that I should think my best
of labors crowned in that Act could serve you.


Gone. Thou art honest and excellent, I shall see you to morrow questionless at
the Nuptials.


Coz. It Is very likely.


Gone. Till then farewell.

exit Gonzetto.
Coz. Good day to your Lordship.

Now Plothrift if thou thriv'st as well as I,
It Is a completed piece of Roguery.
Exit.
Scen seventh.
Eusames in prison. UNto the Man imprisoned, black and obscure is the clear
beauty of the brightest day: through Iron grates he only sees the light and
thereby does increase his misery. Those whom he does perceive in joy to pass,
augment his wretchedness by making him to think that thus I lately was my self.
But may I dye abhorred by mankind if I repine at all. Arm ye gods my love with
constancy of mind that she may never forget the love of her Eusames. O Ermenia!
the exquisitest tortures that by invention ere were made, for the I would think
sports and undergo.

May thou live happily and free from care
And all my miseries of no momentare.

Enter Jailer and Ermenia in man's habit. Ja. There he is Sir.


Erm. There Is for thy kindness Jailer.


Ja. Thank you sir.

exit Jailer.
Er. How do you sir.


Eus. Well.


Er. Not so well as I could wish you.


Eus. As well as I could wish my self and that is sufficient, you are mistaken
sir in me, I am no base metal to be changed at every puff of wind: imprisonment
is the least of terrors to daunt a true courageous heart.


Er. Nay be not so hasty: I kindly come to visit you.


Eus. I kindly thank you then.


Enter Gonzetto. Con. So sir are you sorry yet for your late desperate
rudeness. speaking to Eusames


Eus. Sorry! no i will nere be sorry had I a term of life and liberty could last
for ever, and you could give it me, yes and would, for all or more i would nere be
reconciled to base Gonzetto's, as ignoble in heart, as made noble by thy Titles.


Enter Jailer. Gone. Jailer.

Double fetter him.


Er. You are too cruel sir.


Gone. You speak in vain sir.


Er. It Is against the Law: he is no Fellon.


Gone. It shall be done.


Er. It shall?


Gone. It shall. you are too bold.


Er. No more then I can justify. Jailer forbear: look there high swelling Lord.

Throws him Eusames his pardon purchased from the Duke.


Eus. My pardon purchased by a stranger: it is very strange!


Er. It Is very true.


Gone. Well Jailer you may release him.

exit Gone.
Er. O thank your honor for nothing.


Eus. Sir for this your christian courtisie with many thanks my best of
services are indebted to your kindness, and all too little to make the least
part of requital, yet withal let me entreat one addition of your love: in
telling me how or which way you heard of my imprisonment, and upon what grounds
you grew so kind to procure my pardon.


Er. I heard of your imprisonment by the relation of a friend of yours named
Florentio to a friend of mine, one Mr. Plotthrift by whose persuasion and my
own pity of your sufferings, I obtained this grant from the Duke for your
liberty, more I have to tell you, lets out of this Goal and you shall know all.


Eus. Thus heaven has still a friend in store for those
That have but honest hearts though fiery foes.
Exeunt
Scen eight.
Enter Plotthrift. Aquinto and Cornelio. Plot. NOw Gentlemen judge you whether
I have not been very serviceable.


Aquin. In that nature that really I think half my Estate a morgage to you.


Cor. Indeed I did not doubt your prevaling at the long run, but in so short a
time that your expedition deserves a double reward.


Aquin. My brother and I ere long shall study to requite you, but in the
interim pray accept of a few crowns in this bag. gives a bag.


Plot. Well Gentlemen I thank you, and if the like or any other service lies in
me to obliege you, you may command it, for the present i will take my leave.


Aquin. Are you in haste pray? if your occasions will permit, we entreat your
good company to a glass of excellent wine at a friends house of mine at the
other end of the town.


Plot. All other concerns in me are laid aside to serve you.


Aquin. Come then we will call on my Father Avaritius and thither presently.


Cor. withal my heart.


Plot So my design is laid: but it is the end aside
Must crown the work: so fortune be my friend.
Exeunt,
Finis Actus quarti.
Act fifth
Scen first.
Enter Cozen, Florentio and Eusames disguised with vizards. Coz. I wonder they
come not.


Flo. It Is very late.


Eus. Are we set right?


Coz. Exactly in the place appointed,


Flo. Hush I hear a trampling.


Enter Plotthrift with a bag and Avaritius. Ava. Heaven send us safe home, they
did ill to leave us and cross the fields so late.


Plot. Come sir fear not what small defense my sword and service may be to you
shall not be wanting.


Ava. Your bag of money there, may cause some danger: and we have robbing
spirits walk the streets at this time of night.


Plot. You are very timorous Sir.

They walk off the stage and on again, and they seize on them.
Coz. Deliver all your money, or you are dead men.


Ava. O Murder, murder, murder!


Flo. Nay we will stop your mouthing.


Plot. Hellhounds what Devil has stirred you to this madness.


Eus. Nay we are not so mad to contend but deliver.

They take away his bag.
Plot. Villains redeliver my money or take my life and all, or i will have yours.
draws and fights with two.

The other bind Avaritius.
Ava. Nay pray Gentlemen spare my life and take all I have.


Coz. No sir first weel stop your mouth. gags him.


Plotthrift has routed two and comes and routs the third. Plot. Now villain for
you.

They fight a great while and at last Coz. runs
Plotthrift ungags and raises Avaritius. Plot. Come Sir take courage I have
saved your life though to my loss of a hundred crowns.


Ava. Sir I thank you and if a thousand can make you amends you shall have them.


Plot. No Sir i will only desire your hand being a Justice of the peace, to a
small paper which will benefit a friend of mine in a high manner.


Ava. That I would most thankfully were I but at home.


Plot. Come Sir i will see you safe at home i will warrant you.


Ava. I thank you good sir, heaven keep of a second brunt.


Plot. Nere fear it sir.


Ava. Will they not meet us again now.


Plot. O it is not imaginable, they are all desperately wounded and they will hold
it the safer way to cure those then to come and get more.


Ava. You have a luccky hand.

exeunt.
Scen. sceond.
Enter Lucibella, Clara and Ermenia in man's habit. Luc. COzen I much commend
you, and much more love you now then ever I did.


Cla. Your joys will now increase, never fear it. But breach of contracts is a
second hell.


Luc. What though his fortunes are at present low, when he injoyes content and
happiness in you, you will quickly see his virtues soon will raise him, I shall
wish you much joy in him.


Cla. And so shall I.


Er. I thank you both, and the like I shall wish you in your elections.


Luc. Why I, we never stood wavering, but as soon as we loved a little struck
up a blind bargain presently.


Cla. We found they were wits and they will never leave working till they get
wealth enough i will warrnt you.


Er. But how will you get your portions of your father if you marry against his
will.


Luc. O we never fear that the wheels of their Noddles are working for that
design.


Cla. You shall see we will be married to morrow morn, my Father well pleased by
noon, we sporting in bed at night, and as loath to rise early next morn, as any
two couple in Christendom.


Er. Well i will pluck up a good spirit too, make a third couple, and see if I can
be served the same sauce.


Luc. Gramercy Girl.


Cla. Hush my father knocks.


Luc. Up to my chamber.


Er. I Am gone.

exit Ermenia.
Enter Avaritius and Plotthrift. Ava. O girls had it not been for this
courteous Gentleman I had been killed.


Luc. and Cla. Killed.


Ava. I, killed we were set upon by Rogues, Villains, Thieves but this
Gentleman I thank him preserved me though to his loss of an hundred Crowns.
Here Luci take my key of my desk, there lies a bag of two hundred or
thereabouts fetch it.


Luc. I run sir.

exit Lucibella.
Ava. Clara call my man bid him bring ink and paper.


Cla. I shall sir.

exit Clara.
Ava. Pray sir sit down and assure your self whatsoever lies in poor Avaritius
his power to obleige you, you may freely command, for this never to be
forgotten courtisie.


Plot. Pray sir impute this no such obligation, I was bound in nature to defend
you.


Ava. O Complement no more, can you obleige me more then save my life from
murdering Rebels? no it is impossible. Then life nothing more dear.


Enter Lucibella with a bag of money, Clara. Priscilla and servant with a
Table, standish and paper. Ava. Here accept of this in part of future
recompense.


Plot. You are liberal sir.


Ava. Now sir if you will please to produce your paper i will set my hand produces a
large paper.


Plot. Please you i will read it to you first sir.


Ava. No that will be too tedious, only tell me in two or or three words what
it means.


Plot. Why a friend of mine lately taxed with a scurvy business and
suspitiously imprisoned, this is a narrative of his birth and education, to
which if you will be pleased to set your hand, as knowing him it may be a means
to procure his Liberty.


Ava. That I will willingly, lets see the pen. to his man.

He signs to the paper.
Plot. Pray sir your hand for a witness. to his man.


Ser. What is it sir.


Ava. Sirrah don't dispute but write your hand.


Ser. I shall sir. writes.


Plot. And yours Madam. to Priscilla.


Pris. Yes sir. she writes.


Ava. Sir for to night I bid you farewell. It Is very late and I am very sleepy.

exit Avaritius Servant and Priscilla.
Plot. Be sure be ready. Is Ermenia above.


Luc. Yes.


Plot. Within this hour I Will call.


Cla. We Will be ready.


Plot. Farewell my Dear.


Luc. Adeiu Love till anon.


Cla. Farewell Brother.

exeunt Luc. and Clara.
Plot. Now fortune i will adore thee, thou have been my Friend indeed. Thou have
signed me a deed that renders me a noble estate, fair Lucibella with thirty
thousand Crowns is mine, the like has Cozen with his Clara, my stolen hundred
Crowns are doubled too, well i will to my theiving comrogues and then go find out
a Priest,

Prospitious Heavens by this plots success.
Plothrift is raised to an endless happiness.
Exit.
Scen third.
Enter Cozen, Florentio and Eusames. Coz. EXcellent.


Flo. Good.


Eus. Ha ha ha.


Coz. How savoury the old man smelt when we went about to faggot him.


Flo. How like an Owl in an Ive-bush the Rogue looked when we tied him neck
and heels.


Eus. And made ugly faces when we gagged him.


Flo. O he prays for his deliverance.


Coz. Plot thrift i will warrant you will be his bosom friend, and he has cunning
enough to squeez him.


Flo. His hundred crowns i will warrant you are doubled.


Coz. They are made thousands by this time I hope or he misses of his aim.


Enter Plotthrift. Flo. See here he is.


Plot. Ha ha ha! Hellhounds what Devil raised you to this madness? ha, ha, ha!


Om. Ha, ha, ha!


Coz. How fares the old man?


Plot. O orejoyed that he is delivered: Gentlemen you are notable rogues and
shall be my bosom friends as I am his, see here a slender reward that he has
given me.


Coz. How Lucibela with thirty thousand crowns.


Plot. I think it is thirty, I Am sure twa's writ at length because I would not
be mistaken, look again.


Coz. The like to me with Clara, O happiness beyond expression! let me hug thee
for thy cunning!


Plot. I think I have plotted fairly, now nothing is wanting but a priest, the
Girls are ready at a call.


Eus. Is my Ermenia with them.


Plot. Yes!


Eus. Then Sir to you I owe my life: you have loaded me with so many several
obligations that I am ready to sink under their wait, and could my wishes but
convert themselves into effects it should be my ambition to signify my self an
object worthy of your favors, till then I am your everlasting debtor.


Plot. You are bountiful in expression, I am more then paid in your favorable
acceptance. But come lets go it is high time of day.


Flo. I can direct you to a priest.


Plot. You will obleige us, lead the way you must be Father to us all.


Flo. Withal my heart.

exeunt.
Scene fourth.
Enter Luci, Clara, Erm, Pris. Luc. Sure some ill fortune has betided them or
crossed their designs.


Cla. Ha, ha, fearful Lucibella? fie for shame!


Erm. Better be fearful then fool hardy.


Luc. Pris. watch at the window, besure you do not nod, but give us true
warning.


Cla. Do so Priscilla.


Pris. I shall be careful.


Cla. Come wenches what are you for singing or dancing.


Luc. It Is the maddest wench, fear nothing, sure thy love is not real, else it
could not be so void of fear.


Cla. Well I am resolved to sing a song, we are all alone, and it is one of my
own composure.


Luc. Prithee forbear.


Cla. Troth but I will, i would have you do the same and so take leave of singing
clear, 'twill not be long I hope ere we loose our voices.


Luc. How wildely she talks?


Erm. Come Cozen, begin.


Cla. A comely youth I once beheld
A bathing in a river
Where strait my passions rebelled
And scorh't my heart and liver.
Such might Narcissus beauties be,
But scarce so clear so white as he,
I veiv'd each part, and so
Saw something down below.
Which made my mind and heart a ramblinggo
High! ho.

Enter Plot. Elo. Eusam. Coz. Plot. I Am glad ye are so merry Ladies.


Cla. I Am sorry your so nere Gentlemen.


Cor. Come it is not time now to chat each minuits worth an hour, come away away.

exeunt.
Scen fifth.
Enter Avaritius, Cook, Butler, and Chambermaid. Ava. MY Masters pray be wary
and serviceable, Cook see all your sauces be sharp and poynant in the pallat,
that they may commend you: look to the roast and boyld meat handsomely, and what
new kickshaws and other de-delicate things you made. Is the Music come?


But. Yes sit they are at breakfast.


Ava. There will be dancing too, you must see this room clean: Butler let your
door be opoen to all good fellows, but have an eye to the Plate for their be
Furies. Peg you are for the linen, sort it and seek it ready for the Table,
and see the Bride beds made, and see the cords be not cut assunder by the
Gallants too, there be such knacks abroad, so go in all to your several duties.

exeunt. I now begin to remember I signed a certain writing to Mr. Plotthrift
last night, but what it was I know not. Zachary.

Enter Zachary. Zachary what writing was it Mr. Plotthrift desired me to set my
hand too: did you see it?


Zac. No sir?


Ava. No sir, and why no sir?


Zac. Because he told you what it was and you was satisfied and bid me set my
hand.


Ava. What did he tell me it was.


Zac. A Narrative of a Gentleman's condition in prison.


Ava. What, I set my hand to warrant him before me.


Za. Some such thing sir.


Ava. Very likely: go in.

exit Zachary.
Enter Gonzetto, Aquinto, and Cornelio. Ava. My noble Lord most hearty welcome:
good morrow noble Bridegroomes.


Aquin. and Cor. Thank you father, are your Daughters ready? it is high time for
to send for the Priest.


Ava. Not yet I think: have a little patience and they will come down presently
i will warrant you, but my Lord you have not heard of my Neeces departure.


Gone. Yes sir indeed to my great grief, I sorrow much for her absence; but now
perforce must study to forget I ever saw her,


Ava, She went away abruptly, without taking her leave I know no reason for it,
but come my Lord and Sons that quickly must be will you walk into a glass of
wine.


Aquin and Cor. We attend you.

exeunt.
Scen sixth.
Enter Plotthrift, Lucibella, Clara, Eusames Ermenia. in man's habit Florentio
and Priest. Plot. HO! house! who is within!


Enter Zachary. Zac. Who would you speak with?


Plot. Where Is your Master within?


Zac. Yes Sir.


Plot. Id'e desire to speak a word with him.


Enter Avaritius. Ava. Here he is sir.


Plot. Sir your servant I come to beg a boon of you.


Ava. My life! no sooner asked but granted, name it.


Plot. I take you at your word Sir, thank you, be pleased to give me and my
friend joy with your daughters.


Ava. Why are you married?


Plot. This grave Gentleman will satisfy you if you doubt it.


Ava. Abused cheated, gulled, abused my daughters lost and undone.


Enter Gonzetto, Aquinto and Cornolio. Aquin. How your daughters lost and
undone.


Ava. I married to Vagabonds, Sychophants, and I know not whom!


Plot. Your servant Seniors, we have the Ladies.


Coz. Your servant Seniors, we have the Ladies.


Eus. Your servant my Lord I have the Lady.

Erm discovers.
Gone. 'sdeath! -- in a maze. Am I awake, I vow to send some to their eternal
rest. And make 'em sleep for ever? -- draws.


Plot. Pray sir be well adviz'd, consider first what plea you have to commit
this outrage, your honor Sir cannot bear you out in it.


Coz. Sir what is done was by Avaritius free consent, so that if you find your
selves abused in any particular: 'twas chiefly done by him.


Ava. By me? it is false, my Lord discredit him, mere cheats and imposters!


Plot. Come sir to satisfy you and all these Gentlemen whose misled opinions
thought us merely the actors and contrivers in this plot, see here. produces
the writings.

These with your own hand signed and sealed in the presence of Lucibella, Clara
and Pris. besides Zacharias, Tobit your clark, what say ye all is it not true?


Luc. It Is undeniable.


Ava. How!


Cla. Most true an't shall like you sir.


Pris. I must confirm it too.


Ava. O patience!


Cor. Troth this is very well, it is true I always thought she had too much wit
for me.


Aquin. Well Heavens be thanked we bear not all the baffle on our own backs,
well --


Plot. I am only sorry you spent so much culled courtship to so little purpose


Aquin. I must bear it.


Gone. I could rage too, but 'twill be to full as little effect, come Justice
you ought to bear it best of all, Pox on it, this it is when old men must frolic
and be drunk at the Tavern, could you have kept your self sober on your
daughters wedding even, all had been well then, but now let things go how they
will, Gentlemen I wish you as much joy with your Ladies as I expected.


All. We thank ye, Plot. Come father in Law lets hear as much from you. We Will
maintain your daughters according to their birth and fortunes.


Coz. That we will.


Eus. And I your Niece according to my abillity, and what is wanting in that,
i will make up with love and good husbandry.


Ava. Why this is some comfort, Gentlemen pardon me, I must be contented: well
I forgive and give you my daughters freely, and with them their portions of
thirty thousand crowns a piece, you sir my Niece with twenty, and so my
blessing with you all.


Luc. Thank you dear Father, and pardon us that we have choos'd those whom we
loved and hope to live with comfort.


Ava. I hope so too.


Er. My Lord I beg your excuse to Gonzetto. had I not been contracted ere I
knew your Honor you had been the only man should have enjoyed me, and my last
letter to you was only to obleige you to be here, to see how I am bestowed in
which you have honored me and I humbly thank you.


Gone. Ermenia I am not so angry, but I can tell you that my love and esteem of
you is still as great as ever, though I am debarred that happiness of enjoying
you: yet I wish you a life so circled in with joy, that you may never breath a
sigh, and when you shall grow weary of the earth become Joves dotage and be
Queen of heaven, come Gentlemen be not so uncharitable but give joy. to Aquin
and Cor.


Aquin. and Coz. No sir we wish all joy and happiness.


Plot. We thank you, come lets have a dance or two and so to dinner.


Coz. and Eus. Agreed, agreed.

They dance.
Ava. Well now,
Lets into dinner, but first take my vogue,
No Italian knave like to an English Rogue.
Exeunt.
The Epilogue.
Spoken by a Messenger of State and Plot-thrift. Mess. PLot-thrift Imposter!
Thou must forthwith come
Before the Council board: They have past a doom,
For thy Imprisonment: Upon Information
Thou art a Rogue and Cozens the whole Nation.
Only these Ladies smiles can set thee free
But if they frown you must too Goal with me,

Plot. And hang my self for want of Liberty
How like you this Coz. As I am a sinner,
An ill dish of News at a Wedding Dinner!
Ladies, O dear Ladies, what shall I say
Pox take that English Rogue that writ the Play!
Will Not you be kind to smile and clap me too?
Should y'e ask me I Would do as much for you.
Be not close fisted: Consider that it may
Be your own case to want another day:
You may command me then and thereupon
I Will faithfully repay you three for one.
Join all your forces now and set me free,
One score of Claps and I Am at liberty. (Clap)
To the Gentlemen. Now Gentlemen I hope you are satisfied
On the same Covenants to clap my Bride. (Clap again)
Exeunt.
FINIS

