THREE QUERIES, AND ANSWERS to them.
First Query,
WHether the matter of the late Declaration, be Illegal?

First Answer, It is altogether Illegal: The Foot upon which the Declaration
stands, being a Power not Only to dispense in Contingent and Particular Cases,
which if the Lawgivers could have foreseen, Then they would have provided
against it; But the Dispencing with all sorts of Laws in Cases contrary to the
very Design and End of making them Such a Power, is not properly a Dispencing,
but a Disanulling Power, and is highly prejudicial to the King himself, because
it takes away that Faith and Trust which His People repose in Him, when a Law
is made, which They look upon as Their Security.

Secondly, It is true, Each Bishop or Minister is not a capable Judge in such
cases, but he is the Judge for his own private Conscience, against which he
must not go.

Thirdly, This Case is Publicly Adjudged against in Parliament 1672.
(Secondly) The general forbearance of Addresses grounded upon the Illegality of
that Dispencing Power, shows this to have been the Judgment of the greatest
part of the Clergy and Others. (Thirdly) The Declaration of the present Judges,
goes no further than such a Military Case of Sir Edward Hayles, for it was a
Particular Judgment upon that particular Case, and in whatsoever words it was
expressed, it never yet came Legally to the Cognizance of the Subject.

Fourthly, The Bishops refusing to send the Order and Declaration, the
Ministers have something more than their own private Judgments to move them to
refuse to Read it.

Second Query.
Whether an Unlawful Matter may be Lawfully Published?

Answer. An Unlawful Matter is not to be Published, if he who publishes it
thinks the matter Unlawful. For,

First, It cannot come to him, being Illegal, by any Legal Authority, for the
King can do no Illegal Thing; and if His Officers do it, they do it not by the
King's Authority: And therefore the refusing of it is no Disobedience, being no
Illegal Refusal.

Secondly, If then the Bishops and Ministers publish the Declaration, they do
it Voluntarily as their Own Act, and consequently publish an Illegal Thing,
without Legal Authority; They are Punishable for it, having done what they had
no Legal Authority to do.

Third Query.
What are the ill Consequences of Reading the Declaration?

Answer, They are many, and great, and therefore in Prudence as well as
Conscience, It Ought not to be done.

First, Great Numbers will Justly Judge the Clergy Cowards and Hypocrites, in
Publishing what they think Illegal, and Illegally Sent to them.

Secondly, Many who have Votes for Parliament Men, will take this for the
Consent of the Publishers, and be strengthened in the choosing such Men as
shall be Friends, not only to the Indulgence, but to the Foundation of it, the
Dispencing Power.

Thirdly, They will have reason to take this for a Consent to it, because there
can be no other Intention in Ordering it to be Published, but to make the Clergy
Parties to it, for it is as much known before it be Read, as it will be after
the Reading of it; Therefore the making it Known, is not the Only Thing
intended.

Fourthly, And so it will be Interpreted and Improved by those that intend to
make their Advantage by it, who will publish it in the Gazette, Public
Occurrences, and other Papers, That the Clergy has Approved His Majesty's
Declaration of Liberty of Conscience, by their Solemn Reading of it in their
Churches in the time of Divine Service.

Fifthly, After which they may Expect further Things may be Ordered to be
Published by them, at which they must make a Stand, and their making a Stand
when they have lost their Reputation, will be of no force: It is best then to
stop at first, Especially considering the Weight of this Matter: All Our Laws
and the Test, and Our Interest in Them, being Concerned therein.

Objections in General.
It may be Objected, That there will be great Inconveniences on the other
side. To which it may be Answered,

If the thing be Illegal, both in the Matter and the Publication, we are not to
do it for fear of its inconveniences, but to perform our Duty, and to leave
the event to God, a certain Evil must not be done to avoid a contingent one.

Objections in Particular.
It may be Objected (first). This will be Interpreted by the Papist as a
failure in our great Principles of Loyalty. To which Three things may be
Answered,

First, That our non Addressing was so Interpreted in Books as well as
Discourses, but had no effect to blast our Loyalty, tho the Clergy refused to
Address even in a Branch that made for themselves, because of that one
Foundation on which that cause stood, with the rest of the Dispencing Power.

Secondly, Loyalty being Obedience according to Law, They are the Loyal Men who
act not contrary thereunto. And the best Friends to the Crown are those which
support the Law.

Thirdly, They still maintain the Principle of Suffering without any
Un-Christian Opposition.

Second Objection, It may be further Objected, That Dissenters will construe
this Refusal, as a Declaration against all Tenderness to them.

Answer, To which it may be Answered, (first) That they had never such
assurances from our Churchmen of their Inclination to Tenderness to them as
they have now received.

Secondly, They cannot but see, That this Refusal was not to hinder any favors
toward them, by this Indulgence, but the Dispencing Power, which if it takes
place, They cannot but discern, That a New Magna Charta for Liberty of
Conscience will be of no validity to them, for a New Declaration may dispense
with it at pleasure.

Lastly, The wisest and best of them do look upon our Refusal as a Testimony of
our sincerity to the Protestant Religion, and not of any disaffection to them.

Third objection, It may be Objected, That Suspension or Deprivation of the
Refusers may follow, whereby the People of our Church may be left as Sheep
without a Shepherd.

Answer. First, The Church and our Religion, will suffer less by the
Conscienciousness of their Suspended Ministers, than it will by their Illegal
Complyanc^ in so great and Fundamental a Point.

Secondly, God will provide for them, being his Cause for which they suffer.

Thirdly, They have other Thoughts of the KING's Clemency and Justice, when He
is informed by Men of Consciences against the Councels of Men of Interest. For
how can the King (at the very time he proclaims entire Liberty of Conscience to
all, even those who formerly were looked upon his Enemies) do an open violence
to the Consciences of those who have ever been acknowledged to be his Friends.
When He considers it, He will not deny to us alone what He grants to every body
else. This in duty we ought to conclude of, if we be mistaken, it may serve to
free others from more dangerous Errors.


