THREE LETTERS FROM Sir Thomas Fairfax HIS ARMY.

The one, from a Gentleman residing there, to a worthy Member of the honorable
House of Commons.

Fully relating the manner of the late Fight between Sir Thomas Fairfax, and
General Gorings Forces in Sutton-field near Lamport, on Thursday last July
10. wherein the Enemies whole Army was routed, about 2000. Prisoners, 4000.
Arms, near 2000. Horse, and 40. Colors taken, besides many Horse and
Prisoners in the pursuit, and Goring and his scattered Forces fled into
Bridgewater.

Also the particulars of the Fight between Major General Massey's and the
Enemies Forces, near Ilmore, on Wednesday last, July 9. where he took 500. of
the Enemies Horse, 200. prisoners, 2. Majors, 6. Captains, 9. Colors, and 30.
slain on the place.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Austin. 1645.

A Letter from a Gentleman in the Army, to an Honorable Member of the House of
Commons.
SIR:
IN my last I gave you an account of our affairs till yesterday morning, and
then I left Goring with his whole Army at Lamport; since then be pleased to
take notice of a short relation of our actions. Yesterday we advanced to
Sutton, drawing out that part of our Army, which we had, into Sutton fields,
the rest being 4500 at the least, under the command of Major-Generall Massey,
were on the other side of the river, and those eight Regiments of Foot which
we had at Naesby field, were also quartered at Martoke; Massey advanced with
his Horse and Dragoons, having the Foot to back him to North-Carreg, being
ordered to straiten the enemies quarters, and to hinder them from any plundring
exercises. It seems 1500 of them being upon a design out, and having no
intelligence of his being in motion, were surprised in a careless posture;
Major-Generall Massey fell on them, took (as I take it) nine Colors, 200
prisoners, and 250 Horse, slew about 30. We (in the mean time) were drawn up
within a mile of Lamport, with those Horse the General had with him, not
knowing of his engagement, and there being three rivers between him and us,
and the way without 12 miles march. The last night we quartered at Sutton, and
this morning by three a clock drew out into Sutton-fields, having with us but
seven Regiments of horse, viz. The Generals, formerly called
Lievtenant-Generall Cromwells, Whaley's, Vermudens, Graves, Rich, Fleetwood,
Butlers, which were not in all 2800 Horse; of Foot, we had all but the
Musketeers of three Regiments, having sent for them the last night from
Martoke. Early this morning the enemy appeared in the field, and about 7. of
the clock they made themselves Masters of a pass, which lay in the midst
between our Body and theirs, had lined the hedges between us and them with at
least 2000 Musketeers, so that the passage to them was extraordinary dangerous,
being so straight that four horses could not pass a breast, and that up to the
belly in water. They lying so prepared, both in Flanks and Front to receive us;
in this posture they stood till nigh 11 of the clock, having in the interim
sent away most of their Train and Baggage, led Horses, and other Lumber, to
Bridgewater, being resolved to make good their Retreat thither, which they
conceived they could, having such an advantageous pass thither; we
understanding their intentions by some Spies, and other Contrymen, resolved
to charge them, and accordingly drew down a commanded party of Musketeers to
beat them from the hedges, which was done with a gallant resolution; advancing
the same time with two Regiments of Horse into the Lane, all that we could draw
up in Front was but a single Troop, and that commanded by Major Bethell, the
Enemy standing ready with three Bodies of Horse, of about a thousand to charge
him. He with a single Troop charged, and routed two of their Divisions of about
400, received the charge of the third Division both in Front and Flank, was
somewhat over-borne at last, and enforced to retire to the Generals Regiment,
which was about an hundred yards behind him: C. Desborow with the Generals
Troop sheltred him by his Flank to rally, and charged up himself with about
200 Horse of the Generals Regiment, dispersed the Enemy, and set them all a
running, gained freedom by it for all our Horse and Foot to draw into Bodies,
sent the Enemy running, not being able to endure. In the charge the General,
Lievtenant-Generall, and some other Officers upon the hill beholding the
gallant charge, commended it for the most excellent piece of service that ever
was in England, we had them in chase almost to Bridgewater, having put them to
the cleerest Rout that ever an Enemy was put to: what the number of the slain
be I cannot tell you, being scarce come from the chase: The prisoners come in
already are 900, and I believe there will come in as many as will make 2000.
1200 Horse taken at least: For Colors I am uncertain, I dare say at least 40,
the Arms at least 4000, two pieces of Ordnance I saw, and diverse carriages of
Ammunition, and to make it a complete victory, we pursued the Enemy through
Lamport, having gained the Garrison, and then they fired the Town just at the
bridge to hinder the chase, yet we followed the victory through the fire. The
success of this victory must needs be ascribed next unto God, to the good
conduct of the General and Cromwell, Cromwell following the chase through
Lamport, where he himself went through the fire flaming on both sides of him.
The Enemy cry out they are utterly undone, and that the King must now go for
Ireland. Sir, this victory was the more opportune, that had they staid but
three days longer, Goring would have had a re-inforcement of 6000 Horse and
Foot from Greenvill and the King, they being transporting their Forces as fast
as can be to Minehead, Watchead, and Uphill, there being 1500 that landed ad
Uphill come to Bridgewater yesterday. Sir, this is all at present from

Lamport July 10 seven a clock at night. Your affectionate friend and humble
servant.

A Letter from an Officer in the Army, to his wife in London.
DEer wife, Salutation in the Lord, etc. who continues in multiplying favors
upon his people.
This day after our drawing into the field within two miles of Lamport, a
pretty strong Garrison of the enemies. Our Army was ranged into a Battalia, and
the Forlorn Hopes on each wing being drawn out and marched, the whole Army
presently advanced, the enemy having secured a passage, which was the only way
for us to make through to fall on them; where we could not march above four
horse a breast, in which place the enemy did front, and flank us also on both
sides: when our Forlorns marched nigh them, (the Hill they stood on, they
divided themselves on, in several divisions and squadrons of Horse and Foot)
our Foot fired in Volleyes, and our Ordnance played so quick and sure, that
presently the enemy were put to a rout, and were as in a maze, not knowing what
way to avoid the Cannon; yet all this while maintained the passage, which was
in hot dispute between them and us; yet at last, within an hour or
thereabouts, we gained it, and sent Horse to second our Foot. One Major Bethell
with his Troop went on in the first place, and was to go up a steep hill to
charge (and but his own Troop) by the time he came near: the Enemy came on in
a vast Body of Horse against them, and laid Musketeers in a hedge, which did
flank him, and somewhat front him also, yet with such gallantry he managed the
charge, that they put the enemy to the rout, (all in that place) but presently
a great fresh supply came, that caused our first party to retreat to the
passage to our men, who played on the enemy, and caused them to retreat, and
then our Horse and Foot marched on furiously, and at the second charge beat the
enemy out of the field, put them to a rout, we killed on the several hills we
stood on, and valleys we fought in, not above 20. but in the pursuit very
many. There are already brought in nigh 1000. prisoners, two Carriages of
Ammunition, and two small pieces, which were all they had in the field. They
forsook their Garrison of Lamporne, and are gone toward Bridgewater.
Yesterday Major-Generall Massey went with about 7000. Horse, Dragoons, and
Foot, on the other side of Lamport, skirmished with the enemy, and took about
500. horse, thirty slain, and 200. taken, whereof two Majors, 6. Captains, and
nine Colors. I am in health, and all our friends, for ought I hear; I cannot
particularize yet, for our men are not all returned from the pursuit. The Kings
party here is quite routed, and I hope we shall suddenly drive them from
having an Army in the field, and visit their Garrisons. God has wonderfully
appeared with his people who first charged, that scarce ever any such Charge
was seen in England heretofore. The General and honest Cromwell behaved
themselves most gallantly. I am in have, and rest,

Lamport, 11. July, 1645. at 9. a clock at night. Your affectionate Friend, S.
J.

A Letter from an Officer in the Army to his brother in London, containing all
the particulars of the fight between Major General Massey and the Enemy, July
9.
Brother,
MY love to you and my sister, hoping you are in health as I am at writing
hereof; I give the Lord praise for it, yesterday about two in the afternoon,
Major Genesis Massey fell upon 2000. of Gorings Horse in Ilmore, and as soon as
we came in sight they ran a way, and we pursued them almost to their Garrison
of Lamport, we took near 500. Horse and 200. Prisoners, and slew about twenty:
Then Sir Thomas Fairfax was at Long-Sutton within two miles of Lamport, this
morning he drew forth into the Field, and Goring likewise drew forth of Lamport
and took a pass and lined the hedges with Musketeers near 2000. and drew up a
great Body of Horse, our General drew down toward him, and came up and
charged him, and we were engaged about two hours by parties, at last put the
Enemy to a retreat into Lamport, and we fell on and the enemy ran out at the
other end of the town, and set both sides of the streets on fire, and burnt
down about 20. houses, and ran away to Bridgewater, and sent this morning and
last night all their Carriages and Baggage, except two pieces of Ordnance, and
two Carriages of Ammunition in the Town which we now possess, we chased them
six miles, took about 1000. prisoners in the flight, and are now in pursuit of
them: The Lord follow us with success and give us grace to return glory to
God, for all his mercies extended toward us.

Lamport, July 10. The Messenger who stayed in the the Army two hours after
the date of these Letters, relates that our men brought in Prisoners and Horse
all the while he was there: so that he beheves there were not less then 2500.
Horse taken, and 2000. Foot prisoners: that the Sommersetshire Club-men brought
in diverse of the enemies straglers prisoners, that he heard, that Lieutenant
General Porter was taken.



FINIS.

