THE King of Terrors SILENCED, BY Meditations and Examples OF HOLY LIVING AND
HEAVENLY DYING, As the same was Recollected and Recommended By Sir John
Thorowgood of Kensington, Knight, To be distributed among his Kindred and his
Friends at his Funeral.

Contra vim mortis,
Non est medicamen in hortis.
LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXV.

To such Friends as shall be invited to accompany my CORPSE to the Earth.
THere be many useful Treatises set forth upon this subject (the Lord be
blessed) concerning Man's mortality, and for the Preparation and the Consolation
of all such as do mind their frail condition, and their souls salvation. This,
that I do here offer to you, as it has been for many years in my thoughts, and
for the most part prepared: so now, upon daily expectation of leaving this evil
world, do I intend it only for the use of some particular Friends; who, I
presume, will prize it before the best Marchpane, and prefer it before those
frequent entertainments, by Gloves, or Rings, or Ribbons. In our Health we have
profitable Sermons, and godly Ministers, and Christian Company, and holy men's
Books, to repair unto for soul-refreshment; but, in a retired languishing,
painful sickness, we may perhaps, be deprived of most of these: For this cause
I have here gathered, into as small a Volume as may be, much of it, from other
men's heavenly Meditations, that, which takes in the four several seasons of
decaying man; relating, 1. To the time of his present health. 2. To his first
sickning. 3. To the keeping his Chamber. 4. To certain signs of approaching
Death. 5. To these is added, (for the welcoming of it) some remarkable Examples
of holy men's cheerful deportment in their Christianly departing out of this
mortal Life. To hold you too long in an Epistle, is not proper for such an
occasion as this; and therefore I shall draw to a conclusion, and only
recommend it, and all you my good Friends, to the great Lord and Master of us
all, the Lord Jesus Christ; who is the Propitiation for our sins, and by whom
we are reconciled to the Father: in humble assurance whereof, I remain,

Your supported Friend, JOHN THOROWGOOD.
Kensington May 1. 1664.
A Friendly CAUTION.
TO you my Friends, that I shall leave behind,
Do I bequeath this Gift, where you may find
Some helps to use, when you most helpless are;
So to make it, has been my earnest care:
Peruse it then in Health, that so ye may
Be ready and preparing every day,
To welcome him, that is called the King of Fears,
That with him endless pain or comfort bears.
Then take it in good part, and read and pray,
That it may profit till your dying day:
Take heed betimes of customary sin,
If ever ye intend Heavens joys to win.
Let not your bosome-sin have any rest;
Let it not lodge one night within your breast:
Take heed, I say, no evil do prevail,
If It do, be sure that it you do bewail
With sighs and tears, with sorrow and with care,
Of thoughts, and words, and actions to beware.
Here pray again, with faith and godly fear,
That God your suit most graciously will hear;
That you may conquer self, and live and die,
And fix the safety of your soul on high.
Thus do I pray, thus will I pray, so long,
So long as I have breath, or life, or tongue.
Now farewell Friends; good Lord, I come to thee,
Who ever were a Savior unto me:
Receive me to thy self, and let me bring
A soul full ser, Halleluja's to sing,
(In that blessed Quire, and with that heavenly Host)
Glory to Father, Son, and holy Ghost. Amen.
Your revived Friend, J. T.

The CONTENTS.
PART. I. Meditations in time of Health.
I. SHort Sentences to mind us of our Mortality Page 1 II. A Prayer in Health,
preparing for Death Page 2 III. Meditations of Gods mercies Page 5 IV. Of the
danger and evil of Sin Page 8 V. Health, the fittest time for Repentance Page
11 VI. Holy resolutions in time of Health Page 14 VII. Meditations concerning
Sickness Page 16 VIII. Remedies against Sin Page 20 IX. Meditations of Death
Page 21 X. Resolutions against the vexations and the vanities of the World.
Page 25
PART II. Meditations at first Sickning.
I. A Prayer in time of Sickness Page 28 II. Concerning Prayer Page 33 III.
Meditations at first sickning Page 36 IV. Directions and consolations in time
of Sickness and Death Page 39 V. A Prayer before taking of Physic Page 42 VI.
A Prayer before Physic is working Page 44 VII. Six Meditations to cure the
fear of Death Page 45 VIII. Rules to make our Calling and Election sure Page 50
IX. Against doubtings of Gods mercy Page 52 X. Reading of Chapters, or portions
of Scripture Page 55
PART III. Meditations at growing Weak.
I. A Prayer upon danger of Death Page 56 II. Consolations concerning death
Page 60 III. Against impatience in Sickness Page 63 IV. Consolations in the
Lord Christ, etc. Page 67 V. Reading of Scripture, or part of Chap. Page 69 VI.
A Prayer where friends are to join ibid. VII. Meditations upon the days of
Death and of Doom Page 72 VIII. Short Prayers upon any release of pain Page 75
IX. Consolations against pain and fear of dying Page 77 X. Ejaculations to
Father, Son, and holy Ghost Page 79
PART IV. Meditations upon certain signs of Death.
I. SHort Prayers upon any intermission of Pain Page 81 II. A Prayer to be used
by Friends Page 82 III. Questions with Answers, upon any sign of Dying Page 85
IV. Portions of Scripture to be read Page 87 V. More Questions and Answers
ibid. VI. Short Prayers upon any abating of pain Page 90 VII. Friends to help
with short Ejaculations Page 91 VIII. More of these short Ejaculations Page 92
IX. A Prayer by Friends at leaving this Life Page 93 X. Another by Friends, at
yielding up the Ghost Page 95
PART V. Being ten blessed Examples of holy Persons, relating to a happy
passage out of this Life to a better.
I. THe Sickness and Death of the Earl of Hanaw Page 97 II. The last words of
Mr. John Meautys Page 113 III. Mrs. Juxons Life and Death Page 114 IV.
Archbishop of Armagh's Life and Death Page 118 V. Mr. Rhodes his Life and Death
Page 123 VI. Mrs. Rhodes her Life and Death Page 128 VII. Dr. Harris his Life
and Death Page 133 VIII. Mrs. Scot's Life and Death Page 141 IX. Monsieur du
Moulins Life and Death Page 149 X. Mr. Crook's Life and Death Page 156
PART I. Meditations in time of Health.
I. Short sentences to mind us of our Mortality.
NUllum momentum, sine motu ad mortem.

Quotidie morimur, quotidie enim demitur pars vitae, and tunc quoque cum
crescimus, vita decrescit.

Mill modis morimur mortales, nascimur uno.

Sunt hominum morbi mill, sed una salus.

Non est malum in morte, nisi post mortem.

Ossa arida and sepulchra, sunt praeceprores nostri.

Qui moritur vitiis antequam moritur corpore, non moritur morte aeterna, quando
moritur morte corporis.

Summum hominis bonum, bonus ex hac vita exitus.

Nasci and mori, commune est Regi and populo, diviti and paupero, fortunato and
misero.

Fleres si scires unum tua tempora mensem,

Rides quum non sit forsitan una dies.

Ante senectutem curavi (...) been viverem; in senectute, ut been moriar.

In mundo, spes nulla boni, spes nulla salutis.

Una salus servire Deo, sunt caetera frauds.

Pulvis and umbra sumus, pulvis nihil est nisi fumus:

Sed nihil est fumus, nos nihil ergo sumus.

Dic homo, quid speres, qui mundo totus adhaeres?

Tecum nulla feres, licet omnia solus haberes.

Heu fugiunt fraeno, non remorante, dies.

Mors tua, mors Christi, fraus mundi, gloria coeli,

Et dolor inferni, sint meditanda tibi.

II. A Prayer in health preparing for death. Qui orat and peccat, non orat sed
deludit.
O Most gracious Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh; thou which have the
keys of death and of Hell; thou which have prepared and rulest them both at
thy good pleasure: I humbly beseech thee be merciful to thy poor creature, and
preserve me from the terrors which are ready to seize upon me. O Lord, when I
do seriously consider how I dwell in a house of clay, the foundation being in
the dust, and how I must ere long make my bed in the dark, my spirit does seem
to fail, and my heart to faint; especially being told out of thy blessed Word,
That the sting of death is sin, and so mine own sin. O raise me up from sad and
unquiet thoughts: teach me how to overcome all discouragements; and help me to
call to mind those truths, As that the nature of death is to thy servants
quite altered; that the sting is plucked out, and it self swallowed up in
victory: O help me to consider, how by death thy poor servant shall be freed
from sickness of body, and anguish of mind; from sinning against thy heavenly
Majesty, and from the society of the wicked. Teach me truly to confess, and
humbly to bewail my manifold offenses, and then effectually to apply thy
gracious promises to my everlasting comfort, that so all fainting fears
proceeding from the sense of my sins, may turn to holy rejoicing, with a
cheerful expecting, and even to an earnest longing for the time of my
dissolution. And yet, that I may not beguile mine own soul, in laying claim to
that spiritual refreshing which belongs not to me; make me to labor diligently
for those assured evidences, and undeceiving forerunners of a happy departure.
I have been taught, O Lord, that if I live here without conscience, I shall
assuredly die without comfort; that holiness here, is the safe and certain way
to happiness hereafter; that I must seek to glorify thee, if I mean to be
glorified with thee; that I must fight the good fight of faith, both against
Satan, against the world, and against mine own corruptions; that I must
faithfully finish my course, and conscionably perform the service to which thou
have appointed me; that I must know thy Law, and keep the faith in soundness
and sincerity to the end, otherwise it will be in vain to expect a crown of
righteousness; that I must come to the first resurrection that is from sin, or
else I shall never escape the second death: O Lord, grant me therefore of thy
heavenly grace, that henceforth I may more carefully serve thee in holiness and
righteousness all the days of my life; endeavoring always, and in all
things, to have and to keep a clear conscience toward thee, and toward all
men. Lord, kill my corruptions in me, that I may be even dead to sin, but alive
to thee in Jesus Christ: affect my soul with a sense and an assurance of those
heavenly joys, which may work in my heart both fear and love also to thee the
God of all consolation. And because, if I live after the flesh (taking though
for it) to fulfill it, I shall die; therefore I beseech thee to mortify in me
the deeds of the body by thy Spirit, that so I may have my fruit in holiness,
and that my end may be everlasting life. Teach me, and enable me to be always
numbering my days, and to consider the uncertain certainty of my latter end,
that I may be dying every day, still looking, and still preparing for my
change, and making account that each day (by one means or other) may be the day
of my dissolution. Strengthen also, good Lord, my weak and fainting faith; make
me strong in thee, and in the power of thy might: seal me with the holy spirit
of promise, as with the earnest of my heavenly inheritance, that so no
tribulation in this world may disquiet me, no anguish in sickness discourage
me, no assault of Satan over come me; but that, come life, so long as thou
please, or come death, when or how it shall seem good unto thee, I may
cheerfully, and through Christ, commit my soul to thee, as to a faithful
Creator. Grant me, O Lord, these fatherly blessings, and what else thou in
thine infinite wisdom know better what is needful for me; and that for his
sake, who died to free me from death, even Jesus Christ the righteous; to whom
with thee and the holy Spirit, be given all honor, praise and glory, now and
ever. Amen.

III. Meditations of Gods mercies.
AMong all the infinite treasures, wherewith the largeness of the Godhead
abounds, there is nothing that refreshes, relieveth us miserable sinners,
worms of the earth, that lie low at his footstool, but the consideration of
Gods mercy. His Majesty astonisheth us, his glory beats us down, his
greatness strikes us dead; we adore his omnipotence, admire his wisdom, stand
in aw of his justice, fly from his vengeance: In mercy, in mercy alone it is,
that we taste how gracious, and how amiable the Lord is; of all Gods
attributes, none is more eminent then his mercy. Blessed be her womb that bare
us, and her paps that gave us suck: we live, and move, and have our being by
her; she grew up with us from our youth, and forsakes us not when we be
grey-headed; she gives us our daily bread, and hourly breath; she continues
us in life, comfort us in death, and crowns us with salvation. O mercy,
the Lady and Empress of all the attributes of God! what shall we say of thee?
Heaven and earth are full of thy glory: The glorious company of the Prophets
praise thee; the goodly fellowship of the Apostles praise thee; the noble army
of the Martyrs praise thee; the holy Church throughout the world does knowledge
thee. Thy mercy, O Lord, does shine upon us every way. There is, 1. Thy
preventing mercy; from whence I may say, that unless the Lord had preserved me
by his grace and power, my soul had launched out into the foulest sins. 2.
There is thy forbearing mercy, whereby thou do wait for the conversion of
foul offenders. 3. There is thy altering mercy, which from vanity and vice,
does settle us in ways of holiness. 4. There is thy embracing mercy, whereby
thou assurest us (being now converted) of thy favor in Christ Jesus. 5. There
is thy confirming mercy, which strengthens us in the course of godliness. 6.
There is thy comforting mercy, which sets us in the hope and expectation of
future glory. 7. There is thy crowning mercy, which gives us assurance and full
possession of eternal happiness in the Kingdom of Heaven. Yea Lord, thy
boundless mercies do every where, and every way, and every day, most graciously
enlarge themselves toward us, both in giving us all good things, and in
forgiving us all our offendings: but yet it must be our care, that we take heed
never to presume upon this mercy, but to have this sentence always in our
minds and memories, The Lord is merciful, that he may be feared. Amen. So be
it.

IV. Of the danger and evil of Sin.
1. WHo would be so hardy as to commit any one sin, if he did at all consider
the examples of Gods judgments for sin! and that first, Upon the whole world
which he had made: 2. Upon his Church, the quintessence of the world, when they
sinned in the wilderness. 3. Upon his Saints, the quintessence of his Church;
as David, his beloved. 4. On the Angels in Heaven offending. 5. On his dear Son
himself, when he took our sins upon him, and so felt the bitterness of Gods
justice: upon which one says well; Magna ta^^^^ amaritudo peccati, quae tantam
amaritudinem peperit; Great was the sowrness in our sinning, that produced so
great sharpness in (...) suffering.

2. Alas, what avails it for an impenitent sinner to seek for outward relief,
when our Executioner is within us! If we could shift from our selves, we might
have some hope of ease: but what if we could run from our selves? Alas, that is
nothing! Our souls may fly from our bodies; but our conscience will not fly
from our souls, nor our sins from our conscience. Some indeed, in the sharpness
of these pangs of sins, have leapt out of this private hell, that is in
themselves, into that common pit of hell; choosing rather to adventure on the
future pains that they have feared, then to endure the present horrors that
they have felt; gaining hereby nothing, but to that hell which was within them,
a second hell to be without them. The conscience leaves not where the fiends
begin; but both together join in torturing.

3. What can we think of sin? let the pleasure, or the profit, or the pretense
thereof be what it may be; yet before the execution of the least sin, let us
consider, That either we must repent that sin, and that with a sorrow equal to
the pleasure that we had in it, or else we shall for that one sin be condemned
to everlasting torments. Let this then, O let this only one consideration sink
deep, and dwell upon our hearts, and then it will prove a help to us during our
life.

4. Some obdurate foreheads there be, that would seem to laugh their sins out
of countenance; but certainly their hearts must needs bleed, when their faces
do countenance a smile; they do wear out many waking hours, when they think
they rest: yea, as their thoughts afford them no sleep, no more does their
sleep afford them rest; but while their senses are tied up, their sin is let
loose, frighting them with horrible dreams: Therefore sin no more, lest a worse
thing come unto you.

5. See, the tongue of a sinner begins first to dissemble, next to lie, next to
swear, next to blaspheme; and the next thing that the sinner takes in hand, is
the practice of evil actions: And here (as in other cases) the devil uses his
old method; he first teaches the man the art of fraud and cosening; after that,
the practice of extortion and oppression; then the trade of open theft and
violence: so as, by this time the man is grown a perfect artist and proficient,
being shown the way to swallow any bait, and to scruple at nothing at all.

V. Health, the fittest time for Repentance.
1. LEt us not delay our Repentance from day to day, but even in our youth
begin so necessary, so profitable a work. Can we think it fit to undertake (by
the serious exercises of Repentance, which is the work of works) to turn our
sinful souls toward God, when sickness has seized upon us, and when we are not
able to turn our tired limbs upon our softest bed? If we find it so hard a
matter to turn to heavenward now, we shall find it far harder then: for our
sin will wax stronger every day, but our strength for resistance will become
weaker; our conscience will frighten us, pain will distract us, fear of death
will amaze us, visiting of friends will disturb us; so as if we be not
beforehand furnished with a competency of faith, and patience, and holy
consolation, we shall not on our sick beds, be able to meditate our selves, nor
to observe the words of counsel or of comfort from others; we shall not be able
to pray alone, nor to join with others that would pray with us: therefore let
us beware, and begin Repentance betimes. He shall be sure to forget God at his
death, that did not daily remember him in his life: let us then prepare our
selves betimes for sickness and death; let us pull out the sting of death, by
early bewailing of sins past, by timely cleaving to God for the future, with
purposing and practicing sincerity of life and conversation.

2. We are the Israel of God; our sins are the Egyptians that keep us in
bondage: let us pray, that these Egyptians may be drowned in that red Sea, and
washed away by that precious blood of Jesus Christ.

3. In our health let us take heed of all sins; for sins are the only enemies
to Christ: they be those soldiers that apprehended him; those tormentors that
scourged him; those thorns that gored his head; those nails that pierced his
feet; that spear that spilt his blood; that Cross that took away his life.

4. Take heed; for he that does not repent to day, has a day more to repent
of, and yet a day less to repent in. It was the saying of a holy man, when he
heard a clock to strike: Hark, here is one hour more that I have to answer for.

5. Defer not repentance till sickness come; it may presently be violent; and
then, if our reason continue (which is oftentimes otherwise) it will be most
necessary to employ that reason and our best thoughts on the highest
concernments, on the world that we are going to, and not on the world that we
are about to leave: let terrene things always give place to celestial things,
that so we may be in Heaven here.

VI. Holy resolutions in time of Health.
1. I Will always remember, That the greatest task that I have to finish in
this world, it is to die well, and to make a happy departure out of this life:
for they which die well, die not to die, but to live for ever.

2. When I would do any good, or receive any good, I will offer up mine
endeavors in a sacrifice to thee, O Lord, in Christ; beseeching thee to give
thine holy Spirit to sanctify this thine own sacrifice.

3. In all mine actions I will seek to redeem the time of my life that is past,
with sad and serious repentance: I will regard and consider the time present
with care and diligence; and be watchful for the time to come with providence.

4. Among other my daily business, I will be sure to exercise my self in reading
of something out of the Word of God; and also to be careful, not only to serve
God my self, but to see that all under my charge shall do the same.

5. I will account of every day, as of the day of my death; and will endeavor
to live now, as though I were even now to die: I will do those duties every
day, which I would be doing if it were my last day.

6. Whatsoever I shall undertake in this life, I will enjoy that and all things
in God, and so God in all things, nothing in it self; so shall my joys neither
change nor perish: for howsoever the things themselves may alter or fade, yet
he, in whom they are mine, is not alterable, but ever like himself, faithful,
permanent and everlasting.

7. Passions are said to be either irascible, as sorrow, hatred, anger; or else
concupiscible, as love, desire, joy, hope: In both of them I will be careful to
use a great deal of moderation: I may love the creature, but I will not adore
it; I will not love the creature more then the Creator: I may desire, but not
all things equally; not earth in comparison of Heaven: I may rejoice, but that
joy shall be sober and spiritual: I may hope, but not for impossibilities: I
may be angry, but not to sin: I may weep, but chiefly for sin.

8. In pleasures and recreations, I will not be so much given up to jocundum,
as to forget utile and honestum: pleasures may blaze for a while like crackling
thorns, but they presently vanish, and quickly come to nothing. O Lord, let
these resolutions turn to prayers; and let those prayers obtain a blessing,
through thine infinite mercy in Jesus Christ. Amen.

VII. Meditations concerning sickness.
1. SIckness is sent either, 1. To try our patience, for the confirming of
others; or, 2. That our faith may be found (in the day of the Lord) glorious
and laudable, to the honor of God: or, 3. To correct or amend whatsoever is
amiss in us, or any way offensive to our heavenly Father.

2. Sickness shall turn to our profit, and help us forward in the way that
leads to everlasting life, 1. If we can truly repent us of our sins. 2. If we
can bear our sickness patiently. 3. If we can trust in Gods mercies assuredly.
4. If we can render him humble thanks for his fatherly visitation. 5. If we can
and do submit our selves wholly to his good will and pleasure.

3. There is no greater comfort to tender Christians, then to be made like to
Christ, by patient suffering sickness, trouble, or death it self: for even he
went not up to endless joy, but he endudured first extremity of pain; he entered
not into glory, before he suffered and was crucified: so our way to eternal
happiness, is to suffer with Christ; and our door to everlasting life, is
cheerfully to die with and for Christ, that we may rise again from death, and
dwell with him to all eternity.

4. Sickness or other afflictions, are not signs either of Gods hatred, or of
man's reprobation; but rather tokens and pledges of his fatherly love: therefore
Christians in the primitive Church were wont to praise and bless the Lord for
afflicting them in this life; so did the Apostles rejoice, that they were
accounted worthy to suffer for the name, and for the sake of Christ.

5. In the beginning of sickness, and indeed at all times, we are to search
deeply into our own hearts; as for all, so chiefly for some secret bosom-sin.
2. To confess our offenses to God, and acknowledge our selves guilty, even of
hell, and of eternal death. 3. We are to remember, that the God of Israel is a
merciful God, and to cry to him from a faithful and a penitent heart; even as a
condemned person would do for pardon, vowing amendment of life, in case that
health be restored.

6. In our strongest health, and before any approach or appearance of death or
sickness, we should manifest our real and sincere conversion: 1. In a strict
examination what our hearts are, and so what our ways and courses are. 2. In
confessing of all our sins and offenses, both open and secret, of older time
and of later years: then, what duties we have omitted. 3. In seeking and
begging with sighs unfeigned, and groans of the Spirit, that God will pardon
them all, and be reconciled unto us in the face of Jesus Christ. Then will
sickness and death it self be most welcome to us.

If sickness have seized upon us, it is high time to consider, That a man
cannot presently carry his lusts, his corruptions, his hardened heart, his
unbelief with him into Heaven: no, it cannot be hoped for; let us repent ere it
be too late; let us turn wholly to the Lord, and believe in him with all our
hearts. Amen.

VIII. Remedies against Sin.
1. LEt us not forget, That our particular sins and corruptions are to be
thought upon with grief, and to be inquired into, whether they be weakened in
us, or still remaining in their full strength; and whether we do now resist
them every day, with more and more force, faithfulness and constancy.

2. Whenever we be about the committing of sin, and find the grace of God
forbidding us, and calling us from it, and yet do run on headlong into it: take
heed; for this is no better then crucifying of Christ afresh; and we do no
other, then (as the Jews) refuse a gracious Savior, and take Barabbas.

3. With our eyes, let us always behold God present; with our ears, let us be
ever hearing the sound of that memorable voice, Arise, and come to Judgment;
with our hands, let us be ever working and exercising that which is good; in
our hearts, let us ever lodge the Word of God; and with our feet, let us be
constantly standing in the courts of the Lords house, whenever his Word is
there preached.

4. The vows which in Baptism I did make by others; that is, To forsake the
devil, the world, and the flesh, so as not to follow them, nor be led by them:
the same (for the everlasting peace of our precious souls) we must be careful
daily and hourly to renew in our selves.

5. We must with diligence avoid all kind of enticements to that which is
evil; as wanton discourse, wandering thoughts, and wicked company; and indeed
all the vanities of the world.

6. We must be frequent in humble, faithful, and devout prayer: for none is
overcome by a temptation, till he give over holy, constant, and zealous praying.

7. From the bottom of our hearts, let us resolve constantly to embrace, and to
observe whatsoever is found to be the will of God; yea, though all the world
should repine and persecute us for it: so shall our duties and our services be
regulated by precept, and winged by promises.

8. A sovereign remedy it will prove, to be meditating at all hours, on the
hour of death. Observe carefully, and do what has been said diligently, Et in
aeternum non peccabis.

IX. Meditations of death.
THe highest delights, and the greatest confidence that is in man, cannot shift
off the importunate and the violent troubles of this adversary. That example in
Dan. 5. may serve for all. That Chaldean Tyrant was carousing with his
Concubines, singing triumphant Carols to the praise of his carved gods: yet how
was his courage abated, when death writ him a letter of summons! Now no music,
no pleasant moving jest could remove his deep-struck melancholy. O death, how
imperious art thou to carnal minds! Some do fear, not so much to be dead, as
to die; and some do fear, not so much to die, as to be dead: whereas, the true
Christian (armed only with humble confidence, and holy believing in his future
happiness) can comfortably encounter him, and in triumph can sing, as 1 Cor.
15.55. O death, where is thy sting? etc. Looking cheerfully toward Heaven, he
can unfeignedly say, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. That
dissolution is happy, which parting the soul from the body, does unite both
body and soul to God. He that sees the glory of the end, cannot but contemn the
hardness of the way.

Of all sleeps, death may be said to be the sweetest: children begin it to us,
strong men seek it, and Kings themselves fall to this center.

The pace of death may be soft, but i^ is sure; and every man (live he never so
long) is a dying man, till he be dead.

We should labor to get a particular knowledge and assurance, both of our
happiness in death, and of our salvation after death. And here remember, that
it is of excellent use and comfort, to be frequent in receiving of the blessed
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

On purpose, and in mercy, has the Lord left, both our last day, and the last
day, uncertain to us; that we might always meditate on them, and be every day
preparing for them.

It is the negligent forgetfulness of death, that makes our life sinful, and
our death terrible. He that lives holily, cannot die unhappily.

He is most certainly blessed, that dies in the Lord, what kind of death
soever it be.

He only is fearless of death, that can say upon good ground; Whether I live or
die, I am the Lords.

He that is the true child of God, will never repine or murmur at his rod,
though it be accompanied with death.

We may well fear a storm is coming, when the father does call his children so
hastily home.

Let us then say with Jobs heart, ( Job 14.14.) All the days of my appointed
time will I wait, till my change come. So be it.

X. Resolutions against the vexations and vanities of the world.
THe danger of this world, is seen in the paucity of such as do pass well
through it; and also in the multitude of them that perish in it. All things
therein are but extreme vanity, purchasing to the owner nothing but anguish and
vexation of spirit: therefore will I bid this vain world adieu; and (that I may
loath it, and love God the better) I will be continually meditating on what he
has prepared for me in Heaven, and especially on the means of attaining it;
which is, 1. The mercy of God who gives it. 2. The merit of Christ that bought
it. 3. The holy Gospel that offers it. 4. On faith that receives it. 5. On
the blessed Spirit that seals it to my poor soul. I will with Christ, and by
his gracious assistance, resolve to endure all for him: all the contempts and
persecutions of the world; all the troubles of the body, all the tortures of
death; all the torments of Satan, so as I may enjoy my Lord Jesus Christ and
his Kingdom. I will renounce and contemn all sorts of vanities here below, that
I may enjoy the presence of the Lamb; and with him be singing Hallelujahs
everlastingly, in the highest Heavens. I am weak: but this do I resolve, in the
strength of him, who is the Almighty Lord God.

I will be neither a fool, nor a rebel; not ignorant from whence my crosses
come, neither will I be impatient in them, knowing that they come from my most
gracious God: that he has stinted all my miseries; he has weighed out every
dram of my sorrows; so as all the powers of hell shall not be able to cast in
one scruple more then God has allotted for me. We know, that even savage
creatures will endure to be smitten by their Masters, and yet be ready to tear
strangers in pieces: shall I then struggle with him that made me, and framed
and moderated the whole world, when he is pleased to smite me? No, we should
learn and remember, that our extremities in misery, are Gods best oportunities
to show mercy.

I will have no plot, but against hells policy: I will have no design, but
against sins stratagems: I will learn how I am to act in this life, to my God
fidelity, to my Prince loyalty, to my friends amity, to my self humility: so
shall I be kept from future falls, and also be guarded from present fears: for
this we are assured of, that God has either the Castle of a providence, or the
Ark of a promise, or the faithfulness of his power, or the all sufficiency of
his own grace, for a retirement to his people, in times of greatest storms and
tempests.

PART II. Meditations at the first Sickning.
I. A Prayer in time of Sickness.
In their affliction (says the Lord, Hos. 54, 6.) they will seek me early. So
Egypt's burden made Israel cry to God: so David's troubles made him to pray: so
Hezekiah's sickness caused him to weep: so misery drove the Prodigal home: and
so let me in this my trouble, sincerely and believingly, hasten to my God in
humble supplication.

OH most righteous Judge; and yet in Jesus Christ, my gracious Father: I a poor
wretched sinner, do here return unto thee with the Prodigal, that was annoyed
with want and hunger; and do humbly acknowledge, that this pain and sickness is
none other then the just stroke of thine own hand: but though my sins have been
many and great, yet in wrath thou do remember mercy; for thy corrections have
been easy and few: I have deserved to be smitten with some fearful death, so
as to have perished in my sins; but thou, O Lord, besides the dictates of thy
heavenly Word and boly Spirit, do now visit me in mercy; giving me by this
sickness, not only warning to consider, and time to repent me of all my
manifold transgressions, but also opportunity to sue to the throne of grace for
pardon; so as I do not apprehend this visitation as a sign of thy heavy
displeasure against me, but rather as an assured pledge and token of thy
fatherly kindness; by this temporal chastisement to draw me to the judging of
my self, to be humbled for all my offendings, to abhor my self in dust and
ashes, so as not to be condemned with the world: for thy holy Word has taught
us, That thou scourgest every son that thou receivest; and that if I do
patiently and believingly endure thy chastising hand, thou do offer thy self
as a tender father to relieve me. O Lord, how full of mercy and compassion is
thy nature, that have dealt so graciously with me, in affording to me a long
time of health and prosperity; such, as few have received more! I do confess, O
Lord, that thou most justly do afflict my body with sickness; for my soul
before, was sick of long prosperity, and even surfeited with health, and ease,
and peace, and plenty, and fullness of bread. A wretched sinner I have been,
void of all goodness by nature, and full of evil works by custom: but seeing
thy mercy is above all, I beseech thee heavenly father, in Jesus Christ, for
his sake, and for his meritorious suffering, and according to the multitude of
thy mercies, cast me not out of thy gracious presence, neither reward me after
my iniquities. As thou art the helper of the helpless, and the God of all
consolation, to such as trust in thee: as thou art pleased to lay this sickness
upon me; so let it work that good effect which thou in thy great mercy do
intend. And good Lord, send thy holy Spirit into my heart, by which this and
all other thy dispensations may be sanctified to me; that I may use the same as
a lesson in thy School, whereby to be taught, both the greatness of my misery
and wants, and also the fullness of thy riches and mercy, in the Lord Christ; to
be so humbled at the one, as not to despair of the other. Grant that I may
renounce all confidence in my self, and in every other creature or means; so as
only to put the whole trust of my preservation and salvation in thy boundless
mercy. And for as much, O Lord, as thou know how weak a vessel I am, full of
frailty, impotence and imperfection; and how by nature I am froward and
impatient under the least cross, and under the lightest affliction: Do thou, O
Lord, (who art the giver of all good gifts) indue me with heavenly grace, with
holy patience, and with godly fortitude; so as quietly to resign up my self,
even body and soul, to what thou shall appoint for me. And of thy tender mercy,
lay no more upon me, then thou shall please to enable me comfortably to bear.
Strengthen me by thy healy grace, that during this sickness, and in all other
times of affliction, I may behave my self in all humility, and meekness, and
faith, and quiet repose, in the sight and presence of those friends or
assistants that shall come or be about me: and also, that I may both thankfully
receive, and readily improve, all such seasonable counsel, and heavenly
consolation, and holy direction, as shall proceed from them. And likewise, that
I may show such Christianly example of childe-like patience; and withal, may
give forth such godly lessons of heavenly comfort, as may be both apparent
arguments, and sure testimonies of my holy profession; and also of use and
instruction to them, how they are to behave themselves in the day of their
visitation. I do confess, O Lord, that in regard of my great provocations, I
have deserved both sickness and death it self; and I do now desire no longer to
live, then to reform my evil life, and in some better measure to set forth thy
glory: but if thou have, according to thy eternal decree, appointed by this
sickness, to call for me out of this transitory life; Lord, help me willingly
to resign my self into thy hands, saying, Thy blessed will be done; only I do
most humbly beseech thee, even for Jesus Christ his sake, who is the Son of thy
love, to pardon all my sins, and in him to be reconciled to me; and so to
prepare my poor soul, that by a lively faith, and unfeigned repentance, she may
be ready to yield up her self when thou shall be pleased to call for her. O
holy Father, thou art the hearer of prayers; hear thou in heaven these my weak
supplications, and in this my sickness (which is like to increase upon me) be
pleased to show thy Almighty power and goodness: Teach my heart in holy
believing to say, Whether I live, or whether I die, I am Christ's, and Christ is
mine; and he shall be advantage to me, both here and hereafter, and for ever.
To him, with the Father and the holy Ghost, be ascribed all honor, and glory,
and power, and dominion, for ever and ever. Amen.

The Lord will be a refuge, (Psa. 9.9.) in time of trouble. Hear me, O Lord my
God, (Psalm. 13.3, 5.) that I sleep not in death: for my trust is in thy mercy,
and my heart is joyful in thy salvation.

II. Concerning Prayer.
CHrist, and God, and all, is laid out for the good of the godly: they may go
to God with holy boldness, and tell him wherein they are troubled, pained,
afflicted, oppressed. If we ask great things from God, he is well pleased with
it; but if we ask riches, and honor, and worldly preferment, these are the low
things of the footstool, and they are often in mercy denied: let us therefore
of God, ask peace of conscience, pardon of sin; let us crave power to overcome
our lusts, strength to withstand temptations, joy in the holy Ghost, and grace
to glorify our dear Redeemer, both in doing and in suffering. God has most
assuredly all good things lying ready by him; only he looks that Prayer should
fetch them from him. Now observe: When our great Master Christ would give us a
perfect pattern of Prayer, both for matter and for manner, he there winds up,
and wraps up all with a conclusion, which consists of certain reasons, to
persuade our heavenly Father to hear our prayers; or at least, to assure our
souls that he does, and that he will hear them: and these reasons have a
certain influence into all and every one of the petitions. Thine is the
Kingdom: for this reason we do expect, that as a good King thou will receive
us, and answer our petitions. It is thy concernment, as a King, to have thine
honor advanced; for this reason, Hallow thine own Name; glorify it in the
Church; advance thy Will in it; sustain us thy Subjects; pardon our Offenses;
keep and defend us from all evil, especially our spiritual enemies: for thine
is the Power; such power as Kings do want; but thou art fully able, 1. To exalt
thine own Name. 2. To extend thy Kingdom over all. 3. To fit us to do thy Will.
4. To minister to our Necessities. 5. To pardon our Sins. 6. To preserve us
from, and to deliver us out of all evil; and then, thine is the Glory; the
hallowing of thy Name is the chief part of thy glory; thy Kingdom is the prime
place of thy glory. And herein art thou glorified, that is, when we set forth
thy praise; when we obey thy will; when thou providest for thy people; when
thou forgivest their sins; when thou comfortest them in their calamities: So do
we trust and hope, that thou will do all these things for us.

Take heed; for if in our prayers we come to God, with a guilty defiled
conscience; with cold affections; with dead spirits, not departing from
iniquity, and without a pure heart: This is howling, and not praying.

Prayer, by good Christians, has been styled and esteemed the key of Heaven,
and the confusion of hell; the standard of our spiritual warfare; the
conservation of our peace; the bridle of our impatience; the guardian of our
temperance; the seal of chastity; the advocate of offenders; the consolation of
the afflicted; and the Pasport of the dying. Thus the just do live and die in
prayer.

A Christian without prayer, may be compared to a Be without a sting; which
can make neither wax nor honey.

A true Christian makes prayer not only his lock and key of the day, but his
bolt at night; yea, his very meals and recreations: for this it was, that the
primitive Christians were called the crickets of the night; because when sleep
did fail, their hearts were lifted up in constant ejaculatory prayer.

III. Meditations at first sickning.
WIth one cross, be it of sickness or other affliction, God does usually work
two cures: 1. By chastisement for sins past. 2. By preventing of sins to come;
so as we may say with the Prophet, Before I was afflicted I went astray; but
now (thy grace assisting) I will keep thy statutes.

2. God sends sickness, and other afflictions, to seal to us our adoption: For
every child whom God loves, he chastises; and suffers the wicked still to
continue in their sins without correction.

3. God sends sickness to wean our hearts from the love of the world, and of
worldly vanities; and to cause us more early to desire, and more earnestly to
long for Heaven.

4. Of all afflictions and crosses, sickness may be held to come most
immediately from the hand of God, and that because of sin.

5. By sickness and affliction, God does exercise his children, and the graces
which he bestows upon them: he thereby tries and refineth our faith, to make
it to shine more clear; he thereby stirs us up to pray more frequently, and
more zealously. He sees what patience we have learned all this while in his
School: and so concerning our hope in Christ; our love to the glorious Trinity;
our charity to our Christian brethren, and the like.

6. Sanctified sickness and affliction is a singular help to further us in our
conversion; and by unfeigned sorrow and true repentance, to drive us home to
our heavenly Father in holy believing.

7. Sickness and affliction do work in us, not only Christianly love and
charity, but pity and compassion also toward our brethren; so as to have a
fellow-feeling with them in all their sufferings.

8. God does many times make use of our sickness, and other afflictions, not
only as means, and as examples, whereby to manifest to others the faith,
patience, and other graces that he has bestowed upon us; but also by the same,
to strengthen and to encourage others, that have not yet received so great a
measure of faith and of assurance as we have done.

9. By sickness and afflictions, God works us to a conformity of the image of
his Son Jesus Christ; who being the Captain of our salvation, was made perfect
through suffering.

10. God sends sickness, that the godly may thereby be humbled, in respect of
their own condition and misery; and that God may be glorified, by a gracious
delivering them out of all their troubles, when in sincerity they call upon him
for his help and succor.

IV. Directions and Consolations in time of Sickness and Death.
LEt every Christian upon his sick bed, not only with patience look for death,
but with comfort also; and that for these reasons: 1. Because the death of
every member of Christ (as well as of others) is foreseen and ordained by the
special decree and providence of God. 2. Reason is taken from the promise of
God, Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord; for they shall rest
from their labors, and their works follow them. 3. He that dies in Christ,
his soul and his body are really united to Christ, according to the Covenant of
grace. 4. God has also promised his gracious and special presence to such sick
and dying persons as do belong to him: so he says, Isa. 43.1. Fear not, for I
have redeemed thee: I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine; when thou
passest through the waters, I will be with thee.

A little blast of sickness does oftentimes become mortal, and we are many a
time carried away in that blast: and if we should hold out a while longer, we
do but daily consume and moulder away with old age, till we return to our dust;
and at last do become but a coffin for the worms.

Let not a dying man think on the pangs of death, which may perhaps be light
and short; but let him wholly fix his thoughts, and the eye of his faith, upon
that blessed estate of eternal life, which Jesus Christ has purchased for him.

In the business of sickness, and especially of death, lay aside all curious
speculations of Gods unsearchable counsels; all cogitations and considerations
of works, of traditions of Philosophy, yea, and of the Law of God too; and run
strait to the manger, embrace the babe Christ in thine arms, yea, in thy soul:
behold him as he was born, growing up, conversant amongst men; as teaching,
dying, rising again, ascending above the heavens, and having power above all
things. This thought, this sight, will make thee to shake off all troubles and
terrors, as the Sun drives away the clouds.

We must live in the world, as in a strange Country, where we are every day
taking our farewell, being (as in sickness) always ready to depart; and because
the instant of our departing is uncertain, we should wait for it every hour.
The wise Christian, that hearkneth to the minutes of his breathing, can never
be surprised when the hour of his last sigh does strike.

Our duty in sickness, or any other affliction, is to inquire and find out the
cause; if it be for sin, to humble our selves, to justify God, to turn to him,
to submit to his will, to seek his favor, to mind our own duty, and to live
by faith.

V. A Prayer, before taking of Physic.
O Lord, give me perfect love to thy heavenly Majesty, that I may not delight
in any thing at all but thee; nor look for any other safety at all but in thee;
nor seek for any other help but from thee.

O most holy and most merciful Father in Jesus Christ; who art the Lord both of
health and of sickness; who killest and make alive; who bring down to the
grave, and raisest up again: I do humbly come unto thee, unto thee, as to the
only Physician of Physicians; who can as easily cure my soul from sin, as my
body from sickness. I do not at this time desire either life or death, but do
wholly yield up my self to thy blessed will: death indeed is the reward of sin:
for sin, when it is finished, brings forth death: yet seeing thy gracious
providence (while life remains) has appointed means for thy distressed
children to use, (and by the lawful and thankful use of it, and humble seeking
to thee for it) to expect thy fatherly blessing, for healing of their
distempers, and restoring them to their health; In this my necessity, I do
apply my self to the Physician, and am entering upon the course which he shall
prescribe: O Lord help me, that I may cast my self wholly upon thee. Teach me
to call faithfully upon thy great and glorious Name for a blessing upon it: It
is thou, O Lord, that did recover Hezekiah, that did cleanse the Lepers,
that did restore the woman with the bloody Issue; and it is from thy great
mercy, Almighty power, and gracious providence alone, that I expect deliverance
out of this malady: Oh be pleased, of thine infinite goodness, to sanctify to
me this Physic that I shall now take; and so to prosper the same, that (if it
be thy blessed will and pleasure) it may remove this sickness, and take away
this pain, and restore me to my former health and strength: but if thou have
appointed this sickness to draw me nearer to thy self, in constant obedience
and holy dependence upon thy heavenly Majesty: or, if thou have sent this
sickness as thy messenger, to call me out of this mortal life; then help me to
say with integrity and sincerity, Thy will be done; and enable me with
cheerfulness to submit to thy divine pleasure. And this I do humbly and most
earnestly beg of thee, to assist me with thy holy Spirit, for the increase of
faith and patience in this my day of trouble. O Lord, let thy tender and
fatherly compassion be never wanting to me; but in the midst of all
extremities, be pleased to support me with thy continual help, that I may both
willingly and christianly resign up my soul (as the price of thine own blood)
into thy gracious hands and blessed protection. Grant this, O Lord, to thy poor
servant, and whatever else in thine infinite wisdom and goodness thou know
to be necessary for my present weak condition; such as may tend to my
everlasting comfort, and thine eternal glory. All this I beg, for Jesus Christ
his sake; to whom with thee and thy holy Spirit, be ascribed all Majesty,
power, and glory, now and for ever. Amen.

VI. A Prayer before Physic is on working.
O Holy Father in Jesus Christ, when in my weakness the time shall come, that
Satan shall maliciously accuse me; when my unquiet conscience shall bear
witness against me; when worldly advantages shall forsake me; and when every
creature, and every thing shall seem to set themselves against me, and that for
my manifold, and my reiterated sins against thy heavenly Majesty; then do thou
(who art the God of all consolation) do thou strengthen me in my most holy
faith, so that If all not at all from thee, though every thing does seem to
flee from me. But, Lord, I beseech thee, let thy fullness supply my wants, let
thy mercy do away my offendings, let thy holy Spirit prepare my soul for thy
heavenly appointment; let thy merits, O most blessed Savior, enrich my
poverty: Oh, let thy dear and precious blood wash away all the spots and stains
of my poor polluted soul. And Lord, be pleased at this time, to vouchsafe a
blessing upon the Physic which I have now taken, for removing of my pain, and
recovery of my health; and if thou shall afford this mercy to thy poor
creature, then Lord, I beseech thee grant grace, that the same health and ease
may be employed and improved for the glory of thy great Name, and for the
present comfort and final salvation of my poor soul. And all this I beg, in,
and by, and through the merits of thee my blessed Redeemer, Jesus Christ; to
whom, with the heavenly Father and the holy Spirit, be given, as is most due,
blessing, and honor, and glory, and power, both now and for ever. Amen.

VII. Six Medicines to cure the fear of Death.
1. THe first Medicine, is contempt of the world: For, 1. It will be an easy
thing to die, when our hearts are once freed from the love of earthly things;
therefore should we shun the overmuch care and business of the world, and study
to be quiet, and to meddle only with our own matters, and to draw them into as
narrow a scantling as our calling will permit. 2. We should avoid (as much as
may be) the society of the worlds favorites, that admire nothing but what this
world affords; that know no other happiness but that of this life, whereby our
hearts are too much entangled. 3. We should sort our selves with such
Christians, as do practice as well as praise the contempt of the world, and by
whose example and discourse we may be brought to be in love with Heaven. 4. We
should daily observe, to what things in the world our hearts are most carried
out, and by fervent supplications to strive with the Lord to suppress them. 5.
We should be always pondering in our thoughts, those things which may show us
the vanity of the world, and the vileness and transitoriness of the best things
which the world affords.

2. The second Medicine, or cure of the fear of death, is Mortification. 1. We
must thoroughly mortify all our bosom and beloved sins; our sins must die
before we die, otherwise our dying will be dangerous to us: it is the love and
the delight that men take in sin, which makes them so much afraid to die; or
else it may be the remembrance of some filthy sin committed, which does
terrify the conscience; therefore we must make sure of our repentance. Now he
may be said truly to repent himself of all sin, that allows not in himself any
sin. 2. We must here add the care of an upright, and of an unreproveable
conversation: A mavelous help and encouragement it is to die in peace, when a
man does live without offense, and upon just ground can plead the integrity of
a holy conversation.

3. The third Medicine, or cure against the fear of death, is Assurance. We
should be diligent to get assurance, both of Gods favor, and of our own
calling and election; for hereby will an entrance be given into the heavenly
Kingdom. Simeon could willingly die, when his eyes had seen his salvation: the
full assurance of faith does wonderfully establish the heart, and guard it from
the fear of death, and also does breed a longing desire to come to Christ. St.
Paul can be confident, when he is able to say, I know whom I have believed;
and, I am assured, that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him.

4. The fourth Medicine, is setting our house in Order. A great part of the
fear and trouble of men's minds on their sick beds is over, when (with good
deliberation and advice) they have settled their Estates, and disposed of their
worldly affairs. This is a matter not to be put off to a time of languishing
sickness, when the trouble of it breeds disquiet to their minds; when their
memory and understanding is disabled; when this necessary duty of preparing for
death is thereby hindered, if not wholly neglected.

5. The fifth Medicine, is, 1. A frequent meditation of Death. We must learn to
die daily; for this will lessen, yea, it will remove the fear of dying: Oh,
this remembrance of our latter end, and learning to number our days, is an
admirable rule for to practice. 2. We should begin this exercise betimes. In
this, lay the commendation of those wise Virgins, and so of Job, who resolved
to be always waiting till his change should come.

6. The sixth Medicine against the fear of death, is holy and hearty Prayer.
Because our natures are extremely deceitful, there is a necessity of frequent
and faithful prayer to be used, which will never fail us in whatsoever is fit
for us: It is that which God will not deny to those that ask it in sincerity,
and in the Name of the Lord Jesus; and that because it is a thing which Christ
our blessed Savior did especially aim at in his own death; namely, to deliver
us from the power, yea, from the fear of death.

VIII. Rules to make our Calling and Election sure.
1. WE must be diligent hearers of Gods holy Word; for faith comes by hearing:
what is the reason, that so many do waver and wander out of the way that is
called Holy? Is it not, because they are idle hearers? is it not, because they
will not be at the pains to hear so carefully, as to find what their case and
condition is, and what it does require?

2. Rule. We must frequently receive the Lords Supper: even every experienced
Christian is able to tell us, That this holy Ordinance has (by the mercy and
blessing of God) a very notable confirming and establishing power in it.

3. Rule. If we would have our Calling and our Election to be made sure, then
must we sue to God, as the Apostles did, that the Lord would increase our
faith; for unless Gods Spirit do testify together with our spirit, we can
never come to any assurance of faith, nor to any certainty of salvation: Paul
may plant, and Apollo may water; but it is God alone that must give the
increase.

4. Rule. If we desire to make our Calling and Election sure, we must be
frequent in meditating of Gods promises, as they are set forth in his holy
Word; and accordingly we must try our estate, by the particular marks which are
peculiar to Gods elect.

5. Rule. If we would make our Calling and Election sure, we must be plentiful
in good works: for, who are they which lay up for themselves a good foundation
against the time to come, and so laying hold upon eternal life, but such as are
rich in good works? We are not only to repent, and to turn to God; but to do
works meet for repentance.

6. Rule. That we may make our Calling and our Election sure, Let us always be
making our desires known to the Lord in our humble supplications, that he will
establish us in the most holy faith; that believing in him, we may remain
immovable; neither in prosperity to forget him, or in adversity to despair of
him.

And thus we see the way to a comfortable departure out of this life: The Lord
give us grace to chufe this way; that so by our death, we may both glorify
God, bring comfort and good example to our friends, and everlasting benefit to
our own souls. Amen.

IX. Against doubtings of Gods mercy.
1. LEt us confess, even all our sins to God. 2. Let us be careful to make
satisfaction to whomsoever in this life we have wronged, be it in goods or in
good name; without which there can be no true repentance, and so no salvation.
3. Call upon God for mercy and pardon in the Lord Jesus, and labor for faith
in him; and then in the midst of pain and doubting, remember, that the way to
Heaven is by the gates of Hell. 4. Get a lively faith in Christ Jesus, and so
tarry the Lords leisure; be strong, and he shall comfort our hearts. 5. In the
sense of our greatest sins, let us remember, that Gods mercies do shine more in
pardoning great offenders, then small transgressors; for where sin abounds,
there does grace rejoice to abound much more. 6. God did never forsake any,
till they did first forsake him. 7. God calls all (even sinners that are
heavy laden) to be refreshed: the least drop of Christ's blood, is of more merit
to procure Gods mercy for our salvation, then all our sins whatsoever, can be
of force to procure his wrath to our condemnation. 8. Let our sins be of never
so long continuance, or of never so heavy a weight; let us but repent and
believe, and then the blood of Jesus Christ will cleanse us from all sins. 9.
Though our vows and promises of new obedience have not been exactly performed;
yet upon our tears of true repentance, through faith in the Lord Jesus, we
shall be recovered as often as we are wounded to death by sin: for our salvation
is grounded, not upon the constancy of our obedience, but upon the firmness of
Gods gracious Covenant with us in Christ Jesus. 10. No sin, though never so
great, ought to drive any Christian into despair, seeing, if he believe and
repent, he has the pardon of all his sins confirmed to him; and that, 1. By
the Word of God: At what time soever a sinner repents, and turns to the
Lord, he will blot out all his offenses, etc. 2. By the Oath of God: As I live
(says he) I desire not the death of the wicked. No sin does debar a man from
God, but only incredulity and impenitency. Believe it, O thou drooping soul;
our unfeigned desire to repent, is as pleasing and as acceptable to God, as our
perfectest repentance can be.

X. Reading of Chapters, or portions of Scripture.
REad carefully and considerately these Chapters following, or part of them.

Mat. 26, 27, and 28 Chapters, being he History of our Saviors Passion and
Resurrection.

John the 2 Chapter. Romans the 7 and 8 Chapt. Heb. the 11 and 12 Chapt.

PART III. Meditations at growing Weak.
I. A Prayer upon danger of Death.
OH most glorious and most gracious Lord God, thy providence does extend to the
uttermost parts of the earth, and thy favorable beams do shine upon the chief
of sinners; be pleased to cast thy compassionate eye upon me, whom thou have
brought to the bed of sickness: just it is with thee thus to correct me, yea,
to destroy me, body and soul: seeing I have so grievously offended thee, I will
not, I dare not, I cannot plead against thee; it is my duty rather to magnify
thy mercy, that have spared me so long, and art now pleased so graciously and
so fatherly to chastise me, it being free to thy justice to cut me off, and to
deliver me over to the Prince of darkness. Unworthy I am, I do confess, of this
access to thy gracious presence, in that I have formerly been so careless
thereof; yet seeing thou art ever wont, more to respect the truth of thine own
promise, then the desert of those that pray unto thee; seeing thou vouchsafest
to style thy self, The hearer of Prayer, I beseech thee, hearken to the humble
suit of thy poor supplicant. Lord sanctify to me this present sickness; let it
be as thy School, in which I may learn more sincerely to honor thee, and truly
to know my self. Make me seriously sensible, that all this, and whatever else
thou shall now lay upon me, are but the fruits of sin; and that as sickness
makes way for death, so death is the forerunner, either of eternal salvation
or condemnation: Lord bless this meditation so to me, that I may make it my
chief business to seek assurance of my being reconciled to thy heavenly
Majesty. To this end, Lord, give me a deep apprehension, and a sensible
understanding of my fore-passed transgressions: Lord, take from me all
blindness of mind, all deceitfulness of spirit, all inclination to flatter or
to sooth up my self, so as to lessen either the number or the quality of my
offenses. Cause me to break, and even to plough up my heart, to search and to
try my ways; that so, out of the truth, and the abundance of the sense and
feeling of my sins, I may pour out a most plentiful, and a most sincere
confession before thee. Help me to consider, that it is a vain thing to seek to
cover mine iniquities from thine all-seeing eye; therefore let me rather lay
open my most secret sins before thee, with holy and true contrition, this being
a safe way to find mercy and pardon at thy gracious hands. O then, be pleased
to strengthen my weak faith, that I may from the sight of my sinful condition,
lay hold upon the infinite merits of my blessed Savior, and with all humility
cast all my burden upon him, who by his most precious blood has purged away
all sin and all uncleanness: And because, O Lord, I am full of imperfections,
there being in my nature much weakness to distrust, much frowardness to repine,
and great readiness to rebel against thy holy Ordinances, be graciously pleased
to furnish me with necessary graces, and with such heavenly gifts as thou in
thine infinite wisdom and goodness do know to be fit for my present estate;
endue me with patience, cheerfully to bear whatsoever thou shall please to lay
upon me, meekly submitting to thy most holy appointment. Assure me, that thou
who know whereof I am made, and that I am but poor dust, wilt not press me
with more then thou will enable me to bear. Grant, good Lord, that the hope of
the glory which shall be revealed, may be more strong in me, and more powerful
upon me that all things in this world may be vile and worthless in comparison
of it; make me to be comfortably capable of the counsel and caution which my
Christian friends shall in tender affection endeavor to administer to my
fainting soul; and so likewise, make me able, willing and ready to speak and
deliver something of piety and of profit to such persons as in my sickness
shall be about me. Lord, put into me charitable thoughts and holy affections
toward all people, and that I may be both willing to satisfy wheresoever I
have failed in my duty, and also ready to remit wheresoever I have received
greatest injury or indignity. Oh holy Father in Jesus Christ, prepare me, I
humbly beseech thee, and enable me toward my last conflict: Oh help and defend
me, and by thy Almighty power preserve me from and against the assaults and the
deceits of Satan, who at such a time as this, is most busy to destroy thy poor
creatures: grant, that notwithstanding his mortal malice, I may keep my self
close to thee, and constantly and faithfully to resolve, that though thou slay
me, yet to put my whole trust in thee: And seeing that sickness (so great is
thy compassion to poor creatures) does not always exercise its full power upon
our weak frail bodies, Oh Lord vouchsafe unto me that understanding and
spiritual prudence, as to make a holy use of every small breathing, and of
every little time of ease, which in mercy thou shall be pleased to afford unto
me, so as to gather strength and resolution against the time of greater pain
and anguish. I beseech thee be still bringing to my remembrance those evidences
of thy former favors, and those comfortable examples and instructions which I
have from time to time found in thy holy Word, so as to be thereby quickened and
refreshed, and so as to know and apprehend the love of Christ, which passes
knowledge; and so find spiritual comfort in my greatest need: And as the
danger of death shall increase upon me, so let heavenly rejoicing and holy
desires increase in me: Oh, let me groan earnestly, and desire to be dissolved
and to be with Christ, upon good ground believing, that thou have made him to
be sin (that knew no sin) for me, that I might be made the righteousness of God
in him. Now Lord, hear and help, and do for me thy poor creature, according to
thine everlasting love, and mercy, and compassion, in the same my Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

II. Consolations concerning Death.
I Owe to God a death, even as his dear Son did die for me: Ever since I was
born, I have been sailing to this Haven, and have or should have been gathering
resolution, strength and patience to sweeten and to comfort this hour;
therefore I shall not, I will not (the Lord assisting me) now be one of those
guests that would not come to the banquet when they were invited. What hurt is
there in going to Paradise? I shall lose nothing but the sense of evil, and I
shall presently reap greater joys then I now feel pain; for my head is in
Heaven already, to assure me that my body and soul shall follow after. O death,
where is thy sting? why should I fear that which I would not escape, because it
gives entrance to my chiefest happiness? and I cannot have it unless I go to
it. Every man would be willing to pass through Hell to Heaven; but if I march
only through death, I suffer less then I would suffer for God: my pains do not
dismay me, because I travel to bring forth life, even eternal life; my sins do
not afright me, because I have Christ, the Captain of our salvation, for my
Redeemer: The Judge does not astonish me, because the Son of the Judge is my
prevailing advocate; the Devil does not amaze me, because the holy Angels do
pitch their tents round about me; the grave does not grieve me because it was
my Lords bed; the Prophets and the Apostles are my forerunners; every man is
gone before me, or else he must come after me: if it please the Lord to receive
me into his heavenly mansions before others which have served him better, the
more humble thankfulness do I owe unto him. And lest (by putting off my
repentance till this hour, I should be cut off if) I should die suddenly,
Behold how my gracious God in his merciful providence, to prevent my ruin and
destruction, does call me to himself by a lingering sickness, which stays me
till I be ready, and prepares me for my departure, and makes me (by these
wholesome pains) weary of this too-much-beloved world, lest I should too
unwillingly part with it, and so be like them whose death is their damnation.
Thus the Lord loves me while he smites me, so that his stripes become
plasters to me; therefore who shall love him, if I should despise him? who
shall praise him, if I should dishonor him? This is my whole duty now, to
strengthen my weak body with my believing heart, to be contented with
whatsoever God has appointed for me, until I can glorify him, or he shall
glorify me: If I live, I live to sacrifice; if I die, I shall then die a
sacrifice; for his mercy is above mine iniquity. And now, if I should fear
death, it would be a sign that I had neither faith nor hope, as I have
professed, but that I doubted of Gods truth (in his promises) whether or no he
will forgive his poor dejected penitent: but it is my Father, let him do with
me whatsoever seems good in his sight. Then come Lord Jesus, for thy servant
comes; I am willing, Lord, help my unwillingness; I believe, Lord, help my
unbelief; make me ready to receive thee: Then come, then come, Lord Jesus, come
quickly.

III. Against impatience in sickness.
LEt us consider, 1. That our sins have deserved far greater pains then we do
suffer, even the pains of Hell. 2. That God has in mercy determined the day of
our deliverance: The number of our tears (shed for the dishonouring of God) are
registered in his book. 3. Let us think on the blessed Apostle St. Stephen, who
(as soon as he saw Christ) forgot his wounds, and the terror of the grave, and
sweetly yielded up his soul into the arms of his blessed Savior: so let us do;
let us forget our pain, and meditate on the wounds of Christ Jesus; let us be
faithful to the death, and so receive a crown of life. 4. As we have always
prayed. Our Father, thy will be done; so now let us yield willingly to
whatsoever his holy will is; else we dissemble with God, and deceive our own
souls. 5. Remember, that the rod, be it of sickness or any other affliction, is
in the hands of a merciful Father. 6. Believe, that all things (though
seemingly most sharp) shall work together for the best, if we love and fear
him; and that nothing, neither life, nor death, nor any creature, shall ever be
able to separate between us and our Lord Jesus Christ. 7. That God does use
this chastisement of the body, but as a Medicine for the curing of our sin-sick
souls, by drawing us to our great Physician, by true repentance, godly
patience, and holy believing. 8. The greatest pains that we can feel in our
greatest extremity, are not to be compared with those grievous dolours which
our blessed Savior did undergo for us: how then can we be impatient at any
smart that he shall lay upon us? 9. Nothing in this our suffering does befall
us, but what the holy men of God have felt, and most patiently undergone before
us, and are now in possession of everlasting joys in the highest Heavens. 10.
God has not given us over to implacable enemies, but (as a loving and
tenderhearted Father) does please to keep us in his own most gracious hands,
laying upon us no more then what he shall see and know to be most needful and
profitable for us. 11. Lastly, consider, and consider it with comfort, How
death (if it shall follow sickness) will deliver us from a weak, frail,
corruptible body, which is but a living prison of the soul, and a lively
instrument of sin; and how death does set us free to enjoy the liberty of the
Saints in glory. To conclude: If we love holiness when it is compassed about
with many sufferings and persecutions, God will take notice of our patience and
other our graces, though compassed about with many infirmities; the Lord will
take notice of a little of his good, in a great deal of our evil: let us then
look unto, and long for Christ, as our Savior, as our Advocate, as our Head,
as our Surety, as our great Physician, and as the Bishop of our souls; and let
us run with patience the race that is set before us, and being in likelihood
near the end of the race.

IV. Consolations in the Lord Christ, etc.
HE that has once seen God in the face of Jesus Christ, dares undoubtedly look
the grimmest creature in the face, even death it self under any shape; all
kind of fear does flee before such a soul: it is only a Christian that is
fear-free.

The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law; but thanks be
to God, that gives us the victory, through the Lord Jesus Christ: for, though
the wages of sin be death, yet, the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, etc. Therefore I say, Thanks be to God, who always causes us
to triumph in Christ.

We see Jesus (who was made a little lower then the Angels, for suffering of
death) crowned with glory and honor, that he (by the grace of God) should
taste death for every man; for it became him (for whom are all things, and by
whom are all things, in bringing of many sons to glory) to make the Captain of
their salvation perfect through suffering.

We see Jesus, who himself also took part of the same, flesh and blood with us,
that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is,
the devil; and deliver them, who through fear of death, were all their
lifetime subject to bondage.

We see Jesus Christ, who was made like unto his brethren, that he might be
made a merciful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to work reconciliation
for the sins of the people: for in that he himself has suffered being tempted,
he is able to succor them that are tempted.

Seeing that we have a great high Priest (Jesus the Son of God) who is passed
into the Heavens, let us hold fast our profession; for we have not an high
Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in
all points tempted like as we are, sin only excepted: let us therefore come
boldly to the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace in
time of need.

Seeing we are taught by faith, That whatsoever we have need of, and is wanting
in us, the same is laid up with God for us in Christ; it remains then, that
we do seek it of him, and (be, it in sickness or in health) by daily prayer beg
it of him.

V. Reading of Scripture, or part of Chapters.
PSalms 62, 77, 96.

Isa. 55.

1 Cor. 15. from v. 1. to v. 29.

2 Cor. 5.

Rev. 1, 5. and the last, or part of them.

VI. A Prayer where friends are to join.
O Most gracious, most glorious Lord God, we thy poor unworthy servants are
here prostrate before thy heavenly Majesty, begging pardon at thy compassionate
hands, for all the evils that we stand guilty of. Oh look upon us, not as we
are miserable sinners, but as we are by the precious blood of thy dear Son
reconciled unto thee, for his sake we beseech thee to hear us, and to accept of
our prayers; not only for our selves, but on the behalf of this thy distressed
servant, our Christian brother, whom thou have here brought low upon the bed of
sickness: we are taught, O Lord, that sickness is brought upon the world for
sin, and that it is inflicted upon thine own people for a trial and for a
blessing, that being by thee so fatherly chastised, they may return unto thee
(like obedient children) by unfeigned repentance, holy believing, and humble
supplication, and not (as with the wicked) for hardening of their hearts. O
Lord, we beseech thee, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, give to this thy sick
servant, grace and spiritual strength to search into his own heart, so as to
find out, to bewail and to detest all his former sinful actions, freely to
forgive every injury done unto him, duly to make restitution wheresoever there
is cause, so as to be in charity with all men, and to have a clear conscience
void of all offense: Give him of thy grace, O Lord, that he may not take this
sickness, or any other thy visitation, either insensibly or impatiently; let
him be truly humbled under thy mighty hand, and yet confidently trust, and
constantly depend upon thy rich mercy in Christ Jesus, so that nothing may be
able to separate him from thee, who art his only stay and portion, yea, the
only comfort of his precious soul. And then, good Lord, send thy holy Spirit
into his heart, to support and sanctify him against all his natural
weaknesses, passions and infirmities; let thy Almighty power and goodness
preserve him against all outward cares and troubles; let thy heavenly Grace, O
most blessed Savior, by thy all-sufficient merits, purchase for him his
needful pardon, and let thy most precious blood be to him a happy Medicine to
all his maladies, and a sovereign help against all his spiritual enemies. O
grant unto him this blessing, that he may quietly repose himself at this time
under the shadow of thy wings, void of all fear, and free from all spiritual
darkness, dangers and despair. Lord, give him a watchful heart, willingly
disposed, and thoroughly enabled to abandon all transitory things here below, and
to depart hence with joy, and in the peace of a good conscience. Good Lord,
teach him and enable him upon this his sick bed, openly, earnestly, faithfully,
unfeignedly, and incessantly to be confessing his sins, and craving pardon of
all his iniquities. O be graciously pleased, to keep under Satan, that he may
have no power to draw him from submitting to thy divine will and pleasure:
restore in him the image of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, that so long as thou
shall afford him any breath, he may live in thy fear, trust in thy mercy, rely
on thy promises, believe in thy Word, die in thy favor, rest in thy peace,
rise in thy power, and remain in thy glory. These blessings, and what other,
mercies this thy sick creature, or we thy poor servants do stand in need of, we
do humbly and faithfully implore at thy gracious hands, and in the Name, and
for the sake of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and do conclude all
our petitions as he has taught us; to whom with thee and the holy Spirit, be
all glory, power and dominion, world without end. Amen.

VII. Meditations on the days of Death and of Doom.
DEath was to us (by reason of sin) a dungeon for reserving the guilty body
against the day of Judgment; but now, by and through the merits of Christ our
blessed Savior, death is become, as it were, a persumed bed for the Elect
against the day of the Resurrection: Then, O my Lord and Savior, why should it
molest or trouble me at all to tread in thy steps toward glory? The worst
piece of the horror of death is the grave; that part which is corrupted feels
it not; and the other which is free from corruption, feels an abundant
recompense, and foresees a joyful reparation. The day of Death, and the day of
Doom, are the two Pole-Stars in which we (that are Pilgrims and strangers on
earth) must at all times be fixing of our eyes: Joseph of Arimathea did make
his sepulcher in his garden; Egyptians had the picture of death always in
their Banquetting-houses; even so should we, in the midst of our worldly
pleasures, be continually preparing our selves, and casting up our accounts,
and daily numbering our days.

Death to the righteous is ever welcome; and for the day of Doom, the very name
of it, to the godly, is as honey; the mentioning of it, is as the sweetest
melody; and the thoughts of it, to every good Christian, is as a year of
Jubilee. Be pleased then, Oh heavenly Father, to lift up my head and my heart in
that great and glorious day; Lord, turn from me those judgments that attend
the wicked, and crown me with those myriades of blessings which do always
accompany thine Elect; and so in mercy, come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

In that great day, we shall see and meet the ancient Patriarks, Moses and
Aaron, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and the old Prophets, Elias, Jeremiah, Daniel,
Hosea: we shall also behold the four and twenty Elders, the holy Apostles,
Matthew, Mark, James and John; and all the holy Martyrs, John the Baptist,
Stephen, etc. likewise all those harmless Infants that were slain by Herod, who
(with their Olive-branches in their hands) do continually sing, Worthy is the
Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength,
and honor, and glory, and blessing, both now, and for ever and ever. Amen.

VIII. Short Prayers upon any release of Pain.
BLessed and praised be thy great and glorious Name, O holy Father in Jesus
Christ, for that thou do lay no more upon me, nor punishest me to my
confusion: O grant me still a believing heart, and a patient mind, that I may
still love thee, and wholly depend upon thee, and comfortably bear all thy
fatherly corrections, as it becomes thy faithful servant, and a true soldier
of Jesus Christ. All is thine, and thou art all; to thee only do I fly for
relief and succor, knowing that there is no strength nor support but only in
thee. Thou will not break a bruised reed; thou will not quench the smoking
flax: O thou that delightest not in the death of a sinner, receive me, release
my soul out of trouble, for thy great Name sake: let the shadow of thy wings be
my cover; let the holy Ghost be my company; let thy power be my portion, my
rock and my defense, against all fear and danger whatsoever; and do thou in
thine infinite goodness and mercy, say at this time to my poor weak soul, Be of
good cheer, I am thy salvation.

O Lord, it is thou alone that have sent me this sickness, be thou pleased to
come thy self with it, and teach me and enable me to make that sanctified use
thereof, as becomes thy faithful servant.

O Lord, let thy Word be my rule, thy Glory my aim, thy Spirit my guide, thy
Angels my guard, thy Promises my support, thy People my society, thy Ordinances
my delight; then shall I be happy, both now and for ever.

Grant, O Lord God of Heaven and earth, that thy holy Angels may pitch their
tents round about me in this my low estate, to defend me against that evil one;
and in thine own appointed time, to convey my soul to everlasting glory.

When thou, O Lord, shall be finishing my weak and evil days of sin, be
pleased to quiet my tender conscience, to pardon my many manifold offenses, to
save my precious soul, to receive both my body and my soul into thy heavenly
Kingdom; so that I may follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes.

Oh, thou that art the Captain of my salvation: Oh sweet Jesus, that were made
perfect by sufferings, look graciously upon thy poor creature, and sanctify
unto me all the pains of body, and all the troubles of mind which thou shall
permit to fall upon me, that I may pass through them to everlasting happiness.

IX. Consolations against Pain and fear in Dying.
THere is pain in the curing of a wound; do we therefore suffer it to gangrene,
and let it alone to the danger of a limb, perhaps of life? No, we are willing
to lance and to heal: so let us here submit the body, that the soul may be
safe.

There be few persons, but have endured as great, perhaps greater, and for a
longer time in their life, then they have at their death.

We do make the passage much the more tedious and difficult, by our bringing to
the thought of death a troubled and an unprepared mind, and in the mean time,
forget that Christ by his death has taken away the sting of death.

Be not dismayed: death indeed is terrible, when it is inflicted by the Law;
but it is easy, being imposed by the Gospel. The curse is now taken off: we
are not now under the Law, but under Grace: God, who blessed us in life, will
not forsake us, he will not neglect us in death; for precious in the sight of
the Lord, is the death of all his Saints.

Against all the apprehensions and thoughts of death, let this of the holy
Spirit be our sure consolation: Thanks be to God, that as death is swallowed up
in victory, so he has given us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ,
blessed for ever.

We have the Spirit of Christ within us, which will secure us, search us, and
refresh us, even all the time of the combat; yea, it will abide with us for
the assured comfort of our souls.

We do see many men and women to depart out of this life, without any extremity
of pain or trouble at all; nay, it is sometimes with much tranquillity,
extraordinary cheerfulness, and spiritual joy: let not us then create fear to
our selves, and expect pain; but with patience, and Christian faith and
fortitude, wait upon the Lord for a happy issue.

The body may, and sometimes does, seem to be in grievous pangs, when as the
party feels no pain almost at all, unless it be the Cramp, or the like, while
the soul in the mean time is in a sweet repose, and preparing it self to come
immediately to the presence and blessed enjoyment of his dear Lord and gracious
Redeemer; praying still with servency of spirit, Come Lord Jesus, come and
receive my soul.

X. Ejaculations to Father, Son, and holy Ghost.
O Heavenly Father, who scourgest every son whom thou do receive, help me thy
poor creature, that I may not be weary of thy corrections; but be pleased to
give me such a perfect submitting my self to thee, who art the Father of
spirits, that this chastisement of thine may be so much for my present and
future profit and advantage, that I may be made partaker of thy holiness.

Oh holy Jesus, Son of the everliving God; I have (I do most humbly confess it)
by my many and grievous offenses, crucified thee afresh: but thou (O blessed
Lord) who did pray for thy persecutors, Oh be pleased to intercede also for
me; and suffer not (Oh blessed Redeemer) suffer not my poor soul (the price of
thy most precious blood) to perish.

Oh blessed Spirit of Grace, I have by my manifold impieties done despite unto
thee: yet, Oh holy Comforter, though I have often grieved thee, be thou pleased
to relieve, and succor, and sanctify me, and (in this my weakness) say to my
poor soul, I am thy salvation.

We may pray unto the whole Trinity, but more properly unto the first person,
God the Father, in the name of God the Son, and by the assistance of God the
holy Ghost. Amen.

PART IV. Meditations upon certain signs of Death.
I. Several short Prayers upon any intermission of Pain.
O Lord, thou art my God, early will I seek thee; my soul does thirst for thee,
my flesh also longs after thee: I have looked for thee in holiness, that I
might behold thee in power and glory, for thy loving kindness is better then
life it self: because thou have been my helper, therefore under the shadow of
thy wings will I rejoice.

Or thus:

O Lord, I find this life to be but a troublesome Pilgrimage, few in days, but
full of evil; I am weary of it by reason of my sins: It is enough, O Lord, that
I have lived so long in this vale of misery; take my soul, O Lord, into thy
gracious hands, for I am no better then my Fathers.

The Law in my members has ever been warring against the Law of my mind, and
bringing me into captivity to the Law of sin: O who shall now deliver me from
the body of this death! Thou, O Lord, have redeemed me with thy most precious
blood; all praise, therefore, and thanks be unto thee, who have given me the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

My sins, O Lord, have been such as to deserve eternal death and destruction;
though I have heretofore too much doted on them, I do now desire to abhor and
to loath the remembrance of them all, and to delight and to depend wholly on
thy mercy. O blessed Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world, have
mercy upon me: O sweet Savior of the world, receive my spirit; thou have
redeemed it, O Lord, thou God of truth.

O Lord, the devil is ever busy in taking advantage against our poor souls;
but most of all, when we are most weak and most unable to encounter with him:
Be pleased (good Lord) in this my weakness to rebuke Satan, and let thy holy
Spirit comfort my distressed soul, with assurance of thy love in Christ Jesus:
assuage my pain; O Lord, increase my faith and my patience, and in thine own
good time, give a happy end to these my troubles.

O Lord, for thy mercies sake give me full assurance, that whatsoever in this
my weakness and sickness thou shall please to lay upon me, it shall come from a
blessed Father, a faithful Creator, and a blessed Redeemer.

II. A Prayer to be used by my Friends.
OH most blessed Lord God, we are prostrating our selves before thy heavenly
Majesty, in the Name of Jesus Christ, on the behalf of this thy sick servant;
thou only know what is fittest for him, health or sickness, life or death:
Good Lord, sanctify this thy visitation to him, that by it he may be more and
more humble in the sight of his sins, and so be longing after Christ. Oh,
enlighten his mind, that he may know the hope of his calling, and what is the
exceeding riches of thy mercy in Christ Jesus toward all that believe in thee;
and so strengthen his faith, that he may lay fast hold on the merits of our
blessed Savior: Lord, protect him from the malice of Satan, allay the edge of
his assaults, that they may never make him to despair of thy compassion to him
in this his low estate: Remove from him a dull spirit, with all manner of
secure and hardened thoughts, and all wordly desires and creature comforts.
Lord, give him patience, with Christian courage and constancy, to bear
whatsoever thou shall please to lay upon him: Oh, vouchsafe unto him comfort in
his conscience, joy in the Spirit, and peace in believing; together with a
settled and a well-grounded expectation of eternal life and salvation, through
thine infinite love in Christ Jesus: Impute not unto him his own
unrighteousness, but the righteousness of thy dear Son, so as thy poor weak
servant may appear righteous in thy sight. Lord, raise him up unto thy self,
with those heavenly sighs and groans which are not to be expressed: Oh, keep
and save his soul; command thy holy Angels to be about him, for his everlasting
comfort, and chase far away from him all evil and malignant spirits, that they
annoy him not in this time of his distress: let him more and more abandon the
world, and even long to be loosed, so as to be with Christ. Oh, cause his last
hour to be his joyfullest hour, his last words to be his best words, and his
last thoughts to be his heavenliest thoughts. And, good Lord, we beseech thee,
put thy word of Grace and godly Wisdom into our hearts and tongues, so as upon
all occasions to deliver thy mind holily, soundly and cheerfully, to the
comfort, and to the refreshing of his precious and immortal soul. And now, thou
good and gracious God, be pleased to teach us in him, and in this house of
mourning, to consider our own end, and so to lay it to heart, that we being now
in health, may yet be laboring and preparing for our dissolution, and for a
holy, a joyful, and a comfortable leaving of this life, this valley of tears.
Lord, hear us for this thy poor sick servant, and hear us for our selves: but
above all, hear us for the sake of thy dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ; to
whom, with thy heavenly and blessed Spirit, be given all honor and praise,
power and glory, now and for ever. Amen.

III. Questions with Answers, upon any sign of Dying.
Do thou believe, That Almighty God, the Trinity of persons in unity of
Essence, has by his power made Heaven and Earth, and all that is therein; and
that by his divine Providence he does still govern the same, so that nothing
comes in the world, nor to thy self, but what his holy arm and counsel had
foreordained to be done?

All this I do believe: Lord, help my unbelief.

Do thou really confess, That thou have transgressed and broken the holy
Commandments of God, in thought, word, and deed; and that (for the same) thou
have deserved the wrath of God, even all the miseries of this life and
hereafter, even everlasting torments in Hell, if God should deal with thee
according to thy deserts?

All this I do acknowledge: Lord Jesu, pardon my transgressions.

Art thou not sorry in thine heart, that thou have so broken his Laws, and so
much neglected his service, and so hotly pursued the world, and so eagerly
doated upon thy vain pleasures; and would thou not now lead a holier life, if
thou were to begin thy days again?

Lord, thou know I am heartily sorry for my misdoings, and fain I would with
more constancy have served thee.

Do thou not from thy heart desire to be reconciled to God in Jesus Christ,
thy only Mediator, who is at the right hand of God, and now appearing for thee,
and making intercession at the throne of grace for thy sorrowful soul?

Oh, it is reconciliation to God in Christ, that I above all things do most
humbly desire.

Do thou renounce all confidence in all other Mediators, Saints or Angels,
believing that Jesus Christ alone is the Mediator of the New Testament,
perfectly able to save all such as come to God by him? And, can thou with
holy David, say to Christ, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? there is none upon
earth that I desire besides thee?

There is none but Christ, my soul shall ever sing; there is none but Christ
that can intercede for the sins of the world.

IV. Portions of Scripture to be read.
Psalm. 103. or some part of them.

John 3. or some part of them.

Isa. 53. or some part of them.

1 Cor. 13. or some part of them.

V. More Questions with Answers, upon any sign of Dying.
Do thou confidenly believe, and assuredly hope to be saved by the only merit
of the bitter death and Passion of Jesus Christ, not placing the thought of
salvation in thine own doings, nor in any other means or creature whatsoever,
being certainly persuaded, that there is no salvation in any other, nor any
other name under Heaven by which thou can be saved?

Jesus is the only Savior of the world; therefore let all creatures bow down
before him, and bless his holy Name.

Do thou from thy heart forgive all injuries and offenses done unto thee by
any person whatsoever? And do thou as freely from thy heart ask forgiveness
of all whom thou have any way wronged, in thought, word or deed? Do thou cast
out of thy heart all rancour and malice against any person, so as to appear
before the face of Jesus Christ (the Prince of peace) in perfect love and
charity?

I do humbly pray for such true charity as to forgive all, and I do from my
heart ask forgiveness of all.

Does thy conscience accuse thee of any thing that thou have unjustly taken,
still withholding the same, for which, without restitution, there can be no
true repentance, and without such repentance there can be no salvation; nor
shall thou be able to look Christ in the face, when thou shall appear before
his judgment seat?

I have been willing to satisfy all whom I have wronged: but alas, who is able
to number all his errors!

Do thou firmly believe, That thy body shall be raised out of the grave at
the sound of the last trumpet, and that both thy body and thy soul shall be
united together again in the Resurrection-day, to appear before the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thence to go with him into the Kingdom of Heaven, there to live in
everlasting bliss and glory?

My faith, alas, is weak; but thy grace, O Lord, is sufficient for me: O Lord,
let thy holy Spirit assist me, and lead me into the way of everlasting glory.
Amen.

VI. Short Prayers upon any lessening of Pain.
O Most blessed Savior, be pleased to place thy precious Passion, thy Cross,
and thy Death, between my soul and thy displeasure; and let the merits of thy
obedience stand between thy heavenly Fathers justice and my disobedience; and
from these bodily pains, receive my soul into thine everlasting peace: and good
Lord, give ear unto this my cry: O Jesu, receive my spirit.

Or thus:

O Lord Jesus Christ, forsake not him, that in great distress does fly to thee
for succor and relief: O sound that sweet and comfortable voice into my
fainting soul, which thou were pleased to utter to the penitent Thief; This day
shall thou be with me in Paradise.

Or thus:

O Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, I know and do believe, that whosoever lives
and trusts in thee, who art the resurrection and the life, shall never die:
Oh then, vouchsafe favor to thy poor creature, that I may hear that blessed
voice of thine, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you from the foundation of the world.

Or thus:

O most gracious God, whose nature and property is ever to have mercy and to
forgive, receive my humble supplications; and though I be so much bound with
the chains of my sins, yet Lord, let the pitifulness of thy great mercy loose
me, and set me at liberty, for Jesus Christ his sake, my only Savior and
Redeemer.

Or thus:

O holy Lord, fit and prepare me for my last conflict; and by the support of
thy blessed Spirit, and the assistance of thy heavenly Angels, vouchsafe to
assist and strengthen me against the assaults of Satan, that notwithstanding
his mortal malice, I may still hold me fast, and keep my self close to thee in
all holy believing, so as humbly and steadfastly to resolve, that though thou
should slay me, yet to put my trust in thee, and to place my whole confidence
in thine everlasting mercies in Christ Jesus.

VII. When weakness and faintness increase, let friends help, with these short
ejaculations.
O Lord, bear me thy poor sick servant in thy gracious arms, to the land of the
living.

Or thus:

Lord, bring me, I beseech thee, by thy power and goodness, to thy holy
habitation.

Or thus:

Plant me, O Lord, in the mountain of thine inheritance, the place which thou
have prepared to dwell in.

Or thus:

Lord, make me to be one of the joyful Citizens of thy holy Jerusalem, which is
above.

Or thus:

Oh Lord, as my weakness shall increase, so let my patience, the hope of thy
favor, and assurance of thy mercy in Christ Jesus, still increase more and
more.

Or thus:

Oh Lord, let thy grace and blessing be upon me, that I may safely pass through
this vale of misery, and finish my course with joy.

Or thus:

O Lord, lift up the light of thy countenance upon me, and grant me peace in
the Lord Jesus.

Or thus:

Oh holy Father, if it be thy blessed will, give an end to my labors, and
release me of my pains.

VIII. More of Ejaculations when faintness increases.
SWeet Jesu, receive my soul; sweet Jesu, receive my spirit.

Or thus:

Come, Lord Jesu, come, for thy servant comes: I am willing, Lord, help my
weakness.

Or thus*

O Lord, let thy holy Angels stand round about my bed, and guard me from that
evil one.

Or thus:

O Lord, lay not my sins to my charge, but look upon him that makes the
atonement; Thy Christ, my Jesus.

Or thus:

O Lord, to thee belongs mercy and forgiveness; have pity on my soul, and
pardon my sins.

Or thus:

O Lord, say, to my souls everlasting joy and comfort, I am thy salvation.

Or thus:

O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon me.

Or thus:

O Lord, make clean my heart within me, and take not thy holy Spirit from me.

Or thus:

O Lord Jesus Christ, I do commend my spirit into thy hands: thou have redeemed
me, O God, thou God of mercy, of truth.

IX. A Prayer by friends, at leaving this Life.
OH most gracious Lord God, and loving Father in Jesus Christ, who art our
portion, our strong refuge, a sure defense, and a very present help in time of
trouble: Oh, lift up thy merciful countenance at this instant upon thy weak
servant, who now is coming to appear in thy presence: Oh, thou which art the
great preserver of men, take pity and compassion upon him, wash away all his
natural and sinful pollutions, by the all-sufficient merits of Christ Jesus his
most precious blood, that they may never be laid to his charge, nor hinder his
happy passage to everlasting blessedness. O Lord, increase his faith, preserve
his soul from the malice and danger of the devil, and all his evil angels;
comfort him with thy holy Spirit, cause him now to feel and find, that thou
art his gracious Father, and thou art reconciled unto him in thy dearly
beloved: save him, O Lord; O Lord Jesus Christ, save the price of thine own
blood, and suffer not him to be lost, whom thou have so dearly purchased. Oh,
receive his poor soul (as thou did the penitent thief) into thy heavenly
Paradise; let thy blessed Angels conduct him thither, as they carried the soul
of thy beloved Lazarus; and vouchsafe unto him a joyful resurrection at the
great and last day. O holy Father in Jesus Christ, hear us for him, who cannot
now speak for himself; and hear thy dearly beloved Son, our only Mediator, both
for him and for us all: It is in his Name, and for his sake, that we seek unto
thee in the behalf of the precious soul of this thy weak servant: to him, with
thy blessed self and holy Spirit, we do render all service, honor and praise,
now and for ever. Amen.

X. Another Prayer at yielding up the Ghost.
O Most gracious, and most merciful Father in Jesus Christ, be pleased to cast
a compassionate eye upon the immortal soul of this thy languishing creature;
Lord, hear our prayers for him, and thy Christ, our blessed Mediator, for us
all: the snares of death do encompass him, he is sore bruised, and broken, and
brought very low; the pangs that are upon him are unspeakable. O Lord, pour the
oil of gladness into his fainting soul: assure him, that thou have cast all his
sins behind thy back, and that there is a sweet peace wrought between him and
thee, by him who is the Prince of peace. Oh, give him that inward joy, and such
comfortable taste of eternal happiness, that he may rejoice in thee, and forget
his present anguish, and patiently undergo the same, for that endless joy that
is set before him: and though these faint, and these consuming fits have now
deprived him of speech, yet, good Lord, let the Comforter, that is, the blessed
Spirit, within him, make requests for him, with prevailing sighs and groans
that cannot be expressed; ever crying out, Lord Jesu, receive my soul, Lord
Jesu, receive my spirit; so let death be to him none other then a joyful
messenger sent from thee, the father of all consolation, to call and convey him
from this valley of tears, to everlasting bliss: And, let the blessed and
glorious Name of JESUS, be still the chief and the only anchor of his precious
soul, the sole foundation of his faith, and the sacred staff and sure
supporter, even to the last gasp. Hear us, O Lord, O thou that art the
preserver of men, hear us for this thy poor servant, and have mercy upon him,
and embrace him in thine own most gracious arms, and all for thy dearly beloved
Son Jesus Christ his sake, that he may now come and be with thee for ever, to
sing with thy holy Saints and blessed Angels, Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power
be unto him that sits on the Throne, and unto the Lamb, for ever and ever.
Hallelujah. Amen.

PART V. Being ten blessed Examples of holy Persons, relating to a happy
passage out of this Life to a better.
I. Philippus Lodovicus, Earl of Hanaw, Reinek, etc. a German Prince. He
stickned, July 29. 1612. and departed this life upon Sunday the 9th of August;
being not long after his return as Ambassador out of England.
JUly 29. 1612. His Excellency, as his custom was, went in his Coach to the
Woods, with some of his Council and Court-servants: feeling himself somewhat
ill in the heat, he did take some rest in the fields.

The next day, he went to the weekly Sermon, and the public Prayers at the
Church in the old City; but at his return, he found himself worse, and went to
take some rest upon his bed.

Aug. 2. Sunday, he was let blood, and did take some Physic, and was so well
upon it, as to rise and visit his Lady, who was then in childe-bed. After that,
he called to one of his Counselors, to confer with him about serious matters,
and chiefly concerning the Church of Hanaw.

3. He was ill again, so as he began to prepare for a Christianly departure out
of this life: he called for his Lady and children; in their presence and
hearing he gave an account of his faith, and that with singular zeal, and holy
courage.

His Lady and children being retired, he conferred with his Council, upon what
did concern the Church, the School, the Country, and the Subjects; and then
took his leave of them, in a most friendly and Christianly manner.

4. Came diverse Courtiers upon his request, and after some discourse, with
tears he parted with them, they taking their dear Lord by the hand. Then diverse
of the Citizens came and had very comfortable words from him; after which, they
with much sadness took their leaves of him. Lastly, the Preachers, both of the
old and of the new City being called for, he told them, that his desire was
once more before his end, (with his Household) to receive the holy Supper of the
Lord Jesus Christ; declaring withal, that this was not grounded upon any
superstition, or that, Ex opere operato, it is meritorious, but that it is
chiefly for the strengthening of his weak faith, and for the testifying of his
profession, yet once again, before God and the world: and this did the
Ministers accordingly perform.

This night he could not sleep almost at all; so he caused several Psalms to be
sung, and sometimes he sang himself.

Aug. 5. He called for his Will; and after some alteration, he did deliver it
to his Chamberlain, with charge to deliver it in due time to his Council.

6. Came to him his Lady-sister, the Lady Emilia of Orange, from Heydelberg,
whom he cheerfully received, with these words; Madam, many of my friends have
stood weeping about my bed, but none could break my heart, and provoke my
tears, but your Ladyship.

Diverse of his servants coming from the monthly Sermon, he did call to hear
from every one of them, some good Doctrine that they had heard.

He had a very ill night, and was earnest to have some of the penitential
Psalms to be sung, he sometimes bearing a part. After that, some of the Divines
did mention to him those places of Scripture, as Mat. 11.28. and Joh. 6.37. to
which he gave sweet and spiritual replies, and said, Oh, now do I find and
feel the free remission of all my sins, that I am a child of God, and an heir
of eternal life; yea, I do feel the virtue of my Savior Christ's blood
refreshing of my soul.

The Lady Emilia being now come again to him, he said, Ah, my loving and
virtuous Lady, I am a sick man; rehearse to me, I pray, some comfortable
sentence out of the Scripture. She said, She was a poor weak creature; but she
did see, that the Spirit of God (blessed be his Name) did greatly comfort him.
He still urging it, she did recite that place, Joh. 3.16. God so loved the
world, etc. At which he cheerfully uttered these words; Well said, my noble
Sister: This is the greatest and the surest comfort of all Gods faithful
people; with this comfort will I die happily: I beseech and pray from my heart,
to my gracious God, for such a blessed departure, through the virtue of the
satisfaction of my Lord Jesus Christ. O my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, into
thy hands I commit my soul, both now and for ever.

After this, his Excellency caused some of his little Prayer-books to be
brought to his bed, and appointed to every one of his children, one, writing
therein their several names, and adding thereunto his Christianly and Fatherly
admonition.

For his eldest Son, Philippus Mauritius, upon his German Bible, he did write
thus: MY Son, Philippus Mauritius, Count of Hanaw, Fear God, and keep his holy
Commandments: I have been this night sore troubled, and in great anguish; I
have thought on many things, which I wish, my Child, that you could know; yet,
thus much I tell you, Keep thy self, even all thy lifetime, close unto thy
God; his gracious help, and his blessed assistance, will be evermore most
necessary for thee: I would to God, that I could write the great riches of his
infinite mercy, goodness, and faithfulness, that have been experimented by me
this long time: I bless the Lord, I have already the foretaste of everlasting
glory; Therefore will I sing unto the Lord as long as I live, Psa. 104.33. I
will sing praise to my God, while I have my being: my Meditation of him shall
be sweet; I will be glad in the Lord. The Lord help thee unto me in due time.
Amen. In these pangs of death, I do desire to be delivered, and to be with my
Lord Jesus Christ: O Lord Jesus Christ, thou faithful Savior, how do I love
thee! Thy promises are true, thy love is great, thy heart is faithful toward
me: I do commend my spirit into thy hands, thou dear and faithful God: Thou
have most graciously delivered and sanctified me; Lord, I do wait on thy
salvation.

Thy faithful Father, Philippus Lodovicus,




The second Son, Willielmus Reynhart, received his Book with these words, viz.

MY dear Son, serve thy God with thy whole heart, in Sprit and in Truth; I have
destinated thee thereunto: esteem it not to be any shame unto thee, to serve
God and his Church; for God is the greatest God, he is thy Creator; keep in
honor the true service of God. Obey and serve thy dear Mother, under whose
heart thou have lain; honor and serve thy eldest Brother, as thy Lord, for
such is the Ordinance, and my will also: bear with him if thou be in the right,
for thou art then more happy then he; but if thou do not walk uprightly in
thy words, then art not thou happy. Love thy Brothers and Sisters from the
heart; love thy House; do good to the Poor, according to thy ability, then
shall the Lord bless thee. Beware of drunkenness, of dissoluteness and all
unclean speeches, as thou would do of fire: Honor thy State; be industrious
in all things; read and practice, and that continually, the 119 Psalm; let
thine Astrologians be the 28 of Deuteronomy. So I commit thee to God.

Thy faithful Father unto death, Philippus Lodovicus.


The eldest Daughter, Lady Charlette Loisa, received her Book, with these
words, viz.

FEar, honor, and love thy God from thy heart; have his Commandments
continually before thine eyes, take thy whole delight therein: Honor, with all
filial obedience, thy loving Mother; keep thy mouth close with a lock; esteem
honesty and modesty above all the goods and treasures of this present world:
God bless thee, my loving Child.

Thy loving Father unto death, Philippus Lodovicus.


The second Daughter, Lady Emilia Elizabetha, received her Book from him, with
these words, viz.

HAve God always before thine eyes: Honor thy Mother with obedience and with
love; keep honesty and modesty, for these will be thy best riches, and thy
chiefest jewel.

Thy faithful Father unto death, Philippus Lodovicus.


The youngest Daughter, Lady Catherina Juliana, received her Book with these
words, viz.

DEar Child, be virtuous: Have thy Creator always before thine eyes; fear thy
God, even all the days of thy life; love and honor thy blessed Savior, who
did shed his most precious blood for thee: break off from thine evil will
betimes; be humble and obedient. Humility, honesty and silence, do more adorn a
Lady, then either pearls or other costly jewels.

Thy faithful Father unto death, Philippus Lodovicus.


These Prayer-books being thus delivered, his Excellency caused also the
late-born Lord to be brought before the bed; sighed sadly over him, touched him
with his hand, and prayed, that the Lord would also bless that tender Infant
with his grace.

Lying down again, his bed being new made, he (stretching out both his arms)
said to one of his Counselors, Ecce divinum miraculum, hominem jam mortuum,
viribus tamen adhuc integrum: That is, Lo a divine miracle; a man already
dead, and yet having his full strength.

After this (his understanding remaining very good) he caused diverse things to
be read out of a little Song-book, and then took it to him, and writ in it,
This Song have I used many years; and then commanded it to be laid upon his
heart, as soon as he should be departed.

A while after, he called before him all the Ministers, both of the old and of
the new City, and also some of the Country-Ministers, with whom he did
discourse of the true saving faith, and of a Christianly departure out of this
life; telling them, That he would not willingly, in this his weakness, be
without a Preacher by him.

He did often sigh and pray from his heart for a mitigation of his pains, and
for shortning the pangs of death, and also so for an understanding end; and did
use many comfortable speeches, to the joy and admiration of such as were his
assistants.

7. Aug. Friday, his Excellency feeling the time of death approaching, his
heart was full of godly comfort, and of heavenly consolation, speaking with
singular zeal, of the misery of this life, of the death of a Christian, and of
eternal salvation: Then saying, Ah, Sirs, loving Sirs, I have seen the glory of
God; what do I care for this world! I have kissed the hem of the garment of my
Lord Jesus Christ; I am now climbing on the ladder of Jacob up to heaven,
toward my God and Savior. And while he was full of these expressions, and cast
his arms from him, he said, All things here below, do now stink before me: Tell
this to my children, chiefly to my Steward, that he nor they seek too much
after worldly things, but to put their whole trust in God. Ah, my dear people,
said he, how much trouble have you with me, miserable creature! Then he called,
Open all the doors, let all my people come in, that they may see how joyfully I
do die, and so be comforted by my example.

His Physicians warning him not to speak too much: Ah, said he, Should not I
speak of my loving and most gracious God? He has given me, and he continues
to me, a tongue to that end. Again, when the Physicians spoke against opening
the windows; What, said he, should not I behold the fair Heavens, whither I
shall come anon? He did oftentimes lift up his hands and his eyes to heaven,
using these words; Oh, thou great and strong God, thou Almighty God, thou holy
God, thou good and true God: To which he adds the short Prayers, which Dr.
Luther used to call Stossgebete. He did many times repeat these short
sentences, Psa. 50.15. and 91.15. and 27.14. and 23.1. and 3.8. l -- and yet it
did appear, that soul and body, flesh and spirit, were in conflict. After
several groanings, he did keep himself quiet a while, saying, One combat is
now passed.

Aug. 8. very early, he sent for his Lady, and the Lady Emilia, from whom they
heard many comfortable expressions; and then, with abundance of tears, and sad
complaints, they took their leaves of him.

Though he complained much of pain, he never was without comfort, but was often
times heard to say, Mors mihi gloriosa erit.

In the night, he was in a very great conflict, and turning from the Minister,
said, He could not receive his consolations, he could not hold them fast;
whereupon the Minister went presently to the bed, and fell about his neck, and
spoke to him out of that place, Psalm. 23.2. which had been his delight; so he
turned to the Minister again, and put his hands into the Ministers hands: then
offering to sleep, the Minister said these words; In the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, I do lay my hand upon your head, beseeching him to strengthen and
refresh you. So he slept; and when he did awake, he called for him again to do
the like: which he did, and also prayed; so he did sleep again.

Aug. 9. Sunday, the Sermon-bell in the old City ringing, he said, Never did
that Bell sound so sweet in my ears, as now it does. Then he said, Let us sing:
and laying down his head, he began to sing the Song of the Angels, out of Luke
2.14. the company joining with him; after that, a part of the 118 Psalm. and
then the first part of the 116 Psalm.

After a while, the Minister and he prepared for receiving of the blessed
Sacrament, but first he made his confession as he was able; and being long, it
was not all at the same instant.

The Sacrament being over, and the Minister and company preparing for Prayer,
he observed it, and bad them kneel down and pray; and he did zealously repeat
every word, especially the Lords Prayer, and the Articles of the Christian
Faith: and as some good Christians did use any choice and holy sentence to
comfort him, he repeated the same after them, so long as his tongue could do it.

The Minister concluded with the words beforementioned, of John 3.16. while
his Excellency yielded up his spirit quietly and blessedly. In the mean time,
the Minister cried often aloud by him, O Lord Jesus Christ, I do commit my
spirit into thy hands; Thou have delivered me, O thou most true and faithful
God.

The words of our Savior, John 3.16. wherewith the Minister (as has been
said) did comfort his Excellency at the last hour; those words were by himself
written, as were many other particular remarkable sentences, in his Germane
Bible.

It is observable, that his Excellency did depart this Life, after the ending
of the Sermon in the old Church, and of the Prayer which was there conceived
and used for the benefit of his soul.

Thus did this pious Protestant Prince end his days, in much honor and peace,
Aug. 9. 1612.

II. John Meautis, Esquire Secretary to the Lord Keeper Finch, departed this Life,
Dec. 22. 1635. whose sayings on his Deathbed, were such as follow.
I Am going to Heaven, and I will come no more to you, as well as I love you:
which was very much; for, there were present, his dear wife, some of his
children, his beloved sister, and others. Again,

Come my glory; Come, come, come: Oh, he is come, he is come. Again,

In your patience possess your souls. Again,

Make your Election sure.

Being asked by his sister, What comfort he found in his soul, he said, I have
abundance of comfort, and of assurance too, in the sweet and tender mercies of
my God.

After this, the Minister demanding of him, How he stood in charity toward his
neighbor; he cheerfully did answer, I am at peace with all men: I have done
wrong to no man so near as I could; I ^^ar no man any grudge, nor any ill will
at all.

And so he departed indeed, in peace, blessed be the Lord.

III. Mrs. Elizabeth, the Wife of Mr. John Juxon, a Citizen of London.
BEfore her Conversion (which was about the 22 year of her age, and five years
before her death) she sometimes said, She did wonder what people meant, to run
dagling to hear Sermons; but afterward, if she were in London, she was at nine
or ten Sermons in a week, besides catechizing; and so, that the Word and the
Spirit did work mightily upon her, even voluntarily to confess to her Minister,
how vain her former life had been.

Then she never missed reading the Bible morning and evening, so as she read it
through oftentimes.

In her health, she used to set down in writing much of her spiritual life,
which at her death was found lodged with those things that she esteemed of most
value.

She made conscience of words, as well as of deeds; of the lust of the eye, as
well as of the act of uncleanness; of thoughts, as well as of deeds. She was
exact in keeping her times of Prayer in private; wherein she complained of
hardness of heart, bewailed her failings, and bemoaned the distractions that
she oftentimes found in her self: and hereupon she did many times persuade with
her Husband, not to encumber himself with too much worldly employment.

She feared both the company, and also the doctrine of such Ministers, as
seemed to afford her overmuch liberty in her course of life.

In the time of her long sickness, she was very sensible of the want of hearing
Gods Word preached; and resolved (if God should give her so much strength) to
go to Church, though carried in a chair.

In her health, she did often wish to be dissolved, and that she might not live
to have her confidence weakened; and rejoiced often, that the Lord had freed her
from hellish fears, and that she found much peace in him; and yet not so fully,
but that sometimes she pitifully groaned under the sense of unbelief: though
some Ministers did tell her, that they did never believe aright, that did never
doubt.

She oftentimes gave good rewards in gold, for preaching upon subjects that
were chosen by her: one was, Of the cursed estate of man by nature; and of the
uttermost terrors of the Law against sin, to break her stony heart.

She loved poor godly Christians, yea, and many times preferred them before her
rich kindred.

It was thought, by those that knew her well, that she did affect holiness far
above salvation; and has sometimes been so ravished with it, as heartily to
desire (if it were the will of God) never to go into the world again, but to
spend her days in fellowship with God.

Though she were subject to passion, yet she was contented to sit down under
any wrong that was done her, as being persuaded, that God would clear her
innocence.

She gave the Minister, which she did apprehend to be the means (under God) of
her conversion, no less then 50 l.

After she was converted, she did put out her children no more, but nursed them
with her own breasts.

Being demanded by some friends, if her conscience did not testify with her,
that in the time of her health she had zealously sought after God, and
carefully walked in his ways; to which she gave this answer, That her Chamber
and her Closet, her Orchard and her Garden, her Turret and her Watergate, even
every corner in the house, could testify, that she had always most earnestly
sought after God.

There was nothing, no not her own children, that did move her to desire life.

When death, after above a years sore sickness and extremity of pain, seemed to
draw near, she called the more earnestly to God in prayer, and as earnest she
was for others to pray with her and for her: and so in great assurance, and
faith and patience, she expired, when she was not full 27 years of age.

IV. Dr. Usher, Archbishop of Armagh.
WHen he was but 14 years old, he was preparing himself for the Sacrament, and
(as always afterward) upon the Saturday before, he went to a Brook-side, where
he did meditate and bewail his sins.

His Father's intention was to send him from Ireland to study the Law at the
Inns of Court here; which being his Fathers pleasure, he assented unto: but his
Father dying in 1598. he was at liberty, and devoted himself to the study of
Divinity.

When he was 19 years old, he disputed with Fitz Symonds the Jesuit, De
Antichristo, who afterward knowing more of him, would not call him Heretic,
but Acatholicorum doctissimus; that is, of such as are not Catholics, the most
learned.

Before he was 21 years of age, he was ordained Minister by his Uncle Henry
Usher, Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of Ireland.

The first Church-preferment he had, was to be Chancellor of Dublin.

At 27 years of age, he commenced Bachelor in Divinity; and five years after,
Doctor of Divinity.

He was scandalized to King James, under the title of a Puritan; but this being
(upon the King's discourse with him) cleared, was the occasion of his
preferment to the Bishopric of Mead there. The Motto of his Episcopal seal,
was, Vae mihi, si non Evangelizavero; which he continued also in the Seal of
his Primacy.

In 1624. when he was 44 years of age, he was translated from Mead, and made
Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of Ireland.

Being come into England, he was chosen by the Wife of the Lord Mordant
(afterward Earl of Peterborow) to defend her Religion against that of her
Lords, which was Popish; where he prevailed against the Popish Priest that was
chosen by the Lord Mordant, which drew his Lordship to the true Religion; and
for which he was ever after, both loved and helped in those times of trouble,
by the said Lady: there he lived 9 or 10 years, and there he dyed.

He did use Prayer (beside that in his Closet) four times a day; that is, at
six in the morning, and eight in the evening with his Family, and then before
dinner and supper in the Chapel.

By the disturbances of those times, he was brought very low; and then by
Cardinal Richlieu, was invited to a large maintenance in France, with liberty
to live where he pleased with the Protestants: so by the Hollanders, he was
offered the place of Honorius Professor at Leyden, which had an ample stipend;
but he refused both.

The last Sermon he preached, was in 1656. at Hammersmith.

March 20. 1656. he sickned at the Countess of Peterborows house at London. He
first, in the evening, complained of a pain like the Sciatica in his Hip. The
next morning, the pain removed, and was much in his side: a Physician was sent
for, who did what he conceived was fit for him; but it continuing, and his
spirits decaying, he applied himself to Prayer.

Upon some abatement of the torture, he did piously advise those that were
about him, to provide in their health to encounter death, that so they might
then have nothing else to do but to die; of which, after a short time for
settling of his worldly estate, he took great contentment to find its approach.

In Prayer, he had at first the assistance of a godly Minister there present,
but afterward he desired to be left to his own private.

The last words that he was heard to utter, in praying for the forgiveness of
sins (which was not long before he died) were these: But Lord, in special, I
beseech thee forgive me my sins of omission.

In the general, he had his wish and desire, which he was heard often to
repeat; and it was, that he might die like Mr. Perkins, who expired as he was
crying to God for mercy and forgiveness. So he went out of this world with much
peace, heavenly joy, and spiritual consolation.

He was ever employed in his Masters business, either in preaching, or reading,
or studying, or writing, or else (of late, when his eyesight failed him) in
hearing others read to him. He was always, either resolving of doubts, or
exhorting, or instructing, or giving godly counsel; and yet with this humble
expression (Lord, forgive me my omissions) did this holy man of God expire, in
the 75 year of his age, in Anno 1657.

He was a man of a most exemplary moderation, humility, meekness, and ingenuity.

V. Mr. Benjamin Rhodes.
HE had been servant to the Countess of Oxford, and afterward to her noble
Husband, the Earl of Elgyn, as Steward of their house.

God did deal graciously with him in his youth: for waiting on the Earl of
Oxford in the Wars in Holland, he was active and valiant, till he was suddenly
struck at the consideration, that he might be the author of his brothers death,
and that but for a pecuniary stipend; and thereupon he quitted that employment,
and came to wait upon the Countess as her Steward.

Now, the better to know him, he is to be considered in a fivefold relation; 1.
As a Servant. 2. As a Husband. 3. As a Parent. 4. As a Friend. 5. As a dutiful
Son of the Church.

1. As a Servant, he showed, 1. His skill, in the employment he undertook. 2.
His fidelity, in not mispending his time, nor misimploying the estate committed
to his charge. 3. His diligence, in performing his trust to his uttermost
endeavor. 4. His cheerful obedience to all commands, and that in love.

2. As a Husband, he was loving and tender, both able and apt to teach and
instruct his Wife; he was free from all kind of bitterness and passion.

3. As a Parent, his deportment toward his children was discreet and grave; he
loved them, but not fondly; he was careful in their education, and especially
toward the eldest, who (only of the two) was yet capable of it, as concerning
the Sacrament.

4. As a Friend and fellow servants, he was just and affable; and so beloved of
all, and bewailed of all.

5. As a Christian, and a dutiful Son of the Church, wherein he was not only
commendable, but admirable, both in life and in death: In the communion of this
Church, as he had received his Baptism, so he often professed, he was ready to
lay down his life for it. As for the other Sacrament, he would have every man
to be highly, and also habitually prepared; so, as if he should come into a
Church where it was to be celebrated, he should be ready to join in it; he and
his wife receiving it constantly every month. He was devout and frequent in
Prayer; and sometimes would say, If he should want an opportunity, he would be
praying as he stood behind his Lord.

When he observed, that God by this last sickness gave him an effectual call
out of this life, his zeal and devotion were doubled, so as to inflame the holy
affections of all that stood about him.

Having received the Sacrament on the Sunday, a pious scruple did seize his
thoughts, not to sign his Will on that day, till by the Minister he was
satisfied.

He propounded the place of his burial; which showed much of humility, duty and
affection. There was at Malden in Bedfordshire a stately Monument erected by
his Lord, the Earl of Elgin, in memory of his deceased Lady: At the entrance
into this place, he said, himself and his wife (if she dyed, presaging her
sickness to be also mortal) might conveniently be laid together, that such as
should come to view that Monument, might tread upon her servants: yet adding,
That if it were not convenient, he was not scrupulous, but requested to be
interred in the open Churchyard; and that (to cross the received superstition)
on the North-side.

He was in some trouble, that he had his accounts in no more readiness for such
a surprise, till his noble Lord advised him, by no means to disorder his
thoughts about any business of his.

Though he was always confident of mercy, yet was he ever humble also,
acknowledging himself the chief of sinners; and declaring still, that this his
boldness sprang not from his own works, but from Christ's merits.

When the Minister was to pray with him, he desired him, not to entreat further
continuance in this life, his heart was in Heaven.

Finding himself almost spent with speaking, he desired to have matter of
devotion to be administered to him: thereupon the Minister suggested to him
diverse seasonable expressions; as, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ; Lord Jesu, receive my spirit; which with great alacrity he repeated
after him.

So great was his patience, as to desire God to lay his hand more heavy upon
him.

He was nothing startled in his assurance of the fruition of Christ, but cried
out every moment, almost, I go to my Christ, I go to my God.

He thought he should have died on Sunday (though 'twas Monday) and pleased
himself, that he should go from a temporal to an eternal Sabbath.

When his voice failed him, still his hands held up, showed that his heart was
aloft, and that his God sustained him; and so he breathed out his pious soul
into the hands of his blessed redeemer.

He sickned July 24. 1657. and departed the 3 of Aug.

VI. Mrs. Anne Rhodes.
SHe also was chief servant to the Countess of Oxford, and to her husband, the
Earl of Elgin.

She was descended of the Glovers, even of that pious Glover in Queen Mary's
days; who ennobled his lineage, not only in receiving the blood of others, but
by spending his own, for the testimony of the truth.

She did diligently attend upon her husband in the time of his sickness, so
long as her strength continued; but at the last, she was forced to yield to the
violence of her own sore distemper; where she soon perceived, that except some
remedy were speedily found out, she could not long continue.

Growing weak, she sent several times for the Earl's Chaplen, and he as
willingly came, and spoke, and prayed oftentimes with her; and has professed
to receive no small support and comfort by those holy expressions that came
from her.

Her husband was high in his assurance of enjoying of Christ; but it was not so
with her; she was sadly tormented, and brought down almost to the gates of
hell, with the sense and terror of her sins; so much, that those precious
Cordials administered to her out of the Gospel, were sometimes scarce able to
keep her from fainting.

But the Chaplen, who was much with her, does affirm, that he had good ground
and great reason to judge, that the Lord did hearken to the voice of her
weeping; for her deep humiliation, her earnest invocation, her strong crying
for mercy, her humble request, that her sins might be made known more fully to
her; her justifying of God in all his dealings with her; her full resolution,
if God shall recover her, to walk more strictly; her holy resignation to the
will of the Lord, to do what he pleased with her: These are (he said)
infallible evidences, that God, though he chastised her, and that very sore,
yet he gave her not over to death, the second death.

As she drew nearer to the time of her departure, so did she grow better
acquainted with the slights of Satan, and delusions of her own heart: so she
complained to a religious Gentlewoman in the Family; O the craft and subtilty
of the devil, to make us believe, that this sin is nothing, and that sin is
nothing; but now (said she) I find it to be something!

She was not only contented to live here, or to be gone from hence, as God
should please; but ready also to entertain all other occurrences of divine
providence, with a submissive heart.

There was care had, and some tenderness used, about the acquainting her with
her husbands death; she apprehending them, did quickly make the question, Is my
Husband dead? Said the Chaplen, I hope if he be, you are willing to submit to
the will of God. Yes, said she, with all my heart: and added, That should she
hear of the death of her two Sons (that then were sent for) she could willingly
submit to Gods good pleasure.

When a Gentlewoman, a friend, did spirt some vinegar out of her mouth, to
clear the air in the Chamber, Spit some upon me (said she) for I deserve to be
spit upon. I, but (said the Chaplen) think upon him, that for our sakes was
spit upon.

These and such like expressions of hers, did argue in her, both an humble and
a contrite heart, which the Lord will not despise; and also, a quiet submitting
to Gods correcting hand, and then a holy resignation, and a ready acceptance
of such punishment as God should think meet to lay upon her.

Further, to show that God was gracious to her (notwithstanding the terrors
that had been upon her) when the Chaplen wished her to lift up her heart to
God, she presently replied, I do, and the Lord hears me; which came certainly
from the comfortable testimony of the holy Spirit, which from a spirit of
bondage, was now become to her a spirit of adoption.

The holy frame of her heart, and the bent of her soul, with a sense of
spiritual things, may be judged by some letters to her Son, which are in print;
and by the translation of the Psalms, and other essays of divine Poetry.

After some sharp conflicts with death, she did patiently and devoutly yield up
her spirit into the hands of her gracious Lord, Christ Jesus.

She sickned the 28 of July, and dyed the 4 of August; and they were both of
them buried in the same grave.

VII. Dr. Harris his Life and Death.
HE was born at broad Campden in Gloucester shire, about the year 1578. and
lived till 1658. even fourscore years.

After he had been his time at the Free-schools in the Country, being by his
Parents designed, either for Divinity or the Law, he was sent to Oxford; where
following his studies, he took the degree of Bachelor of Arts.

Preparing himself for the Pulpit, not the Bar, he offered his first pains at
Chipping Campden; where (though a great Town) a Bible could scarce be found,
no, not at the Vicars house, without much search, being not seen some months
before.

Upon a fearful plague at Oxford, the University was dissolved, and few
Scholars left behind: he durst not go home, lest he should not (by his Father)
be suffered to return thither again, and whither else to go he knew not, till
by a providence he was invited to Mr. Doily's house, five miles from Oxford, a
Family of great piety.

Mr. Prior, the Incumbent there, was assisting to Mr. Harris in his studies;
which he requited in assisting Mr. Prior (a godly man, but sickly) in his
preaching for him.

By the removal of Mr. Dod, he was settled at Hanwel, not far off, where the
people were very conformable; scarce a family, wherein Gods Name was not in
some measure called upon; nor any that refused to be prepared by him for the
Lords Supper.

Edge-hill-fight was about four miles from him upon the Lords day; he took it
for a great mercy, that he heard not the least noise of it, till the public
work of the day was over; nor could he believe the report, till a soldier
(besmeared with blood and powder) did witness it.

There happened to be quartered a company of soldiers, that were so given over
to blaspheming and swearing, that he could not forbear using that Text, Isa.
5.12. which in the handling did so nettle some of them, that they damned
themselves to Hell if they did not shoot him, in case he preached any more upon
that Text: but he went on the next day, when in his eye a soldier took his
Carbine, and fumbled about the lock, as intending some mischief; but the
Preacher conceiving it was only to disturb him, went on with his work, without
any farther news of the soldier.

After this, by a Scottish Commander, with the treachery of some neighbors, he
was enforced to shift for himself, and went to London.

From London, he (with four other Divines) was by the Parliament commanded to
Oxford, then under suspension; and the Chancellor of Oxford, the Earl of
Pembrook, coming to visit the University, he was made Dr. of Divinity; which he
had refused, had it not been the favor of his betters, as being not made
thereby the better Scholar, or the better Preacher.

In continuance of time, when he had settled his affairs, and placed his
children, he left himself almost nothing more to do, but to prepare himself and
his wife (50 years married) for their graves; but now the Lord was pleased to
exercise him a new.

His wise, that was religiously bred, frequent in holy duties, that seldom rose
from her knees with dry eyes, was yet delivered up to Satan's buffetting, to
such horrors of mind, to such hellish temptations, as grieved every spectator.
Upon this occasion, he often said, The receiving of grace, the keeping of
grace, the use of grace, is all from the Almighty God. She complaining much and
often, that she could find no comfort; Oh, said he, what an Idol do some
people make of comfort, as if their comfort were their Christ! But this
cheering he had, that she was kept, 1. From blaspheming the highest, (so she
styled God.) 2. From hurting any, in word or deed. 3. That this affliction did
waken him, she being most conscientious and innocent. 4. It wrought in him a
holy despair of all creature comforts; for now he enjoyed neither wife, nor
child, nor friend, nor sleep, as formerly, only instant prayers are continued
for her upon all occasions, which gives hopes, that the Lord may please to make
the end comfortable, and the conquest glorious. So he sometimes said, The
difference is not great, whether comfort do come in death, or a while after
death, seeing comfort will assuredly come to all that wait with faith and
patience.

After a long and laborious life, he comes now to a long and a painful
sickness. In the Summer he began to droop; and when two friendly and learned
Physicians (Dr. Bathurst and Dr. Willis) were sent for, he professed, That he
used means merely in obedience; that he could be content to live, and durst
die. He said, His Physicians would lose of their known worth, having to deal
with complicated diseases, which were seldom removed; and with old age, which
was never cured.

His first encounter, was with a vehement Pleuretical pain in his left side; to
that was joined a Fever, and also a great defluxion of Rheum, and oppression
of his Lungs with phlegm; and sometimes not without some fits of his old
disease, the Stone and Strangury, which for some weeks wrought so upon him, as
he was not able to speak much to those that visited him.

At his first sickening, being desired to admit of some good company, he said,
I am alone in company; it is all one to me, to be left alone, or to have
friends about me: my work is now to arm my self for death; and I do apply my
self, as I am able, for that great encounter: And so he spent his whole time,
in Meditation, Prayer and reading, especially the Psalms, and St. John's
Gospel, where he took exceeding delight in the 10, 14, 15, 16, 17 Chapters. And
growing weaker, got others to read to him.

Still would he be exhorting his visitants and attendants to get faith above
all; It is your victory (would he say) your life, your peace, your crown, and
the chiefest piece of your spiritual armor: however, get on all, go forth in
the Lords might, and stand to the fight, and then shall the issue be glorius,
only be sure not to forget to call in the help of your General; do all by him,
and for his glory.

On the Lord's day, he would not hinder any from public duty, to do any thing
about him; and when the Sermons were ended, he would say, Come, what have ye
now for me? meaning, of repetition; to which he attended so diligently, as to
sum up all the heads, and then say, O what excellent truths are these! lay them
up charily, ye will have need of them.

Being asked where his comfort lay, he said, In Christ, and in the free grace
of God: and then added, Work, work apace; dear friends, assure your selves,
nothing will more trouble you, when ye come to die, then that ye have done no
more for God, who has done so much for you.

Being again asked, what they should do for him, he said, Do not only pray for
me, but praise God also for his unspeakable mercy to me; especially, that in
this my weakness, he has kept Satan from me, and that I see the worth of a
Christ, and do taste of the sweetness of Gods love more then ever.

Again, O how good is God! entertain good thoughts of him. So he concluded all
prayers for him, with a loud Amen.

Upon Saturday-evening, he began to set himself to die; forbad all Cordials,
gave his dying-blessing to his Son that was present; and calling for the 8th to
the Romans, he entertained no more disdiscourse with the sons of men.

Herein God was exceeding good to him, as a return of prayer: his breathings
were easy and even, and his soul without the least motion or resistance of the
body, did enter into rest, while we below were entering upon the day of rest;
for then did he begin a perpetual Sabbath in Heaven, when we begin ours on
earth, that is, before one a clock on Sunday morning, 12 of December. 1658.

In all the Wills that he made, this Legacy was ever renewed; Item, I bequeath
to all my children, and my childrens children, to each of them a Bible, with
this Inscription, None but Christ.

VIII. Mrs. Scots Life and Death.
SHe was Daughter and Heir to Sir Matthew Howland, also Heir to her Uncle, Sir
John Howland. She was first married to the Son and Heir of Sir Walter Roberts
of Kent, when she was not 17 years old, and afterward to Mr. Scot, a worthy
Justice of Peace in the same County.

She had Sir Howland Roberts, and two other Sons, with two Daughters: she was
one of a choice spirit, of a mavelous sweet temper and disposition, of an
amiable and a winning carriage, and of a religious and charitable conversation.

About 19 years of age, as she was riding on Hunting, she had a fall from her
horse, and put her leg out of joint; which was the happy occasion of her
conversion: after this time she never hunted, scarce ever came on horseback;
and she writ it down in a book, among other experiences of Gods goodness,
especially to her soul, resolving for the time to come, to walk constantly in
Gods ways; which she made good.

Once going to the Sacrament, she had grievous temptations, as if she might
live without Ordinances, and as if there were no necessity of them; but her
faith fought against it, and she found sweet comfort and strength in the
Sacrament; she received Christ, and gave her self up to him.

She writ in the foresaid book, the comforts she found in frequent Fasts and
Sacraments; concluding with such words as these: My God does give me sweet
experiences of the growth of grace in my soul, and all from the virtue of
Christ's blood.

Again, This day I was at a Fast, and God came graciously in, and melted my
heart, and made good his promise to me: They that wait on the Lord, shall renew
their strength.

Again, she writ thus; This day I did receive Jesus Christ in the Sacrament,
and so came home rejoicing, and fully assured, that all my sins are pardoned;
and that Christ may as well be pulled out of Heaven, as I be pulled from Christ.

Again, out of the same book: I kept a Fast by my self, to seek help from God,
in a great straight that I was in; for no power but his could help me out, and
deliver me; the Lord did in great mercy assist me. Afterward, I kept a Fast in
private with others, about the same thing: my heart at first was out of frame,
very heavy and perplexed; but God at length came in, and melted it, and made
the duty very sweet to me.

Now, she thought the Ordinances could not be too often enjoyed; and when in
Wintertime she could not use the Coach to her Country-Church, she would
usually walk on foot, in all the rainy and tempestuous weather, that long and
tedious, up-hill and down-hill way.

In London, she would be often, by seven of the clock in the morning, at the
Lecture at Christ-Church, from High-Holborn, and there stay till the second
Sermon was ended.

She had the grace, as well as the gift of Praying; which was both to
admiration, and to satisfaction.

Every day, she had constantly in the Family (morning and evening) Prayer, with
something also of the Word, and part of a Psalm sung: on the Lords day,
morning-duties; after dinner, singing and praying; and at evening, repeating,
singing and praying. She was indeed, a true sanctifier, and a spiritual
observer of the Lords day, even to a thought, and would often bewail the
liberty which too many Professors did take on those days, to talk of civil,
and sometimes of worldly things, without any remorse.

She never went abroad, but she first withdrew her self into her Closet, for
some time to prayer; and the like when she returned home.

Such exceeding in-comes she had, at the Table of the Lord, the Lord so
blessing that Ordinance to her, that she would often say, She could there fetch
from the Lord, any mercy that she wanted; as, direction in straights, support
in troubles, power against sin, conquest over self, and grace to carry her on
in the ways of God.

Whilst her Father, Sir Matthew Howland, and her Uncle, Sir John Howland lived,
she would often say, (foreseeing the same, as being their only Heir) She was
afraid of too much of the world to come upon her, and to be an encumbrance to
her.

As her life, so her death, was full of grace and comfort: The Lord did
graciously strengthen her upon her bed of languishing; though she was walking
through the valley of death, she feared no evil; her God was with her, the Lord
sustained her.

Though her pains and tortures were very great, there being applied to her
Cupping-glasses with lancings; yet did the Lord put gladness in her heart, so
as she would say, God has been very good to me; Oh, how good is God! there
has not the least cloud interposed between God and my soul all this sickness,
so as I shall go to my gracious God triumphing.

She would often say, O friends, how sweet and precious is Jesus Christ! And
again, O friends, get an interest in Christ, and try your faith. To the
servants and keepers (that helped to turn her in her bed; for in a few days,
from Wednesday to Monday, she was by much pain become helpless) she said, I am
very weak, but my God is very strong; and there is my comfort, he will lift me
up. Oh, praise the Lord for his goodness.

Her eldest Daughter saying, Mother, I am going to Church, and to the
Sacrament; That is well, said she, but I cannot go: Child, be sure to go in
the strength of Christ, and do all your duties in his strength; and the Lord go
with you.

She would often say, That she did never put on her best attire, but she had
thoughts of clothing her self with the rich robe of Christ's righteousness, and
decking her self with the jewels of his heavenly graces.

When her Steward came to ask her any domestic question, she would say, Oh, do
not trouble me with these things on the Sabbath day. Such was her happy
mistake, she thought all the time of her sickness was a Sabbath; and indeed so
it was, the Law of the Sabbath was written upon her heart; every day was more
and more a Sabbath with her, as she drew nearer her end, as she drew nearer to
that rest which remains for ever; into which she expired, and in which she now
triumphs, with him whom her soul loved, and with the spirits of just men made
perfect, and with the Angels of God, to all eternity, Dec. 1658. Thanks be to
God for his mercy.

The Preacher at her Funeral, from Prove. 31.29. speaking of her unparalleld
goodness, did number up 10 several excellencies that did shine in her; 1. Was
her knowledge, as being eminently verst in the methods of grace, and in the
mysteries of godliness. 2. Was her wisdom, by which she brought down all her
heavenly principles into practice. 3. Was her humility: her knowledge did not
puff her up; her head was not so high, but her heart lay as low. 4. Was her
meekness; she would not provoke any, nor easily be provoked by any; she was
most fearful to give offense, most free to forgive it. 5. Was her mercy; the
love of Christ to her, had melted her all into compassion, compassion to the
bodies of poor creatures, and compassion to the souls of all. 6. Was her
conscientious attending on the Ordinances, the Word, the Sacraments, Fasts,
Prayer, etc. 7. Was her stability in judgment, being a well-bottomed
Christian. 8. She was not a censorious Christian. 9. She was of a sweet and
cheerful spirit, among crosses and trials. 10. She was very good in her
relations; never Mother had a better child, never child had a better Mother;
never servants had a better governor, never friends a better friend; she did
fill all her relations with wisdom and fidelity.

So with gladness and rejoicing, was she carried to enter into the Kings
Palace, into the joy of her Lord, where there is fullness of that joy, and
pleasures for evermore. Amen.

IX. Monsieur du Moulins Life and Death.
HE was Minister of Gods Word, and Professor of Divinity at Sedan in France;
and being 90 years old, died there, March 10. 1658.

During his whole life, he was much given to devotion; but about 3 years and an
half since, he had a fall from a horse, after which he had no health, and yet
performed his charge constantly in the Church, and in the Schools, or else
privately in Meditation, or in Prayer.

Feb. 26. 1658. he awaked in the morning very ill, but being helped into the
Pulpit, he from Psalm. 16.9. preached as it were, his own Funeral Sermon; and
giving an account to his Hearers of his faith and hope, he took his leave of
them, as if he knew that to be the last time (as it was) that he should preach
to them.

28. It being also a Sermon-day, he desired his Colleagues to remember him in
the Prayers of the Church. After the Sermon, much company came to him, to bid
him farewell, and to receive his blessing; some had encouragement from him, and
some had admonition.

Taking his leave of his Colleagues (for he was thought to be near his end) he
said, Fare ye well, my Masters; I do not doubt, but ye will carefully look to
the conduct of the Flock that is committed to you. One of them said; The Lord
grant, that we may imitate you; you have done good service, and your labors
will live when you are gone. He replied, Ah, Sir, you know not how much you
grieve me, by saying so; I am conscious to my self, that I have neglected my
duty in many things, that I have many ways offended my God; yet I must say,
that I have loved his holy truth, and do hope in his mercy: he is my Father and
my God, and Jesus Christ is my Savior; whosoever believes on him shall not
perish. Then he added: Thou have led me, and taught me from my youth: O Lord,
forsake me not in the last period of my life; have mercy upon me, O God; O my
Father, have mercy upon me; O Lord, hear me, help me, and save me, O my God.

He said, I have been grieved for the afflictions of the Church; O Lord, purge
and purify her from all kind of scandal; let her be blessed, and let not the
adversaries of the truth triumph over her for ever.

Once coming out of a strong and sore fit (being a burning Fever) he said, O
my God, how weary, how tired am I! When shall I rest in thy bosom, in thy
everlasting arms? when shall I be filled with thy hid treasures? when shall I
drink of the rivers of thy pleasures? I am unworthy of it, I confess, O Lord;
but thou art glorified by doing good to the unworthy. It is not for them that
are whole, but for them that are sick, that thy beloved Son (the great
Physician of souls) was sent into the world; whosoever believe in him, are
passed from death to life.

Being asked by one of the many friends that were about him, Whether he did not
perfectly hope in the grace of God that was presented to him, he said, I do
hope, not perfectly, yet as much as I am able.

The first four days of his sickness, he was both day and night (with little
intermission) either in good discourse or in praying; but the six last days,
he was much in a deep slumber, though he did strive earnestly against it; and
sometimes would say, Stir me, prick me, for I should now watch; it is not a
time now to sleep, but to die. O great God, abandon me not to my infirmities,
but so preserve and keep up my spirit, that I may glorify thee, even when I am
dying. For a whole day he was ever and anon saying, The Word was made flesh.

Being well awake, a friend asked if he did lift up his heart to God; O yes,
said he, I do it incessantly, and God is gracious to me.

Sometimes he (feeling of his pulse) would say, O what a grief is this, I
cannot die: O good God, have mercy upon me; set my soul free, shorten the days
of my combat, if it be thy blessed will.

The two last days did add to his burning Fever, and to his deadly slumber,
contracting of the sinews, and convulsions; every hour was thought to be his
last; but about midnight he opened his eyes, saying, I shall soon be eased; I
am going to my Father, and to my God; he has heard me indeed. And a while
after: I go to him with confidence; for he has arrayed me with his robe.

Being raised to a rapture not to be expressed, he said; I see him: and (with
an acclamation of joy) Oh, how beautiful he is! And then (putting some by with
his hand) I renounce all worldly, all earthly affections; I will no more love
any thing but thee, O God, who do alone possess me. In this rapture, his eyes
were clear and sparkling, his mouth open and panting after the living God, his
arms were stretched out toward Heaven, and his body striving wonderfully to
rise, as it were, to meet and embrace that beautiful object of his love; so as
all his friends did wish and pray, that God would receive him in that happy
instant; but his time was not yet come.

The next day, toward evening, the assistants perceiving certain signs of
approaching death, did double their endeavors to comfort and strengthen him:
he understood every thing that was said to him, and showed most holy elevations
in his prayers, and in these words did give them thanks that prayed with him;
The Lord hear you, the Lord bless you, for all your labor of love to my poor
soul.

When he did hear the glory at hand extolled in some emphatical sentences of
Scripture, he returned into his former raptures, and once more pronounced those
words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 17. l. I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy
likeness. And twice or thrice had these words; Come, Lord Jesus, come. And as
the last time, that Text which he loved so much, Joh. 3.16. God so loved the
world, etc. and then concluded thus: Lord Jesu, receive my spirit.

To him that comforted him with these words, Sir, you shall soon see your
Redeemer with those eyes of yours, he said, with an effort, laying his hand
over his heart, I do steadfastly believe it. This was the last intelligible
saying that he did pronounce; yet did he make several offers, and great
endeavors to be understood, and was a quarter of an hour, with much fervent
affection, speaking, but the phlegm that filled his throat and palate, hindered
him.

His friends making their last prayer with him, he did perpetually lift up his
eyes and his hands toward Heaven, though he was not able to utter a word.

Some moments after, he did quietly give up the Ghost, dying with peace, and
joy, and comfort, which was very visible in his face: And this was half an hour
after midnight, even Sunday morning, when he was going to keep an everlasting
Sabbath in the highest Heavens. So all did bless the Name of the Lord.

X. Mr. Crook's Life and Death.
HE was born at Waldingfield in Suff. in the year 1574. son to Dr. Thomas
Crook, sometimes Preacher at Gray's Inn in London, and dyed in 1649.

From Merchant-Taylors School in London, he went to Cambridge; and being in
Pembrook-Hall a while, he was admitted Fellow in Emanuel-Colledge, and grew to
be well skilled in the Greek, Hebrew, and Arabic tongues, as also in Italian,
French, and Spanish.

He gave several Books to the University-Library, as also to the Libraries of
Pembrook-Hall, and Emanuel-Colledge.

He did usually preach three times a week: and though by his profound judgment
and faithful memory, he could dexterously dispatch that with little labor,
which cost others much; yet, he often professed, with rejoicing, that he never
durst serve God with that which cost him but little.

He did practice what he preached; and his Motto was, Impendam, and Expendam; I
will spend, and be spent, for the glory of God; accordingly he never gave over
studying and preaching, till all his strength of body failed him: And expecting
death, he oftentimes did Preach, as it were, his own Funeral-Sermon.

It was his care to discover to his People, the divine authority, the purity,
and the sufficiency of the Scriptures, the Decalogue, the Articles of Faith,
the Lord's Prayer, the Sacraments, God in Trinity, his Decrees, the Creation
and Providence, the Fall, Sin, Christ, the New Covenant, the Mediator,
Gospel-faith, Vocation, Regeneration, Justification, Adoption, Sanctification,
and Glorification; the Church, the last Judgment, the Christian warfare, etc.

When his Preaching-day, Jan. 17. happened, being his birthday; he always
noted his years, with this penitential close; God be merciful to me, a sinner.

His divine spirit of Prayer seemed to excel all other his excellencies;
therein he was full of penitent, unbowelling confessions, of earnest
deprecations, petitions, pantings and sighings after God and his grace; of
mighty Arguments, by which he used to set all home; of feeling, thanksgivings,
and divine raptures, carrying up his soul to Heaven.

If any Christians came to him for resolutions in cases of conscience, for
counsel in straits, for comfort in spiritual desertions, for healing of a
wounded spirit, he wisely and compassionately administered to their several
occasions; so as they went from him, both satisfied and comforted.

He was never weary of his Lords work; his behavior was pious: he was grave
without austerity, pleasant without levity, courteous without dissembling; he
did love useful discourses, but abhorred froth and babbling; he was a great
Master of his own passions and affections, a great admirer of learning and
piety in others, though far beneath himself; he conversed more with heaven then
with earth.

Sickness at last seized upon him, and it was full of biting pains, which he
bare with much patience; his only grief was, that God had taken him off from
his labor, which was his life and his joy: if he were weary in work, yet was
he never weary of work; his spirit was still willing, though the flesh was
weak. And now, when he saw no more ability for labor, he did account it
superfluous to live; and so did not only cheerfully yield, but patiently desire
to die.

After that he had in himself received the sentence of approaching death, he
desired his friends not to pray for life, but for faith, for patience, for
repentance, and for joy in the holy Ghost. His godly friends continuing with
him, and blessing God for him, he would often say, Alas, I am nothing but a
voice, as being troubled at the increasing decays of nature, whereby he was
disabled to do any more work for his Lord and Master.

Some of his last words were these; Lord, cast me down as low as Hell in
repentance; but then by a lively faith, raise me up to the highest Heavens, in
an humble holy confidence of thy salvation.

This day seven night (said he) will be the day on which we have remembered
Christ's nativity, I shall scarce live to see it; but, for me also was that
Child born, unto me also was that Son given, who is Wonderful, Counselor, the
mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace.

He is now come to the end of his labors, and to the beginning of his rest;
his work was with God, and his reward shall be from his God. And thus did set
this bright occidental Star, upon the day of the Lords Nativity, being the 75
year of his age. He had been a Preacher 47 years, even to above 7000 Sermons.

As he was full of days, so was he full of grace, and full of peace, and full
of assurance; yea, he was full of the truest honor, for his worth and works
sake, in the hearts of all that feared God. His memory shall be blessed, and
his name shall be a sweet perfume to posterity.

So let us leave this happy Brother of ours in the bed of Honor, until the
joyful morning of the blessed Resurrection of the just.

Blessed be the Name of the Lord.
FINIS.
This was finished about the first of May, which was the day of my Nativity,
and now the seventieth year of my age, and of our Redemption, 1664.


