THREE GREAT VICTORIES: I. Obtained by Colonel JONES, and Adjutant General
Louthanie, in the entering of the Town of Chester; where they took all the
Northeast part of the Town, and the Bars, and all the Outworks, and Works, as
far as the East Gate; With all the particulars of the said fight, and the
summons sen^ in, for the surrender of the City and Castle. II. The taking of
the Devizes, by Lieutenant General Cromwell; With the Ar^icles whereupon it
was surrendered, on Tuesday the 24. of S^ptember, 1645. With all the particulars
about the same. III. The Copy of a Letter from Lieutenant General Leshl^y, to
his Excellency the Earl of Leven, of the glorious Victory obtained in Scotland
against Montrosse. 3. Barons killed upon the place, 2500. also slain, 700.
killed in persuit, 500. laid down their Arms, 6. Lords, and 17^0. others taken
prisoners, amongst which many of quality; And a List of the Names of the
chiefest of chose were slain and taken, 4000. Arms taken, and all Montrosses
Carriages and Ammunition, Bag and Baggage.


Commanded to be printed, an publish^d according to Order.

London printed, by Jane ^o^. 1645.

The manner of the entering Chester, by Colonel Jones, and Adjutant General
Louthanie, with Sir William Brewertons Forces; On Saturday the 20. of Sept.
1645.
Certified by a Letter from thence, dated Sept. the 21. 1645.
SIR,
WE have proceeded so far in the Leaguer at Beeston, for the taking of the
Castle, as we could; and have st^ll kept in the Enemy on this side Chester,
that they have not offended us, their sallies out have turned to their
prejudice: The Lord Byron has been lately out on the Welsh side, and we have
longed for Sir William Brewertons coming down to command in chief, which would
by this time have been an occasion of doubling of our forces. But however, we
(seeing that it could not be at present, and) being unwilling to lose what
advantage we could gain, have attempted a great design, such an one as you
will wonder at, knowing the smallness of strength; Yet (to God be the praise)
we are able to give a very good account of it hitherto, and so I hope we shall
for the future.

SIR, Not to trouble you with a tedious discourse of the business, time being
precious with me; the business was thus.

On Friday last September 19. 1645. We called a Council of War^e in the
Leaguer before Beeston Castle, to consult about the marching to Chester, to
storm that Garrison, and and concluded that it should be done forthwith: So we
stole away from the Leaguer that night, the Enemy within the Castle knowing
nothing at all of the business; and drew off about 1300. horse and foot from
the Siege, Colonel Jones commanded the horse, and Adjutant General Louthany
the foot, and the next morning before the Enemy were awake, we came upon them,
having marched all that night through the Moors, passing over the River at
Hupley, and so on by the way of Wareton, nor so much as staying at Christleton
to refresh our selves, lest by our stay we should lose the opportunity, or be
discovered. We marched that night about eight miles, and passed before break of
day between Christleton and Huntington, and so on to Boughton, all which we
carried on so private, that the Enemy had not so much as an alarm in the City.

We came before the City on the North east side thereof, where we made no stop,
but presently fell to storming, and by break of day were got upon their Works,
and many of us got over in several places, before they heard any thing of us;
we took all their works between Cowland and Boughton, quite to the walls of
the City, the enemy still flying before us, we pursued them to the inner works
which they shut up against us, but we forced open the gates at the bars, and
still followed them, driving them into the East gate, which we had prevented
them of, had we not been stopped by the fastening of the gate which they did to
gain opportunity to fly into the city; we lost in all this, not above 2. men
killed many wounded, the enemy carried away their dead all but one body, many
of note on their side are wounded, and we believe many slain, two of their
great Works we have taken, and all that side of the Suburbs, and doubt not but
in short time to give a good account of the whole Town. The Enemy within we
hear, are about 1000. many Malignants are in the Town, we hope we shall be able
to go on, if the Kings whole strength come not against us, and we have no
relief to oppose them, or relieve us. Money our soldiers want much, yet will
not our Commanders in chief, suffer any of them to plunder the Inhabitants of
any thing, nor to drive away their Cattle.

One part of the Enemy fled into S. Warburge Minster some at the East Gate,
and some at Newgate; we have gained all between the Rack and the Gate going to
S. Warburge, for the Northgate we doubt not but we shall soon determine that,
and are sending in a summons for the surrender of the City and Castle, which
we hope to give a good account of. We have taken the Bars, and the inner.
Works there, and the Majors House, where we took his Sword, and his Mace.

Your humble servant.
For-gate street in Chester, Sept. 19. 1645.
A Copy of a Letter, containing the manner of the surrender of the Devizes, to
Lieutenant General Cromwell, on Tuesday the 23. of Sept. 1645. According to
Articles agreed on, Monday the 22. of Sept. 1645.
SIR,
IT has pleased the Lord, still to add further blessing to our endeavors, we
have not been many days before this Garrison of the enemies before it was
surrendered to us, Colonel Lloyd the Governor, had made strong works about
it, and had Ammunition good store, Major Du^^ was abroad and a party of the
horse. We hear, Colonel Whally are gone out toward them, we sent in a summons
to Colonel Loyd the Governor for the surrendering of the Garrison, and
received a modest answer, in short, this day Commissioners were chosen, 2. of
theirs and 2. of ours, who soon determined the business^, which had they not
done Lieutenant General Crumwell; was resolved to storm them suddenly, but
they being willing to condescend to so fair Articles, it was thought better to
take the Garrison upon the terms propounded, then to run that hazard of loosing
many precious men, (which we must have done had we stormed it and (you know)
the best soldiers are always lost in ^uch service, J sent you the substance
of the Articles that they agreed on for the surrendering of the Garrison, to
Lieutenant General Crumwell, and rest

Dated before the Devizes, Sept. 22. 1645.
The substance of the Articles agreed upon Monday the 2^. of Sept. 1645.
Between Lieutenant General Cr^mwell, and Colonel Lloyd, for the surrender of
the Garrison of the Devizes.
1. THat the Field-Officers march away with their horse and arms, out of the
Devizes to morrow morning. 2. That all other Officers march forth with them,
only with their own arms, not carrying out any thing else with them. 3. That
all the common soldiers belonging to the Garrison that march out, do lay down
their Arms, and march only with their persons secured. 4. That all the Arms
and Ammunition belonging to the Garrison, save the Officers single Arms allowed
them, be left in the Garrison unimbezeled or spoiled. 5. That they have liberty
to choose what Garrison they will march to, within 30. miles of the said Garrison
of the Devizes. 6. That a safe Convoy be allowed to march along with them, to
convoy them to the place which they shall nominate, after they are marched out.
7. That they have all of them quarter for their lives, and the Town be secured
from plunder. 8. That on the said Tuesday morning, Lieutenant General Cromwell
be admitted to march into the Town, and Castle, according to the said Articles.
And accordingly hostages given.
Here follows the Copy of a Letter from Lieutenant General David Leshly, to
General Leshly his father; Of his great Victory against Montrosse, on Saturday
and Sunday, Sept. the 13. and 14. 1645.
For his Excellency the Earl of Leven, these present.
May it please your Excellency;
IT has which God to give us a notable and unexpected victory, highly begun
on the 13. of September, between 11. and 12. a clock and was pursued the next
day. All Montrosses forces which were Irish and Highlanders, killed upon the
place, the strength of horse and dragoones were about 2000. Which are all fled
several ways. I protest I never fought with better horsemen, and against more
resolute foot, who were drawn up amongst the closes. The Commanded horsemen,
and Middletons Regiment were put oncoback, but advanced again and did most
gallantly, Lieutenant Colonel Mercer had the van* who ^ought exceeding
bravely, and Colonel Robert Mountgomery did the like and his soldiers are
much to be commended, but the Lord Mountgomery was a little hurt, the Eord
Lanericks behavior was very gallant, though his Regiment were new listed
forces, and had never been engaged with any enemy before, Lord Craford Linsey
and all our Noblemen, according to their places and qualities, did well. We
have diverse prisoners of quality.

May it please your Excellency, I intend to have away to Glascoe, because
Colekintoe was sent away with 800. horse and foot thither, and when God shall
bring the enemy to that condission that they shall not be admitted to come
together. I will leave Middleton behind, and be ready with the rest, to wait
upon your Excellency.

May it please your Excellency: This is all I can write, etc.

From the place where the Battle was fought, 15. of Sept. 1645, Your
Excellencies most humble Servant: DAVID LESHLY.

A List of the particulars of this great Victory obtained by Lieutenant
General Lashley against Montrosse, Sept. 17.
3. Barons ^l^in upon the place. 2500. Killed upon the place. 300. Killed in
pursuit. 500. Run to their own homes. Taken prisoners.
Earl of Tarquire. Lord Linthen. Lord Seaton. Lord Dounnould. Lord Gray. Lord
Ogleby.
1700. taken prisoners. Montrosse fled with not 20. men with him. 200. Irish
shot to death against posts, after they were taken straggling in the Country.
There is not in all the enemies forces above about 1400. left, and Lieutenant
General David Leshly is gone to pursue them, they were not engaged in this
fight; but he is gone up to them all.
In all this, the Scots have not lost one Nobleman or any Officer of no^e, save
only Lieutenant General Middletons father; Montrosse (before the fight too)
murdered him in his bed, a grave old Gentleman, that never took up Arms at
all.

All Montrosses Carriages was taken, and Ammunition, all his Bag and Baggage,
and above 4000. Arms.

FINIS.

