TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
The humble desires of the Commissioners of your MAJESTY'S Kingdom of Scotland.
Decimo septimo Ianuarii, 1641.
WE Your Majesty's humble and faithful Subjects, Considering that the mutual
relation betwixt Your Majesty's Kingdoms of Scotland and England, is such as
they must stand or fall together, and the disturbance of the one must needs
disquiet and distemper the peace of the other, as has been often acknowledged
by them both, and especially in the late Treaty, which is ratified in
Parliament, and confirmed by the public such of the Estates of Your Majesty's
ancient and native Kingdom of Scotland. (...) to maintain the peace and
liberties of one another, being highly concerned therein, as the assured means
of the safety and preservation of their own. And finding our selves warranted
and obliged by all means to labor to keep a right understanding betwixt your
Majesty and your people, to confirm that brotherly affection begun betwixt the
two Nations, to advance their unity by all such ways, as may tend to the
glory of God, and peace of the Church and State of both Kingdoms. And likewise
to proffer our service for the removing all (...) and mistakings which may
arise betwixt your Majesty and this Kingdom, and our best endeavors for the
better establishment of the affairs and quiet of the same, That both your
Majesty's Kingdoms of Scotland, and England, may be united in the enjoying of
their liberties in peace under your Majesty's Scepter, which is the most
assured foundation of your Majesty's honor and greatness, and of the
security of your Royal Person, Crown, and Dignity. We have taken the
boldness to show to your Majesty, that we are heartily sorry, and grieved to
behold these distractions, which increase daily betwixt your Majesty and your
people, and which, we conceive, are entertained by the wicked plotts and
practices of PAPISTS, PRELATES, and their adherents; whose aim in all these
troubles has been not only to prevent all further reformation but also to
subvert the purity and truth of Religion within all your Majesty's Kingdoms;
for which end their constant endeavors have been to stir up divisions
betwixt your Majesty and your people, by their questioning the authority of
Parliaments, and the lawful liberties of the Subjects, and really weakening
your Majesty's power and authority royal, upon pretense of extending the
same. Whereof by Gods providence being disappointed in your Majesty's Kingdom
of Scotland; They have now converted their mischievous counsels, conspiracies,
and attempts, to produce these distempers in your Majesty's Kingdoms of
England and Ireland. And therefore according to our duty to your Majesty, to
testify our brotherly affection to this Kingdom, and acquit our selves of the
trust imposed upon us; We do make offer of our humble endeavors for
Composing of these differences, And to that purpose do beseech your Majesty
in these extremities, to have recourse to the sound and faithful advice of the
Honorable Houses of Parliament, and to repose thereupon as the only assured
and happy means, to establish the prosperity and quiet of this Kingdom, and
in the depth of your Royal Wisdom, to consider, and prevent these
apprehensions of fear, which may possess the hearts of your Majesty's
Subjects in your other Kingdoms, if they shall conceive the authority of
Parliaments, and the Rights and Liberties of the Subject to be here called in
question. And we are confident, if your Majesty shall be graciously pleased to
take in good part, and give care to these our faithful and humble desires,
that the success of your Majesty's affairs, (howsoever now perplexed) shall
be happy to your Majesty, and joyful to all your people. Over whom, that your
Majesty may long and prosperously reign, is the constant and fervent prayer of
us your Majesty's faithful Subjects and servants.

Printed by M. S. for Jo. Chapter 1641.


