THE DECLARATION OF THE COMMISSIONERS for the Kingdom of SCOTLAND Concerning
the removal of His Majesty from Holdenby.

Together with a Speech made by the Earl of Lauderdale touching the same; At a
Conference with both Houses of PARLIAMENT on Saturday the 5th. of June 1647.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Bostock. 1647.

WHen in January last, the Honorable Houses did desire, that the King (then at
New Castle with the Scots Army) might come to Holdenby; They did declare to the
Kingdom of Scotland, that they would take care of the preservation of his
Person, in the preservation and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of
the Kingdoms according to the Covenant; And that when the King should be at
Holdenby, and the Sco^tish Forces gone out of this Kingdom, they would be
ready, according to their former Declarations, to join with the Kingdom of
Scotland, in employing their best endeavors to pro^ure his Majesty's assent to
the Propositions of Pe^ce: And when the Parliament of Scotland did give their
concurrance for His Majesty's going to Holdenby, they did declare against all
harm, prejudice, injury, or violence to be done to his Royal Person. We have
attended these six weeks past in a readiness to join with the Honorable
Houses, according to their Declaration, for procuring His Majesty's assent to
the Propositions; and whilst we were expecting that an application should have
been made to his Majesty by both Kingdoms for his assent, We understand,
that in a violent manner, his Majesty is carried away against his will, by a
party of Sir Thomas Fairfaxes A^my, which we are confident is without any
warrant from either House of Parliament. The Parliament of Scotland to manifest
their confidence in the Houses of the Parliament of England, did consent to his
Majesty's coming to Holdenby; And now by an open breach against both
Kingdoms, he is carried from thence we know not, whether I Which action will
certainly be highly resented by the Kingdom of Scotland; and does engage us
according to the duty we owe to them who have entrusted us, to represent our
sense of this violent act, which must needs be dangerous to both the Kingdoms;
And to desire, that the Houses in their wisdom, would take such course, as the
King may be brought from those who have taken him away, unto some of his houses
near the Parliament, that so a joint application may be made to him by both
Kingdoms, for the settling of a just and solid peace. And we do assure the
honorable Houses in the Name of the Kingdom of Scotland, that if there shall
be need, they will be ready to the utmost of there power, to join with this
Kingdom; As for the other ends of the Covenant, So for rescuing and defending
his Majesty's person, in the preservation of the true Religion and Liberties of
the Kingdoms, and for maintaining the Privileges of the Parliaments,
according to the Covenant, wherein we shall have regard to the honor of this
Kingdom, as well as our own. We cannot think that all who are of that Army,
are accessory to such wicked designs, Or will knowingly disappoint the trust
reposed in them by the Parliament. Some we believe have gone along in the
simplicity of their hearts; Such we doubt not but the clemency and wisdom of
the honorable Houses, may, and will reclaim unto their duty; And upon the
other part we trust the prudence and care of both Houses, will in such a way
as they shall think fit, provide against the present visible dangers, which
do more then threaten the Parliament and City.

These things the Conscience of our duty has moved us freely to declare. And
as we would have accounted it guiltiness for us to be silent at such a time;
So if a speedy remedy be not taken against this deluge of the worst of evils,
we trust that we have hereby exonered our Consciences before God and the
world.

5th June 1647. By command of the Commissioners for the Parliament of Scotland.
Jo: Cheislie.

The Earl of Lawdersdales Speech in the Painted Chamber.
5. June 647. My Lords and Gentlemen:
THe interest of these two Kingdoms of Scotland and England, are so nearly
conjoined in this Cause, that what is hurtful or dangerou^ to either, must
needs be so to both; for they are so united, that they must stand or fall
together. This consideration has moved us (who serve the Parliament of
Scotland here) to desire to wait upon both Houses of Parliament; having
understood, that his Majesty is against his will carried away from Holdenby,
we know not whither.

My Lords, The Parliament of England has often upon several occasions, since
the beginning of these unhappy troubles, declared their firm resolution to
maintain and reform Religion; To preserve the established Government of the
Kingdom; and, to defend his Majesty's Person and Authority, in the defense of
the true Religion and liberties of the Kingdoms. These I need not repeat, your
Lorships and the^e w^rthy Gentlemen do better remember them, and I am confident
will make good what you have so frequently declared. But we are all more
solemnly tied: For when the Kingdom of Scotland was engaged in this Cause, the
Parliaments of both Kindoms entered into a solemn League and Covenant, for
reformation and defense of Religion, the Honor and happiness of the King, and
the peace and safety of both Kingdoms.

In the pursuance of the ends of that Covenant, the Kingdom of Scotland has
employed both their Forces and Counsels, with so much fidelity and constancy,
that the mouth of malice it self is stopped, even our Enemies being Judges. And
to take away all jealousies, and to show our earnest desires of the ease of the
Country, and settling of Peace; Our Army marched away (as they came into this
Kingdom) in the dead of Winter, punctually performing their Treaty. And yet
further to witness their confidence in this Parliament, the Parliament of
Scotland agreed His Majesty should go to Holdenby, or some other of His houses
in or about London, until joint Applications were made to Him by both
Kingdoms, for settling jointly a happy Peace. But it was with the two Houses of
Parliament He was left; They are of one Religion with us, and engaged in the
same Covenant. Yet now we understand, that His Majesty is violently torn away
from that place by some Soldiers of Sir Thomas Fairfax Army. We know not, nor
cannot understand by what Authority; but we are confident not by the Authority
of this Parliament. And I confess I wonder how any Subjects of great Britain,
will take upon them to dispose of the Person of the King against His own will,
and the declared intentions of both Parliaments.

Your Lordships and the Honorable House of Commons, know best what to do for
Your own Honor and safety; I shall not presume to offer any Advice, But
because this action will certainly be much resented by the Kingdom of Scotland,
and have a very great influence there; We are engaged to come hither, and
according to the duty we owe to them that trusted us, represent our sense of
this violent Act which must needs be of great danger to both the Kingdoms. And
we do desire, that the two Houses would in their wisdom take such a course,
that the Kings Majesty may be rescued from those that have so violently
carried him away, and be brought to some of His own houses near the Parliament,
that a joint application may be made to Him by both Kingdom^, for agreeing all
differences, and settling of a just and solid Peace.

I can assure You, that the Kingdom of Scotland, if there be need, will join as
one man with this Parliament, to maintain wi^h their lives and fortunes the
Covenant, the Kings Majesty, an^ the just liberties of both Parliaments,
according to the Covenant against whatsoever violence; To vindicate the Honor
of this Parliament, and to preserve and strengthen the Union of the Kingdoms,
until it please God to crown all our endeavors with Truth and Peace.

FINIS.

